NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SORTING IN THE LABOR MARKET:
DO GREGARIOUS WORKERS FLOCK TO INTERACTIVE JOBS?
Alan B. Krueger
David Schkade
Working Paper 13032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13032

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007

This paper was prepared for a conference in honor of Reuben Gronau's retirement, December 19-20,
2005 at Hebrew University. The authors thank Elaine Liu and Tatyana Deryugina for helpful research
assistance, Edward Lazear and seminar participants at Hebrew University, NBER, Cornell University,
and Hamilton College for helpful comments, and the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and the
National Institute on Aging for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Alan B. Krueger and David Schkade. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Sorting in the Labor Market: Do Gregarious Workers Flock to Interactive Jobs?
Alan B. Krueger and David Schkade
NBER Working Paper No. 13032
April 2007
JEL No. J0
ABSTRACT
This paper tests a central implication of the theory of equalizing differences, that workers sort into
jobs with different attributes based on their preferences for those attributes. We present evidence from
four new time-use data sets for the United States and France on whether workers who are more gregarious,
as revealed by their behavior when they are not working, tend to be employed in jobs that involve
more social interactions. In each data set we find a significant and sizable relationship between the
tendency to interact with others off the job and while working. People's descriptions of their jobs and
their personalities also accord reasonably well with their time use on and off the job. Furthermore,
workers in occupations that require social interactions according to the O'Net Dictionary of Occupational
Titles tend to spend more of their non-working time with friends. Lastly, we find that workers report
substantially higher levels of job satisfaction and net affect while at work if their jobs entail frequent
interactions with coworkers and other desirable working conditions.
Alan B. Krueger
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@pucc.princeton.edu
David Schkade
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0093
La Jolla, CA 92093-0093
dschkade@ucsd.edu

“Musicians cannot be tone-deaf; football players tend to be large; while lawyers, and
many economists, have a propensity to talk.
What matters for economic allocations in all of these cases are the direct
manifestations of tastes.”
-- Sherwin Rosen (2002, p. 9)

I. Introduction
A central implication of an equalizing differences equilibrium in the labor market
is that workers should sort themselves into jobs with different attributes based on their
preferences for those attributes. Workers who enjoy interacting socially, for example,
should seek jobs that entail frequent interactions with co-workers or customers, while
workers who are introverted by nature should eschew such jobs, all else being equal. At
the same time, it is in employers’ interests to search for gregarious workers when they
seek to fill vacancies for jobs that require social interactions, and to search for more
reclusive personalities when they seek to fill jobs that require social isolation. The extent
of worker sorting by preferences has implications for many labor market policies and for
economic theory. For example, if risk-loving workers are in jobs that have a higher risk
of layoff, then the optimal level of unemployment insurance is lower than if workers are
randomly sorted across jobs based on their risk aversion. The extent of sorting in the
labor market based on tastes -- a simple yet fundamental feature of a competitive labor
market -- has not been adequately tested, however, owing primarily to the difficulty of
assessing workers’ preferences toward work attributes. 1

1

One paper that studies sorting by tastes is Viscusi and Hersch (2000), who find that smokers are more
likely than nonsmokers to be employed in industries with high injury and illness rates. It is unclear,
however, whether smokers have a preference for risk generally, or whether they have addictive
personalities.

2

In this paper, we present evidence on whether workers who are more gregarious,
as revealed by their behavior when they are not working, tend to be employed in jobs that
involve more social interactions. Because psychologists find that the tendency to be
introverted or extroverted is a persistent personality trait (see Roberts and DelVecchio,
2000 for a review), and because many employers administer personality tests specifically
to identify extroverted job applicants for some positions (Hough and Oswald, 2000), we
consider this a worthwhile attribute to study. We conduct our analysis using three new
data sets on the time use of working women in the United States and France. We also
assess the reliability of our measures using a fourth data set that consists of workers who
were interviewed twice, two weeks apart. By examining how individuals spend their
time while they are not working, we are able to infer something about their preferences.
In each data set, we find a significant and sizable relationship between the
tendency to interact with others off the job and while working. In addition, people’s selfdescriptions of their jobs and their personalities seem to accord reasonably well with their
time use on and off the job. The results suggest that sorting of workers and jobs based on
personality types and work attributes does take place, although it is unclear if the extent
of sorting reaches the efficient level. Our results complement those in recent work by
Borghans, ter Weel and Weinberg (2006a, 2006b), who find that workers who report
being more sociable as youths tend to be employed in occupations that involve more
people skills as adults. Extensive sorting by tastes could explain why compensating wage
differentials for many work attributes are often found to be small or zero (e.g., Brown,
1980), although sorting cannot account for the weak evidence for compensating wage
differentials for working conditions that are universally disliked or liked.

3

Lastly, we provide direct evidence of the relationship between job characteristics
and two measures of worker job satisfaction: global job satisfaction and mood during
work episodes. Our results indicate that workers who are in jobs that entail more
frequent interactions with coworkers, low perceived risk of layoff, and higher hourly pay
are more satisfied with their jobs and in a better mood during work time than workers in
jobs without these characteristics, while workers in jobs with time pressure, constant and
close supervision, and little variability from day to day are less satisfied with their jobs
and in a worse mood during work. We further find some evidence that in terms of
subjective well-being, more extroverted workers, as revealed by how they spend their
time while off work, gain more from jobs that involve frequent interactions with
coworkers than do workers who are less extroverted. To the extent that our data
represent workers’ utilities, the estimates imply that workers should be willing to
sacrifice large amounts of income for more desirable working conditions, on average.
In the next section, we briefly summarize the main implications of equalizing
differences for sorting. In Section III we describe our data. Section IV presents our main
findings and considers issues of the reliability of the data. Section V provides an analysis
of how the opportunity for social interactions on the job and other working conditions
affect workers’ reported job satisfaction and their emotional experiences while at work.
Section VI offers concluding remarks.

4

II. Sorting and the Labor Market
We borrow liberally from Rosen’s (1986) model of equalizing differences to
illustrate the role of sorting of workers over jobs with varying social requirements. 2
Define S as the percentage of the day that a job requires a worker to be engaged in
conversations with customers, clients or co-workers. For now, we assume workers are
productively homogenous, and ignore all other work attributes. 3 To simplify, suppose S
takes on two values, 0 or 1. We will focus on the employee side of the matching market,
so we take it for granted that by the nature of technology and costs some employers
choose to offer jobs with S=1 and others with S=0. 4 For example, the job of telemarketer
naturally involves a great deal of interaction with customers, while the job of night
security watchman involves little contact with others.
Write a worker’s utility function as U(W,S), where W is the wage rate. There is
no saving, so consumption equals the wage. The wage has a positive effect on utility for
all workers, while utility rises with S for some workers and falls with S for others. In our
data, the average worker appears happier when interacting at work than when not (as long
as the interaction is not with their boss), so U(W,1) > U(W,0) for most workers, but

2

A referee has pointed out that the model underlying our analysis is also similar to Tinbergen (1956), who
presents a model in which workers are differentiated by the extent to which they possess a certain
productive characteristic, such as intelligence. Jobs that utilize this characteristic are in fixed supply in
Tinbergen’s model. Workers who are on jobs that do not fully utilize their productive characteristic receive
a compensating differential for this mismatch. One can think of a tendency toward extroversion as a
productive attribute (at least for some jobs), and extroverted workers who do not get to fully use their social
skills on the job, or introverted workers who are asked to engage in more social interactions than they are
comfortable with, demand a compensating payment as a result.
3
Notice that we are treating a worker’s tendency to be extroverted or introverted as a taste. We do so
because extroversion is identified in the psychology literature as a personality trait, and because people
engage in social interaction to varying degrees while not working. From an employer’s perspective, a
tendency to extroversion could also be thought of as a productive skill in some jobs.
4
A more complete model would allow for a distribution of employers’ costs for providing or eliminating S.
This would add very little to our story about sorting of workers as long as enough employers find it
unprofitable to switch from S=0 to S=1 jobs given the nature of their technology and business.

5

clearly some people find interactions more stressful than others, and for some it may be
that U(W,1) < U(W,0). 5
Define z as the compensating variation necessary for a worker to be indifferent
between accepting a job with S=0 or S=1. That is, implicitly define z by the equation
U(W1+z,0) = u(W1,1). The z that makes a worker indifferent between the two types of
jobs is her reservation compensating wage differential. If the offered wage differential
between S=0 and S=1 jobs, denoted ΔW = W0 - W1, is less than z for a particular worker,
that worker would prefer to be in a job with S=1. And if ΔW > z, that worker would
prefer to be in an S=0 job. Notice that z is a personal taste variable that differs over
members of the labor force. Extroverted workers have higher values of z than introverted
workers. Denote the probability density function of z across members of the labor force
as g(z) and the cumulative distribution of z as G(z), and normalize the total labor force to
ΔW

1. Then the supply of workers to S=0 jobs is

∫ g ( z )dz = G (ΔW ) and the supply to S=1
0

jobs is 1-G(ΔW).
In equilibrium, the number of workers in S=1 jobs depends on the distribution of
the cost to firms of modifying jobs. But the sorting of workers should be clear: workers
who have a taste for social interaction (high z) will seek jobs that entail frequent contact
with customers, clients or co-workers and firms that offer jobs with high S will seek such
workers, while workers with little taste for social interaction (low z) will seek jobs that
entail a more solitary work environment. If g(●) is normal, then we have the familiar
selection bias term as the discrepancy between the conditional and unconditional
expectation of z given S:
5

See Saffer (2005) for further evidence that individuals receive consumption value from social interaction.

6

(1) E ( z | S = 0) = μ z − σφ (

ΔW − μ z

σ

) / Φ(

ΔW − μ z

σ

)

where μ z and σ are the unconditional mean and standard deviation of z, and φ (•) and
Φ (•) are the normal probability density function and cumulative distribution function. 6

The extent of social interactions that a worker engages in while not working is a
plausible proxy for z. To test for sorting by preferences, we examine whether workers
who have frequent contact with others while on the job also tend to interact relatively
frequently with others while they are not working. This test implicitly makes the
assumption that other worker preferences are unrelated to the tendency to extroversion, or
are not related to working conditions. While the latter is not plausible, we can control for
some other aspects of workers’ preferences (e.g., self-reported joy from reading) in one
of our data sets.

III. Data
Our analysis makes use of four time-use data sets that we collected as part of a
project on subjective well-being. All of the data sets have a similar structure. The data
were collected using the Day Reconstruction Method (DRM), which asks respondents to
segment their preceding day into episodes as if they were going through a movie, and
then to briefly summarize each episode in a diary. 7 Next respondents describe each
episode by indicating: (1) when the episode began and ended; (2) what they were doing,
by checking as many activities that applied from a list of 16 possible activities (plus
other) that included working, watching television, socializing, etc.; (3) where they were;
6

A pioneering application of the normal selection-bias model is Gronau (1974).
Kahneman, et al. 2004 provide a discussion of the development of the DRM. The questionnaire is
available from http://sitemaker.umich.edu/norbert.schwarz/files/drm_documentation_july_2004.pdf.

7

7

(4) whether they were interacting with anyone (including on the phone, in teleconference,
etc.); and (5) if so, whom they were interacting with (boss, co-workers,
clients/customers/students/patients, friends, spouse, children, etc.). Respondents next
reported how they felt during each episode on selected affective dimensions (such as
happy, frustrated, angry, enjoyment), using a scale from 0 to 6, where 0 signifies that the
emotion was not experienced at all and 6 signifies that it was very strong.
Texas DRM. This DRM approach was first applied to a sample of 909 working
women in Dallas and Austin, Texas who reported on their experiences during a workday
in November 2001. (See Kahneman, et al., 2004 for more details about the sample and
method.) The data set, which we henceforth call the “Texas DRM”, consists of 535
respondents who were recruited through random selection from the driver’s license list
plus a screen for employment and age 18-60, and another 374 workers in three
occupations: nurses, telemarketers and teachers. A flag identifies the over-sampled
occupations. Although the results are similar, we mostly work with the randomly
selected subsample. Subjects were paid $75 for filling out the questionnaire, which
usually took 45 minutes to 75 minutes to complete. Table 1 provides some descriptive
statistics for the sample.
Re-Interview Sample. A slightly modified version of the original DRM was used
for the other two samples. In this version, respondents were asked: (1) when the episode
began and ended; (2) where were you? (3) “Were you alone?” (4) “Were you talking
with anyone?” (5) With whom were you talking or interacting (list includes customers,
co-workers, boss, friends, etc.)? (6) What were you doing (check all that apply)? For the
last question, the list of activities available to choose from was expanded and included

8

“talking, conversation” in addition to “working” and 20 other activities. Again,
respondents could check more than one activity. 8
This modified version of the DRM was administered to a sample of 229 women in
Austin, Texas who were interviewed on two Thursdays a fortnight apart in March and
April 2005 to examine the reliability of the data. Henceforth, we will call this the “ReInterview Sample”. Respondents were recruited by random selection of women from the
driver’s license list in Travis County, Texas. The sample was limited to employed
individuals between the age of 18 and 60. Respondents were paid $50 upon completing
the first questionnaire and an additional $100 upon completing the second one for a total
of $150. The interview dates were two Thursdays, March 31, 2005 and April 14, 2005.
Following the DRM procedure, participants reported on the previous day, which were
Wednesdays in this case. Completion times for the self-administered instrument ranged
from 45 to 75 min. Average age was 42.8 years and median household income category
was $40,000-$50,000.
Columbus and Rennes Samples. In May and June of 2005 we administered the
same questionnaire as used in the reliability survey to a sample of 810 working and
nonworking women in Columbus, Ohio, who were recruited by random digit dialing, and
to another sample of 820 working and nonworking women in Rennes, France, who were
also recruited by random digit dialing. 9 (For the latter survey, the questionnaire was
translated into French.) The Rennes and Columbus questionnaires also pertained to a

8

The questionnaire is available at
http://homepage.mac.com/WebObjects/FileSharing.woa/30/wo/uWFtDYyXwzkg3RSc.1/0.2.1.2.26.31.97.0
.35.0.1.1.1?user=dschkade&fpath=WB structure supplemental&templatefn=FileSharing1.html.
9
Respondents were paid $75 for completing the questionnaire in the Columbus survey and 50 Euros
(approximately $60 at the time) in the Rennes survey.

9

single day, which was a weekend for one third of respondents and a weekday for the
remainder. 10 We limit the sample used below to workdays.
In addition to time-use information, respondents provided demographic
information and answered personality-type questions, such as whether they enjoy being
with other people. The Texas DRM survey also contained additional questions about
work, including occupation and subjective information about the nature of the
respondents’ main job, such as whether “frequent interactions with co-workers is an
important part of my job” and whether the respondent “can chat with others while on
job.”
Using the Texas DRM sample, we computed the proportion of time that each
individual was not interacting with someone else during non-work episodes. We also
computed the proportion of time during non-work episodes that was spent interacting
with a friend. To measure the extent of interaction on the job, we computed the
proportion of time each respondent spent interacting with co-workers, customers, clients,
students, patients or their boss during episodes that involved work. 11
These variables were computed in a somewhat different fashion in the other data
sets, because the activity list enabled respondents to indicate if they were talking or
engaged in conversation during each episode, and because of the different phrasing of the
interaction question. For the Columbus, Rennes and Re-Interview samples, we computed

10

The questionnaires are available at
http://homepage.mac.com/WebObjects/FileSharing.woa/30/wo/uWFtDYyXwzkg3RSc.1/0.2.1.2.26.31.97.0
.35.0.1.1.1?user=dschkade&fpath=WB structure supplemental&templatefn=FileSharing1.html.
11
Note that an episode that involved worked is potentially different from an episode that took place at
work. Some episodes at work (e.g., lunch, coffee break) do not involve work, and are not included in our
universe of episodes that involve work. In the Texas DRM data, 10.6 percent of the time spent at work did
not involve working; most of this time was spent eating or socializing. Hamermesh (1990) reports that 8
percent of work plus break time consisted of break time in 1975-76.

10

the proportion of time that each individual was alone while not working, and the
proportion of time spent talking or engaged in conversation during work episodes.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the three main analysis samples. The
median episode duration was 45 minutes. According to the definition used in the Texas
DRM, almost 90 percent of work time is spent interacting with others. Because this
figure is so high, we have computed this variable differently in the other data sets, e
xplicitly requiring that the respondent checked that she was talking or in a conversation
during a work episode to classify the episode as involving a social interaction. (If we use
a definition that comes as close as possible to that used for the Texas DRM, we find that
72 percent of work time in Columbus and 62 percent of work time in Rennes involved
interacting with customers, co-workers or the boss.) Forty-four percent of working time
in Columbus and 34 percent of working time in Rennes was spent talking or in
conversation.
Interactions are less common off the job than on the job, but still make up a
majority of the time. According to the Texas data, for example, 57 percent of the time
that people are not working they are interacting with someone. Sixteen percent of
nonworking time is spent interacting with friends. A slightly different concept was used
in the Columbus and Rennes data. In both cities, we find that workers are alone about a
third of the time when they are not working, and are interacting with friends about 11
percent of the time when they are not working.
Based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ American Time Use Survey (ATUS), 46
percent of women’s non-work time (on days in which they worked at least one hour for

11

pay) is spent alone, and 6 percent of non-work time is spent in the company of friends. 12
These figures are not terribly far out of line from what we find with the DRM data.
Unfortunately, the ATUS does not ask whether individuals are alone or with someone
while they are at work so the analysis presented below cannot be conducted with the
ATUS.
Tables 2a and 2b provide some evidence that individuals’ descriptions of
themselves and their jobs correspond to their actual time allocation. Specifically, in the
Texas DRM we asked respondents whether people who knew them would say the
respondent enjoys being in the company of other people less than others, about average,
or more than others. Respondents who answered much less or less did indeed spend less
time with others when they were not working (See Table 2a). We found a similar pattern
in the Columbus and Rennes surveys. In addition, in those surveys we asked, “How
much pleasure and joy do you get from each of these domains of life?” Friends was one
of the domains inquired about. Those who marked that they received “a lot” of pleasure
and joy from friends did spend a higher proportion of non-working time in the company
of friends than did those who marked “some” or “little or none”.
In the Texas DRM we also asked respondents the extent to which the following
statement described their situation at work: “Frequent interactions with co-workers is an
important part of my job?” Table 2b reports the average proportion of working time
involving no interactions, or interactions with co-workers by responses to this job
descriptor. Those who answered “definitely yes” spent 80 percent of their working time
on the reference day interacting with co-workers, while those who answered “definitely
not” spent 58 percent of their time interacting with co-workers.
12

We are grateful to Marie Connolly for these tabulations from the ATUS.

12

Together, these results give us some reason to believe that our time-use measures
do reflect social engagement during individuals’ work and non-work activities.

IV. Empirical Results on Sorting
A. Texas DRM
Table 3 reports estimates of Tobit models where the dependent variable is the
proportion of time spent interacting at work using the Texas DRM sample. The statistical
model allows for censoring at 0 or 1. The key explanatory variable is the proportion of
time that the individual was not interacting with someone else during non-work episodes
(columns 1 and 2), or the proportion time the individual was interacting with a friend
during non-work episodes (columns 3 and 4). Either measure of a person’s “sociability
off work” has the expected relationship with the amount of time spent interacting at
work. 13 The effects are also sizable: a 10 percentage point increase in the share of time
spent interacting while not working is associated with a 5 percentage point increase in the
share of time interacting at work in column 1.
Variables such as education, marital status, age and tenure are included as
explanatory variables in columns 2 and 4. The rationale for including these variables is
that they may be related to worker productivity, and sorting by tastes is predicted to take
place among workers who are equally productive. For purposes of estimating the extent
of sorting, however, it is unclear whether all of these variables should be held constant.
For example, suppose marriage is unrelated to productivity for women, but more
gregarious women are more likely to become married (and also more likely to interact

13

If we restrict the sample to those who said the reference day was a typical day, the coefficient on noninteracting time in columns 1 and 2 tends to rise while the coefficient on interaction time with friends in
columns 3 and 4 tends to fall. In neither case is the qualitative conclusion different, however.

13

with someone off the job) and more likely to work on a job that requires social
interaction. 14 In this case, we would be over-controlling for tastes. Nonetheless, we find
that our proxies for sociability off work remain significantly related to the extent of social
interactions on the job despite controlling for the effects of these other variables.
Age is of particular interest because individuals’ may become more or less
extroverted over time. Interactions at home and at work both fall with age. One concern
is that people may become more extroverted over time if they are employed in a job that
requires interactions. If we interact age with proportion of time not interacting or spent
with a friend while away from work we get mixed results, however. Both interaction
terms are negative, but neither is statistically significant.
Some of the additional variables are of interest for their own sake. Hispanic
workers spend about 25 percent less of their working time interacting with others than do
non-Hispanic workers. Controlling for 19 occupation dummies has no effect on this
differential. This finding may, in part, be a manifestation of language differences that
reduce communication opportunities for Hispanics at work. Unfortunately, we did not
collect information on facility with English. More than language may be at work,
however, because we also find that Hispanics are less likely than non-Hispanics to spend
time interacting with friends or others off work, where they presumably could interact
with Spanish speakers.
Union members also spend less time interacting with others at work than do nonunion members. Unlike Hispanic workers, however, union members are not less likely to

14

In case you were wondering, married women spend 9 percent (p=.025) more time interacting with
someone when they are not at work than do single women. Married women spend considerably less time
interacting with friends when not working than do single women, however, which is part of the reason why
adding the covariates has a different effect on off-work sociability in column 2 than column 4.

14

interact with friends or others when they are off work. The lower proportion of work
time spent interacting by union members may partially explain why union members
typically report lower job satisfaction than nonunion members, a phenomenon first
documented by Freeman (1978). Work interactions tend to decline with company tenure,
while time interacting with others away from work is unrelated to tenure. Lastly, older
workers are less likely to interact with others while working and while not working.
We have also looked at the extent of interaction during work episodes by
occupation, assigning 19 two-digit Census occupation codes to the data. An F-test of the
null hypothesis that occupation dummies jointly have no predictive power for the
proportion of time spent interacting at work has a p-value of .026. Because the sample
sizes are small, however, the occupational estimates are very imprecise and the results
should be taken with a large grain of salt. With that caveat in mind, we find that the legal
profession (which includes legal support jobs) and healthcare practitioners have the
highest rates of interaction at work for an occupation with more than 20 observations,
which seems plausible.
To provide an independent assessment of the extent to which jobs involve social
interactions, we assigned each worker’s job a “sociability score” based on the O’Net
Dictionary of Occupational Titles. The O’Net book contains detailed descriptions of the
work activities and personality traits required for various occupations. We linked
workers to an occupation in the O’Net guide based on their description of their job duties
and titles, and assigned a score ranging from 1 to 4 indicating the sociability of the job
based on the description in O’Net. For example, elementary school teachers were
assigned a 4 (most social/extroverted job) based on their job description in O’Net, which

15

lists "social" as the first attribute under "Personality Type", and under "General Work
Activities" lists "establishing and maintaining relationships" and "communicating with
persons outside organization" and lists “speaking” as a required skill. Other descriptions
used to gauge the social skills used on the job included "working with others,"
"communicating with internal groups, " and "oral expression". This process undoubtedly
produced some mismatches between workers and occupations and necessarily involved
judgments about job sociability based on the descriptions in O’Net, but the resulting
measure has the virtue of being derived independently of the earlier work-related
sociability data and, in principle, pertains to social skills required to do the job well.
Figure 1 presents the average percentage of non-work time spent interacting with
friends by the sociability score derived from O’Net. Despite the crudeness of the data,
there is a tendency for workers who are in jobs that are ranked higher on the job-related
sociability scale to spend more time interacting with friends while they are not at work.
The correlation at the individual level is 0.10 (p < 0.05), which is not overwhelming but
nonetheless suggests that workers who are on jobs that require more social interactions
tend to spend a greater proportion of their non-work time interacting with friends.

B. French-American Data
Next we consider the data from Columbus, Ohio and Rennes, France. Two-limit
Tobit models for the proportion of time spent talking or engaged in conversation during
work episodes are presented in Table 4a for Columbus and Table 4b for Rennes. A test
of the hypothesis that the two samples can be pooled is rejected for each model at the
0.01 level.

16

The model in column 1 shows that workers who spend more time alone while not
working are less likely to engage in conversations while on the job. The effect is
attenuated when demographic variables are included in the model in column 2, especially
marital status, but, as mentioned, marital status may be related to workers’
gregariousness. The fraction of time spent interacting with friends has a positive effect
on interactions at work that is almost statistically significant for the Columbus sample,
but it is small and insignificant in the Rennes sample. In Columbus, we find an even
larger gap in interactions at work for Hispanic workers 15 than we found for the Texas
sample, although this result should be treated extremely cautiously given that there were
only 6 Hispanic workers in the Columbus sample. We also find that married workers are
more likely to engage in conversations while working. 16
Unlike in the simple model of sorting that was used to motivate this paper and our
estimates so far, workers’ tastes are not unidimensional. It is possible that workers who
have a preference for social interactions may also have preferences over other working
conditions. Depending on the variance of preferences and the correlation among
workers’ preferences, one does not necessarily have to find hierarchical sorting along
tastes for extroversion and the social nature of jobs. The Columbus and Rennes data sets
include a large set of other self-reported preference-type variables. As a partial check on
the sensitivity of our results to controlling for a wider set of workers’ preferences, in
results not shown here we included the workers’ self-reported pleasure and joy on a
three-point scale (“little or none”, “some”, and “a lot”) from reading, spiritual and
15

In France it is illegal to collect ethnicity information and thus we have no comparable results for the
Rennes sample.
16
While not working, married women in both Columbus and Rennes spend 17 percent less of their time
alone than do single women. At the same time, married women spend 6 percent less of their non-work time
with friends than do single women in Columbus, and 7 percent less in Rennes.

17

religious life, art, food and eating, nature, television and taking walks. These variables
were jointly statistically insignificant when they were included in each of the models in
Tables 4a and 4b, and their inclusion hardly changed the magnitude of the off-work
extroversion measures. Thus, controlling for these limited measures of preferences over
other attributes that might be related to some jobs do not appear to alter the pattern of
sorting by tendency toward extroversion.
A final point worth nothing is that despite the greater extent of government
intervention in the French than in the American labor market, and the higher rate of
unionization in France, there is no sign in these results that sorting in the labor market
along lines of the propensity for social interactions is less efficient in Rennes than in
Columbus. If this finding can be replicated in other data sets, it could provide insights
into the workings of labor market rigidities and comparative labor market institutions.

C. Limits of One Working Day
A potential concern is that the data we use to estimate the extent of social
interactions by workers while they are working and not working are noisy because the
data pertain to just one day in the life of the individuals in the sample. How
representative is one working day? To assess this question, we analyzed a sample of 207
women who worked on both reference days in the reliability sample. The version of the
DRM used in these surveys is virtually identical to that used in the Columbus and Rennes
surveys.
Table 5 reports the correlations and means of key variables used in the study: the
proportion of the day alone, the proportion of the day talking, and the proportion of the
day spent in the company of friends. The variables are computed over working episodes

18

and over non-working episodes, and the first two variables are also computed over the
entire day. The good news is that the key explanatory variable in Tables 4a and 4b, the
proportion of time spent alone while not working, has the highest autocorrelation: 0.64.
This suggests there is a reasonable amount of signal in one day’s measure of
reclusiveness, but the coefficients are nonetheless attenuated because of noise inherent in
using one day’s experience to infer a person’s personality. The correlation between the
proportion of non-work time spent with a friend is just 0.32. This figure would no doubt
be higher if we aggregated over a week, for instance. For most people there is much dayto-day variability in getting together with friends after work. The effect of this variable is
probably severely attenuated in the regressions.
The dependent variable, the proportion of working time spent talking has a 0.44
autocorrelation two weeks apart. If one day’s fluctuations in interactions at work is just
white noise, then the precision of the estimates will be reduced but they should still be
unbiased. To reduce the noise, we averaged over each day in the Reliability Data Set and
regressed the average proportion of time talking during work episodes on the average
proportion of time spent with friends during non-work episodes. The slope coefficient
from this bivariate regression is 0.342 with a standard error of 0.156. 17 If the same
regression is estimated just using Session 1 data, the coefficient (standard error) is 0.273
(0.149) and if it is estimated for Session 2 the coefficient (standard error) is 0.224
(0.149). If the first period proportion of time spent with friends is used as an instrument
for the second period proportion of time with friends in an Instrumental Variables
regression that uses the second period proportion of time talking at work as the dependent

17

If we use the average amount of time spent alone while not working as the explanatory variable, the
coefficient (standard error) is -.115 (0.101).

19

variable, the coefficient is considerably larger: 1.003 (0.493). All of these results suggest
that noise has attenuated our earlier estimates.
An alternative way to avoid relying on one day’s measures is to use individual’s
own descriptions of their jobs and personalities. As was shown in Tables 2a and 2b,
these measures are correlated with objective circumstances on and off the job. If we use
the Texas DRM data to regress individuals’ assessments of whether “Frequent
interactions with co-workers is an important part of my job?” on their assessments of
whether people they know would say that they enjoy being in the company of others, we
find a significant and positive relationship (r=.11; p=.01). Reliance on self-reported
personality and job traits is common in the personnel selection literature. We consider a
focus on actual time allocation to be a contribution of our study, but it is nonetheless
reassuring that we find sorting based on a tendency for extroversion when we use selfreported data as well.

V. Work Satisfaction and Affect at Work
We measure individuals’ net affect or mood as the average of the positive
emotions less the average of the negative emotions recorded for each episode in the
DRM. Emotions are reported on a scale of 0 (not at all) to 6 (very much part of the
experience). Positive emotions are “happy” and “enjoying myself” and negative
emotions are “impatient for it to end”, “frustrated/ annoyed”, “depressed/blue”,
“worried/anxious” and “angry/hostile”. These emotions were selected because they do
not necessarily require social interaction to be present.

20

Table 6 reports average net affect during episodes that involved selected work and
non-work activities for the full sample and random subsample of the Texas DRM survey.
Notice that, on average, work is ranked as a relatively unpleasant activity and leisure
activities such as socializing and exercising have relatively high net affect ratings. This
pattern is not surprising – and, indeed, presumably it is the reason why wages are positive
– but it contrasts with earlier research based on more general questions about enjoyment
with various activities (Juster, 1985 and Robinson and Godbey, 1997). Juster (1985), for
example, finds that work ranks near the middle of activities in terms of enjoyment. The
difference appears to stem from our using a recall diary method as opposed to Juster’s
use of an overall domain satisfaction approach, in which people’s subjective theories
about their lives probably play a larger role.
Average net affect during work episodes that involve interactions with the boss is
particularly low, while net affect is higher during interactions with customers, clients,
students or patients. Workers in the full sample report especially low affect when they
are working alone. All of the averages in Table 6 are potentially affected by sorting, as
not every worker engaged in each activity.
Another limitation of self-reported feelings like those in Table 6 is that
respondents may utilize the scales in idiosyncratic ways. We therefore examined the
pattern of net affect during various types of work interactions after removing individual
fixed effects. Specifically, we regressed net affect during each episode on three dummy
variables indicating whether that episode involved an interaction with the boss, coworkers, or clients, customers, students and patients, and a set of unrestricted individual
fixed effects. This fixed effects model is identified by workers who had at least one work

21

episode involving social interactions and at least one work episode without interactions
on the survey reference day. Within a person’s work day, we find that interactions have a
large effect on net affect. For the random sample, compared with not interacting with
anyone, net affect was 0.53 (0.14) points lower when an episode involved interacting
with the boss, 0.24 (0.12) points higher when co-workers were interaction partners and
0.40 (0.18) points higher when customers, clients, students, or patients were involved.
Table 7 presents estimates of regression models at the individual level using the
Texas DRM sample. 18 The dependent variable in column (1) is responses to a
conventional work satisfaction question: “Overall, how satisfied are you with your
present job?” Response categories were not at all satisfied, not very satisfied, satisfied,
and very satisfied. A score from 1 to 4 was assigned to these answers, and then the
responses were rescaled to have a unit standard deviation. Many previous studies (e.g.,
Freeman, 1978, Helliwell and Huan, 2005) have examined the determinants of global
work satisfaction. The dependent variable in column (2) is duration-weighted net affect
while at work. This measure should provide a closer approximation of workers’ actual
emotional experiences on the job than reported work satisfaction. Net affect is composed
of the same emotions as in Table 6. For comparability to work satisfaction, net affect
was rescaled to have a unit standard deviation in the regressions.
A rich set of working condition variables is available to model subjective wellbeing at work. Table 7 reports results using a dozen working conditions as explanatory
variables, including the extent to which the respondent stated that her situation at work
was described by “frequent interactions with co-workers,” “constant and close

18

To increase the sample size, results are reported for the full sample. If we restrict the data to the random
subset, however, the main results are qualitatively similar.

22

supervision” and “flexible work hours”. Four responses categories ranging from
“definitely not” to “definitely yes” were provided, and answers were scaled from 0 to 1,
with 0 indicating definitely not and 1 indicating definitely yes. Thus, the coefficients
indicate the change in work satisfaction or net affect in standard deviation units
associated with a change from the working condition being definitely absent to definitely
present. The regression models also control for the log hourly wage, education and
demographic characteristics.
The working condition variables generally have their expected signs, although
there are a few notable exceptions. Most importantly for our purposes, having a job that
allows frequent interactions with co-workers is positively associated with work
satisfaction and with net affect while at work, conditional on the sorting that takes place
in the job market. Workers who believe their job entails frequent interactions with coworkers report about half a standard deviation higher work satisfaction and net affect
than do those who say their job does not entail frequent interactions. From our earlier
results and equation 1, we would expect that workers who receive greater enjoyment
from social interactions would be more likely to be employed in jobs that require frequent
interactions with others. To test directly for this result, in results not shown here we
added a variable that is the product of the frequent-job-interaction variable and the
proportion of non-work time each respondent spent alone (based on their time diary) to
the regression models. The coefficient on this interaction variable was -0.34 and
statistically significant (t=2.29) in the net affect regression, consistent with the view that
more social workers derive more enjoyment from jobs that entail frequent interactions

23

with co-workers. 19 The interaction effect was negative but small and statistically
insignificant in the work satisfaction model, however.
Turning to the other variables in Table 7, the log wage has a positive effect on
both work satisfaction and net affect at work. A 10 percent increase in pay is associated
with just over a .015 standard deviation gain in work satisfaction, which is fairly modest
compared with the effects of several of the working condition variables, including
interactions with co-workers. Time pressure, close supervision, risk of job loss, and
monotony all have sizable adverse effects on work satisfaction and on net affect during
work. Reporting that one’s employer provides all the resources needed to do the job well
has a strong positive effect on satisfaction and net affect. Although there is some
tendency for working conditions that have an immediate and salient effect on the work
setting, like time pressure, to have a larger effect on net affect than on work satisfaction,
this is not always the case. For example, constant and close supervision has a larger
effect on work satisfaction than on net affect, as does belief that sufficient resources are
provided to do the job well.
Some of the working condition variables in Talbe 7 have statistically insignificant
effects, such as flexible hours and the presence of offensive noise. Two notable variables
have perverse effects: The presence of dust, dirt and bad smells has an unexpected
positive effect in the net affect regression and the presence of a risk of injury has a
positive effect in the work satisfaction regression. As a whole, however, the models yield
reasonably strong support that pleasant working conditions are associated with greater

19

It is worth noting that in this regression workers who spent all of their non-work time alone were
predicted to have higher net affect if their jobs entailed frequent interactions with co-workers than if they
did not entail frequent interactions with co-workers.

24

job satisfaction and net affect at work, and unpleasant working conditions are associated
with lower job satisfaction and net affect at work.
Lastly, it is worth discussing the magnitude and interpretation of the working
condition effects in relation to an equalizing differences equilibrium in the labor market.
Helliwell and Huang (2005) argue that dividing the coefficient on a working condition
variable by the coefficient on the wage rate in a job satisfaction regression provides an
estimate of the marginal rate of substitution between log pay and working conditions. If
workers have homogeneous preferences, in a competitive equilibrium this ratio would
equal the observed compensating wage differentials associated with working conditions.
Using this approach, Helliwell and Huang find that enormous compensating wage
differentials are required for working conditions such as low workplace trust, low task
variety and time pressure. Because direct evidence of compensating wage differentials
often yields mixed or weak evidence of tradeoffs between pay and working conditions
(e,g,, Brown, 1980), 20 Helliwell and Huang conclude that the labor market is in
disequilibrium, with “unrecognized opportunities for managers and employees to alter
workplace environments, or for workers to change jobs, so as to increase both life
satisfaction and workplace efficiency.”
Our results also imply an enormous tradeoff between wages and undesirable
working conditions. For example, the results in column (1) of Table 7 imply that workers
would require a log wage increase of around 2 (-.29/.15) to be equally satisfied with a job
that entails constant time pressure as opposed to one that does not. The net affect
regression in column (2) implies a log wage change of more than 5 for workers to be

20

One recent exception is Stern (2004), who finds a sizable tradeoff between the opportunity to conduct
and publish scientific research and starting pay among Ph.D. biologists at the start of their career.

25

equally well-off with constant time pressure. Moving from a job with frequent
interactions with co-workers to one without them likewise would necessitate large
compensating payments, as would many of the other working conditions.
What is one to make of Helliwell and Huang’s and our large implied marginal
rates of substitution? One possibility is that job satisfaction is not an adequate measure
of utility because it misrepresents what happens on the ground at work. The fact that net
affect generally yields similar results, however, suggests that the explanation is more
complicated.
Another possibility is that the coefficients in the work satisfaction and net affect
regressions reflect the preferences of inframarginal workers while the compensating
differentials that are ground out in practice pertain to the preferences of the marginal
worker. This distinction matters if tastes vary across workers and workers sort into jobs
based on their tastes, as we have emphasized. Regression estimates like those in Table 7
only identify conditional averages, and the averages are conditional on the workers
sorting. The marginal worker probably has a more benign view of social isolation than
the average worker in a job that does not involve interactions with co-workers, for
example. While we believe there is some support for this interpretation, the results imply
that such extreme compensating differentials are required for undesirable working
conditions that we would question how far sorting by preferences can go toward
explaining the full set of results.
Still another possibility is that direct estimates of compensating wage differentials
suffer from severe biases. For example, high-ability workers receive higher pay and
better working conditions than low-ability workers, but the estimates in the literature may

26

not adequately control for ability. While this bias is likely present in cross-sectional
estimates, it is unlikely to account for the weak evidence of compensating wage
differentials in longitudinal estimates. Moreover, if the required compensating wage
differentials are as large as those implied in Helliwell and Huang and in Table 7, we
would expect that they would be detectable in conventional wage equation estimates.
A final interpretation is that the marginal worker is unaware of the relevant
working conditions when a decision is made to accept a job, or underestimates the impact
of social relations and other working conditions on her well-being and overestimates the
impact of pay on her well-being, perhaps because of a focusing illusion (see Kahneman,
et al. 2006). In either case, this failure of decision making would cause the market to
generate insufficient compensating differentials for working conditions. Although we are
reluctant to push this conclusion too far, given the similarity of the results using job
satisfaction and net affect, we believe it deserves serious consideration.

VI. Conclusion
We have documented a positive and statistically significant relationship between a
worker’s tendency to interact with others (particularly with friends) while not working
and the relative frequency of work-related interactions on the worker’s job. We interpret
this pattern as evidence of sorting: more extroverted workers tend to work in jobs that
require greater social interaction.
Other interpretations are possible, however. For example, it is possible that jobs
that require more social interactions cause workers to become more extroverted in their
non-working time. Although extroversion is apparently among the more stable

27

personality traits (Roberts and DelVecchio, 2000) and Borghans, ter Weel and Weinberg
(2006a, 2006b) find that sociability at an early age is related to later employment in
occupations that involve more people skills, we acknowledge that work experiences
could affect an individual’s tendency to extroversion. It is also possible that a tendency
towards extroversion causes some workers to spend a lot of time interacting with others
while away from work and while at work, but that the social interactions during work
time are not work related. While we acknowledge this possibility, our finding of a
positive correlation between non-work time spent interacting with friends and the
sociability score assigned to the job based on the O’Net Dictionary of Occupational Titles
suggests that extroverted workers are more likely than introverted workers to be
employed in positions that require social skills.
Biasing our results in the opposite direction, one should also recognize that many
workers who spend their entire work day talking might seek some solitude when they are
off work. This effect, if it exists, is not strong enough to overturn the positive
relationship between the prevalence of work-related and non-work-related interactions.
Another concern is that workers’ tastes are not unidimensional. It is possible that
workers’ who have a preference for social interactions may also have preferences over
other working conditions. A worthwhile direction for future work would be to develop
measures of tastes toward other work-related conditions, such as risk, offensive noise and
stress, and then to jointly test whether sorting occurs on jobs along those lines as well
extroversion. For example, the seemingly anomalous results we found for risk and
offensive noise may be due to occupations such as hospital nurses or construction
workers, whose jobs involve these negative characteristics but which are outweighed by

28

other positive features. Multidimensional sorting could well resolve these puzzling
results.
Competitive markets are presumed to raise welfare by enabling buyers and sellers,
workers and employers, to make efficient matches according to their tastes, talents and
technology. The extent to which workers are actually sorted across jobs according to
their tastes has not previously been examined. An important feature of our work is that
we identify workers’ tastes toward social interactions by their revealed behavior while
not working. Similar results are found, however, if we use self-reported indicators of
individuals’ personality traits.
The approach we have taken can be used to compare the efficiency of different
labor markets. Although our evidence is admittedly sketchy and preliminary -- and
dependent on the assumption that opportunities for socializing while not working are
similar in the two countries -- we do not find much evidence of differential sorting by
workers’ preferences for social interactions in France and the United States. If correct,
this finding suggests that the rigidities in the French labor market do not obstruct the
efficient sorting of workers across jobs in a noticeable way. A useful direction for future
work would be to examine the extent to which the matching of workers and jobs
according to workers’ tastes are affected by labor market institutions.
Lastly, we find that workers express higher levels of satisfaction and higher net
affect during work if they are employed in jobs that involve frequent interactions with coworkers. This effect tends to diminish for workers who spend a smaller share of their
non-work day in the company of others. We also find that other workplace
characteristics, such as time pressure, close supervision, and perceived risk of job loss,

29

have a sizable effect on work satisfaction and net affect on the job. The estimated effect
of desirable working conditions on work satisfaction and net affect is especially large in
comparison with the modest estimated effect of pay on work satisfaction and net affect,
and the typically modest compensating wage differentials associated with various
working conditions observed in the labor market. The reasons for this divergence
deserve further consideration.

30

References
Borghans, Lex, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce Weinberg. 2006a. “People People: Social
Capital and the Labor-Market Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups,” NBER WP
11985, (January).
_________ . 2006b. “Interpersonal Styles and Labor Market Outcomes,” unpublished
paper, Maastricht University, (May).
Brown, Charles. "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market." 1980. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 94, No. 1, (February), pp. 113-134.
Freeman, R. B. 1978. ‘Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable’, American Economic
Review, 68, pp. 135-141.
Gronau, Reuben. 1974. “Wage Comparisons – a Selectivity Bias,” Journal of Political
Economy 82(6), pp. 1119-43.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 1990. Shirking or Productive Schmoozing: Wages and the
Allocation of Time at Work. Industrial & Labor Relations Review 43(3), February, pp.
S121-S133.
Helliwell, John and Haifang Huang, “How’s the Job? Well-Being and Social Capital in
the Workplace,” NBER WP No. 11759, November 2005.
Hough, Leaetta and Frederick Oswald. 2000. “Personnel Selection: Looking Toward the
Future – Remembering the Past,” Annual Review of Psychology 51: 631-64.
Juster, F.Thomas. 1985. “Preferences for work and leisure”. In F. T. Juster and F. P.
Stafford (Eds.). Time, goods, and well-being. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social
Research, University of Michigan.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan Krueger, David A. Schkade, Norbert Schwarz and Arthur A.
Stone. 2004. "A Survey Method for Characterizing Daily Life Experience: The Day
Reconstruction Method (DRM)," Science, (December 3), pp. 1776-80.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz and Arthur Stone.
2006. “Would you be happier if you were richer? A focusing illusion,” Science 312,
(June): 1908-10.
Krueger, Alan, and David Schkade. 2007. “The reliability of subjective well being
measures,” unpublished paper, Princeton University (January).
Roberts, Brent and Wendy F. DelVecchio. 2000. “The Rank-Order Consistency of
personality Traits from Childhood to Old Age: A Quantitative Review of Longitudinal
Studies,” Psychological Bulletin, 126 (1): 3-25.

31

Robinson, John P. and Geoffrey Godbey. 1997. Time for Life: The Suprising Ways
Americans Use Their Time. University Park, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. I,, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, Chapter 12, pp. 64192.
Rosen, Sherwin. 2002. “Markets and Diversity.” American Economic Review, (March),
92(1), pp. 1-15.
Saffer, Henry. 2005. “The Demand for Social Interactions,” NBER WP 11881,
(December).
Stern, Scott. 2004. “Do Scientists Pay To Be Scientists?” Management Science, Vol. 50,
No. 6, June 2004, pp. 835-853.
Tinbergen, Jan. 1956. “On the Theory of Income Distribution,” Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, vol. 77, pp. 155-175.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Joni Hersch. 2000. "Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers." Review
of Economics and Statistics (August 2000).

32

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for the Three Analysis Samples
Texas
All
Random Smpl
Age

Columbus

Rennes

38.0

38.0

43.0

37.9

$53,659

$47,915

$69,510

€ 30,826

Married

0.44

0.42

0.61

0.40

College + (a)

0.54

0.38

0.55

0.43

Union

0.20

0.12

NA

NA

Tenure

6.30

5.59

NA

NA

Black

0.24

0.27

0.17

NA

Hispanic

0.22

0.24

0.01

NA

Number of Work
Episodes

4.48

3.70

3.86

3.90

Number of NonWork
Episodes

9.63

9.88

9.78

11.04

Proportion of Time Alone
while Working (b)

0.08

0.08

0.14

0.23

Proportion of Time Alone
while Not Working (b)

0.44

0.43

0.32

0.33

Proportion of Time w/Friends
while Not Working

0.15

0.16

0.11

0.11

Proportion of Time Interacting
while Working (c )

0.89

0.89

NA

NA

0.44

0.34

409

372

Annual Household Income

Proportion of Time
Conversing while Working

NA

Maximum Sample Size
__________________

908

NA

535

Notes:
(a) In France, college + is baccalauréat plus 3 or more years.
(b) In Texas, time alone is time spent not interacting with anyone; in Columbus and Rennes, it is
time spent alone.
(c ) Proportion of time interacting with customers, clients, co-workers, patients, students or boss.

Table 2a: Non-Work Time Allocation by Self-Described Gregariousness
What would the people who
know you say about you?
Enjoys being in company:

Proportion of non-work
time spent noninteracting

Proportion of non-work
time spent with friends

Much less than others (n=50)

0.51

0.09

About average (n=75)

0.42

0.14

Much more than others (n=390)

0.43

0.17

0.106

0.017

p-value

Note: p-value is from a regression of percent of time on reported in each category
on self-reported enjoyment from being in company, which runs from -3 to +3.
Sample is TX DRM, random sample.

Table 2b: Work Time Allocation by Self-Reported Job Description
Does this statement describe
your situation at work?
Frequent interactions with
co-workers is an important
part of my job:
Definitely Not (n=18)

Proportion of work
time spent noninteracting

Proportion of work time
interacting with co-workers

0.16

0.58

Mostly Not (n=49)

0.10

0.71

Mostly Yes (n=129)

0.13

0.73

Definitely Yes (n=337)

0.06

0.80

0.001

0.000

p-value

Note: p-value is from a regression of percent of time reported in each category
on self-reported job description, which runs from 1 to 4.
Sample is TX DRM, random sample.

Table 3: Tobit Models for Proportion of Time Spent Interacting at Work
Texas DRM Sample, Random Component
Explanatory Variable
Prop. of time not interacting
while not working
Prop. of time interacting w/friend(s)
while not working
Age

(1)

(2)

-0.472
(0.146)
---

-0.395
(0.154)
---

---

-0.007
(0.004)
-0.047
(0.084)
0.084
(0.082)
-0.113
(0.098)
-0.281
(0.099)
-0.151
(0.114)
-0.011
(0.006)

College +

---

Married

---

Black

---

Hispanic

---

Union

---

Tenure

---

(3)

(4)
---

---

0.533
(0.214)
---

0.522
(0.225)
-0.008
(0.004)
-0.102
(0.086)
0.140
(0.083)
-0.104
(0.099)
-0.257
(0.100)
-0.167
(0.116)
-0.011
(0.006)

-------------

Log Likelihood
-337.229
-303.426
-339.234
-304.024
Sample Size
534
502
534
502
______________
Note: Dependent variable is proportion of time interacting with co-workers,
clients, students, patients, or boss while working. Tobit allows for censoring
at 0 and at 1. Mean (SD) of dependent variable is 0.89 (.24) in columns 1 and 3,
and .90 (.24) in columns 2 and 4. In column 1 and 3, 19 observations are censored at 0,
129 are uncensored, and 386 are censored at 1. In columns 2 and 4, 17 observations
are censored at 0, 120 are uncensored and 365 are censored at 1.

Table 4a: Tobit Models for Proportion of Time Spent Interacting at Work
Columbus DRM Sample
Explanatory Variable
Prop. of time alone while
not working
Prop. of time interacting w/friend(s)
while not working
Age

(1)

(2)

-0.286
(0.175)
---

-0.136
(0.188)
---

---

-0.003
(0.005)
0.072
(0.099)
0.204
(0.115)
0.256
(0.141)
-0.796
(0.453)
-425.489
403

College +

---

Married

---

Black

---

Hispanic

---

Log Likelihood
Sample Size

-435.005
408

(3)

(4)
---

---

0.447
(0.294)
---

0.449
(0.300)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.078
(0.098)
0.247
(0.108)
0.250
(0.140)
-0.807
(0.453)
-424.625
403

---------435.187
408

Table 4b: Tobit Models for Proportion of Time Spent Interacting at Work
Rennes DRM Sample
Explanatory Variable
Prop. of time alone while
not working
Prop. of time interacting w/friend(s)
while not working
Age

(1)

(2)

-0.467
(0.202)
---

-0.311
(0.216)
---

---

-0.003
(0.005)
-0.065
(0.100)
0.204
(0.112)
-363.868
369

College +

---

Married

---

Log Likelihood
Sample Size
______________

-367.066
371

(3)

(4)
---

---

0.054
(0.272)
---

0.166
(0.288)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.075
(0.100)
0.266
(0.106)
-364.743
369

-----369.752
371

Note: Dependent variable is proportion of time talking or engaged in conversation
while working. Tobit allows for censoring at 0 and at 1. For Panel A, mean (SD) of
dependent variable is 0.44 (0.42) in columns 1-4; in column 1 & 3, 147 observations are
are censored at 0, 168 are uncensored and 93 are censored at 1; in column 2 & 4
145 observations are censored at 0, 166 are uncensored and 92 are censored at 1.
For Panel B, mean (SD) of dependent variable is 0.34 (0.39) in colums 1-4; in column
1 & 3, 172 observations are censored at 0, 148 are uncensored and 51 are
censored at 1; in column 2 & 4 171 are censored at 0, 147 are uncensored and
51 are censored at 1.

Table 5: Reliability of Data
Two-Week-Apart Correlations of:

r

Average______
Session 1
Session 2

1. Proportion of Day Alone

0.56

0.26

0.27

2. Proportion of Day Alone
While Not Working

0.64

0.35

0.35

3. Proportion of Day Alone
While Working

0.30

0.15

0.16

4. Proportion of Day Talking

0.46

0.44

0.44

5. Proportion of Day Talking
While Working

0.44

0.47

0.48

6. Proportion of Day Talking
While Not Working

0.43

0.42

0.42

7. Proportion of Day with
Friends While Not Working

0.32

0.13

0.15

________________________________________
Notes: Sample consists of 207 women in Texas who were sampled on March 30 and
April 13, 2005 and worked on the preceding day. Both surveys were conducted on a
Wednesday, and the responses refer to the preceding day. The average respondent
reported 9.7 nonworking episodes and 4.6 working episodes per day. The definition of
the variables conforms to those used in the Columbus and Rennes DRM samples.

Table 6: Net Affect During Various Activities; Texas DRM Sample
Random

Full Smpl.

Exercising

4.00

3.97

Socializing

3.86

3.99

Watching TV

3.45

3.59

Doing Housework

2.63

2.79

Commuting

2.15

2.22

Working

2.06

2.13

While Working:
Not Interacting

2.05

1.65

Boss

1.96

1.89

Co-worker

2.05

2.11

Clients/customers/
students/patients

2.15

2.28

Table 7. Work Satisfaction and Net Affect Regressions
Work
Explanatory Variable

Net affect

Mean

Satisfaction

during work

Log hourly wage

2.78

0.15
(0.07)

0.12
(0.07)

Frequent Interactions with coworkers
is an important part of my job

0.85

0.44
(0.14)

0.51
(0.14)

My employer provides all of the
resources needed to do my job well

0.69

0.98
(0.13)

0.48
(0.13)

People in my position are at risk of
being fired or laid off

0.24

-0.27
(0.13)

-0.28
(0.13)

Under constant and close
supervision

0.36

-0.4
(0.12)

-0.19
(0.13)

Have flexible hours

0.37

-0.09
(0.09)

0.02
(0.10)

Works nights shifts

0.13

0.14
(0.12)

0.19
(0.13)

Breaks are infrequent and short

0.48

-0.32
(0.10)

-0.07
(0.11)

There is time pressure; constant
pressure to work fast

0.52

-0.29
(0.11)

-0.64
(0.12)

Does pretty much the same thing
all day

0.55

-0.28
(0.10)

-0.22
(0.11)

Involves significant risk of injury

0.16

0.35
(0.15)

-0.09
(0.16)

Exposed to offensive noise

0.28

0.12
(0.12)

-0.1
(0.13)

Exposed to dust, dirt and bad
smells

0.27

-0.05
(0.12)

0.28
(0.13)

R-squared

0.22

0.15

n
_________

809

776

Notes: Regressions also include a constant, education, age, age-squared, and hispanic ethnicity, black,
and white indicator variables. Standard errors shown in parentheses. Work satisfaction and net
affect have been scaled to have a standard deviation of 1.

Percent of Time with Friends

Figure 1. Average Percent of Non-work time
spent with Friend by Social Requirements of Job
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1 (n=8)

2 (n=304) 3 (n=149)

4 (n=72)

Occupational Sociability Score
Note: Occupational sociability score was assigned based on job descriptions from O*Net
Dictionary of Occupational Titles, Third Edition. Average percent of non-work time
with friends is based on Texas DRM.

