NIBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PECUNIARY AND MARKE'T MEDIATED EXTERNALITIES:
TOWARDS A GENERAL THEORY OF THE WELFARE
ECONOMICS OF ECONOMIES WITH IMPERFECT
INFORMATION AND IMCOMPLETE MARCFTS

Bruce Greenwald
Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 1304

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts
Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

March 198k

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those ot the authors and
not those ot the National Bureau ot Economic Research.

1304

NBER Working Paper

March 1984

ABSTRACT

PECUNIARY AND MARKET MEDIATED EXTERNALITIES:

TOWARDS A GENERAL THEORY OF THE WELFARE
ECONOMICS
OF ECONOMIES WITH IMPERFECT
INFORMATION AND INCOMPLETE MARKETS

This paper presents a simple but quite general framework for analyzing
the impact of informational externalities.

By identifying the traditional

pecuniary effect of these externalities which nets out,

the paper greatly

simplifies the problem of determining when tax interventions can be Pareto
improving.

Ii some cases it also leads to simple tests, based on readily

observable indicators of the efficacy of a particular tax policy.

The

framework of the paper is used to analyze adverse selection, sigri111ng,
moral hazard,

incomplete contingent claim markets and queue rationing

equilibria.

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Bell Laboratories and

Bruce Greenwald
Bell Laboratories and
Harvard Business
School
Cambridge,

Massachusetts

0' 2 138

Princeton

University

Princeton,

New Jersey O854

PecSary uth MarkM Medated ExtnSId
Towanh a n1 Theory of tim Welfare

EnunSn of Ftida #th Inwefed
InanrqMe Maita
Bruce Greenwatd
Bdl Labomtthes

ad

Harnxd Business Sc&tl
Joseph StigiLiz'
Pxincetrn University

and

Bell Lcbaratat
A Ignifirzmt pcriim I the reccnt literatwe in public finance has be devc*ed to Ut analyth cf
newly

dscovad atutia]it in markets with impeitct infcrmatiaa Signalling (s e e Spe

(1973)), search (see flamini and Maskin (1979), Mcrtenscn (1979)),and imuraxe (see Shavdl

(1979)) dated atataUtia are all

in pcint. lh each htazte the papers inVdVCd attempt

first to 5tablish the amer d a "maT" tnality az then to detop a prtipt1m for welfare
improving go'nnment interventicz5. In mat d the literatwe ndt&r d the steçs is straight-

forward. Yet tlcc is a framework devdo

in this papa, th readily identific rea1"

unliti (i.e. thae bdling to bWI5dit marks taiioz) aS! pro'Ades simple rcrip&ns,
LnsS m cSaiable indirnán, for the apjrcpriate thrm Cf gounnent intervention.

Ccncan with wSt infamaticn based externalitis are "iS" sm to be rated in the lccg,
ixit now alnnt cknant, traãticn cf analyzing the sixial impact d an indhidual's acticns in taics

1 pecuniary aS nan-pecuniaq atanalities; 'with the latter lxing "ri" atutalida Mich justify

govnnezfl Servaidra The zao

n impact cf p&uthaxy atniit (i.e. the nu!uar cf an

thdisithia]% imct m ti tiraigh his imnrt ni mark ptic) is thai ascribed, if aily
Fwrial qpxt ci die Natimal Scieme FaSadon is gatthally athtedged. Earlia iwa <1 this pa tre
çreserrel at scinam at Prin Hanni, Kmixtdy Sct, aS LSE We are irxithted rsxtidifls at Sse
Tthta1 far hdpM armvnt

-2infnally, to the fact that as tim number ci ageit in an ecmany Lnxnies large, the Wect ci a
single in&idual a! market detnined variables, like prices, becomes negligible. Consequently,

these n an be ignaed in making well are calculafions. The implicit concern in the literature
seem to be that, in atomistically corupetithe nomics, uth market- ar.ediaS ettanalities may

be nligiWe for similar reasot (Inc the we cith which the literature examines uniting cases

'isith large nuts ci agents). Hawe%vr, as this jrper makes dear, pecuiiary attnalitin in tIe
sense arc a wry spial case aM market-mediated aternalities are in geinal entirely
ana!cgcus to taditional atnlities (e.g. air pcllution).

There are, however, pctmiaiy n with arise fran any gatnmmt interveaticn ad these do

i&d itt at in welfare calculations far atcnnistically mnpetitiw eccnanics. The aplexity d
many nalyses ci

m_adonal atcialilies is then affiuixatable to a failure to identify and

eliminate these tenn.' Thing so within the framework destope3 in this paper provides an apprcech

which substantially thrplifia the analysis ci the apprcpriate nature Cf gO'i'imit intervciticn in

inçerfectly infcnnth market wrni,ies?

lit papa csts cf two sections and a brid amduthon. Section 1 develop the lsic
framewixk aM anal)t Section II then uses this formulation to investigate a brad range ci
welfare dtuaticx in which market-me*fatui atemalities play an important role. It analyses the
lcral welfare impliatia5 if adverse selection, signnTflng, moral hazard, brcrnplete markets and
queueraliothng equilibria.

LThaBIcModdwxIR5ub
lit agents in the nithel contht 1 lnsseltlth, firms, aM a genment with the fdkming

drarat
d ci

1. See dtlr the liteatwe ci serth ctcsaciit' eg Mmsm (1979) a rtammd ath Maskin (1979) - a
isrcqte seactdes rmthcs - tg tflmrnd (1967) a Lccng ard Zeckhause (1981). In gaI, dt atç!Sty cf
de amty!es arise teuse dc a2ts mutate ci caqaiir rdevant trarginal rats cf sibttaici a frnsork,
wtich nka it dthAtt w i&xtfy dt fa"u' jmzilaiy ecrcnalitiu cdth ittat.
2.

M liqntn aspcc if Ut çpcath is that it itrifi5 eaenatitia 'Mth de t tear the brdri rat than thcse

rg the dfs In paence ths iaka it mich eet tify Mt r atunality is Seed zn-yauziary.

-3A. HourfrM
}kucehoh maximize a utility fwrdai,

=

x'. = (x, %h) —

H,

Ccnsumpticn wctT cf IEUSdIcId

x =(x,

h,zt bccinsumption c( dmnumaáegocx1,

x)isax3umptiondtheN-1nofl-xIuffler3fregocds,

vect 1 Nh t variables v1ñth aff the utility cf bausthold Ix (c.& levels
cf pcihthai, avatge quality cf a — ccinsnd).
Housebolc mnrimfra u h subject to a budget amstraint cf the form.

F

takingq,c/,1,at and?

atd,

te
q—

attratpicattheN—lnm-tutrtierairegocds,

if - pzuCiartfizmf,
-

1IcbzflInzsek1dh

infirmf,iö

— ahnnpw1govenunenttrafotobousebc1kIh,I —

1,

(ii,

Wewiflalsouse,

E"(q,?, u) -

tS apethtwe fuzrthn ct bousthdd Ix th gives t!t nñzñmmn expmcflture
rnsary to thain a level cf utility u1, ta prices areq and z' is level cf
'almr" variables.

It is nll-bain that,

4(q;z1i1) a tlzacpeiisatSdneaMfagocxlk given?

sash
eq
Finally,

1

-4-

x1'(q,I) —

(x(q,I),x(q,I))a thedettnndfncn(uncompcnsated)dbouschddh.'

We will autmie that this fturticn is cEffnttiable.4

tklrna
Firms rnaximfre the profit itmcti cn,

y1 (y,f') -

—

p

ct&dfirthf sithy{andj" tdanaicgwsiyto4 and
Vtcr cf prothicms' prices icr tim N —1 non-nmnnaire goals.

Firms mathnize prcñt subject to tim cortraint that,

iuxttia *1 tim tsual sort,
- vn ci aba N
affting fixmf
a

S

variables

lit

firm's

mniirnt

analcgassly

defrwi to?

1 fuxticn,

has tim jcty that,
3. lIt luisdr4d &mand fmdai ciJs 01 the true swa ci t!nfas tate bib z ad z
thexdne ci',
ii' and in hcssthdd Sate) ray djrrxi a the anizptim ddces Cf d&
Ft

? (shithIn

Lnist2th.

a put athaxe cm.

AIso,fadtsake
xA(q,fl.x*(q,Ih;:*(q,fl)%tmex*(q,1;1)iSttuSflldafldtunaitieStkZ"asfiXS.
cf pcüdanl srxçlidty, lnzsdrld In ocbcrtu base Its aztharily at win This hn m subsazrin inpa

mdt aSys.

4.

•

a
lIt ptliein Cf sifying ts kind Cf dffrrSabi]ity assurqt is aatnS in tal ty Stmts (1980) nIt
dfSet . lit df5ailty the is that the 'sal anvecity asunpdot Cf
tilt awnjn in a slighdy
pefeerza aid pvdictai fuixdas nil guaran dffeaiability. The atcal deco tray acre dscciziaiides.
lit excess nd' ftmaia% tned the SLide the df ci
mqian€ties tub drealy arid ithrecdy ia tir
m cinlity gtaañag acisiS (it. ftwgb fit inpact d/ aid g*) nlith in win, df mwuvrr1Q1 aid

—

5. )'(<Oultanmflpit.

.5-

—111=yLk =1,

N

(2)

where y( here denota the prct maximizing level d the production variable in question.
Finally,

y'(p,J)

(y{(p,I)Jf(p1i)) a sipplyfncticxn(mcanpo,sated) ef firznf.

We will assume that this fuxctkn like the demax fund on is diffen1iab]e.

C. Gownwnnt

The govatment produces ncthing, ccilects taxes, &tttes the prcceeds and recelves a net

brave,

R at.i_Eih,
H
t — (q —p),
;h (i.e. the sum of non—nurneraire consumption).

An initial eputbrium with no taxes ath P' =0, h, will be assumed to st.6 At this

euilibiium,p=qand,
=0
i(q,I) —Ei&1')
F
A tple tat cf the Paro Optimality d this equilibrium is to ask sstictht these exists a set cf
taxes, subsidies and lump sum dansfcr vdiith wtnld (a) leave housthdd utilities tnxhanged and (b)
ixrease gosanment revexiucs (assumed to be anuxnnl in numaire good). Ths, in turn, implies

6. As desaid so f& the tnt irny

xn, ct czxwse ban

an calibitnn rice wc. Hov.ever, ha*g zne that

pnbilizy, ft is dl wuth iin&igating Ut wfare linØicatia d any euflibria v4ich emy edst. The se ftr this is
rr2de fuRy and rqzUiny li Scaneu (1980). We fl1 also ine the pthlan cI fr gcixk. Accambng ía them
wxdd nty axxçttcate it are! yis v.ithac altering any basic rults.

.6that Ut probkm,

maxRss.i_EJht
r,l

(3)

subject to
1h

=Eh(q,zh;iih)

(4)

competitive equilibrium utility levels,

11h,1/,1/, end9 arefimctior5cft andl,hasasduficnatz =O,ifthefnita1ex:pii1ibrium
is Paro Ctiita]. (This is a nsaq, but nct suffident, conditica for Pareto Optimality.)
To see vth fit last contim holds, note that aicng the anstraint ci equation (4),

(5)

r
dl h

- change in lump sum inccne p tnt tharzge in lazY
Oiri

,enN'-demitvecwr,

[:: } = [:; 1 (ith

suitably norrrialized), an N1'-

elenait vatcr.
But, dq/dt = N1 + tip/ti: (here 'N—i is an identity matrix). Therefcxe3 substhu&ig into (4)

and reananging tn 4eith,
7. This N-i dart sc is xxx a cinvrria2l jivathe, tcc the, is m fwrtiarnl rdatihip tetwn r and I. Also,
is an hrjxrarx
itich intlies epats (5). The dsbiats, 1b
4 ath, In, dianges in
tine ds1biicm aie asin to base to irnçn'i (21 1k icr airy bassd4d Cr ;f icr #ny frm. Ixiudir the impact d
term to the x izdud term tiwd 1oa',
thiaztn lintie dsmbtciardy icUs an ixane Ltd
Stncr ths w1d geady 4itt the inatci cn}nc 2)mg
ke.sic mture d the TeSUItS, thee tens have ire-i
srnMt atvarily) içiS. aMtenañvdy. :L the &2ivatives dz (ar p and q) with rçea to t can
(a&tiny
sjewej as
aI &rintht, wJdr€ izto acinc the assctaattt thanes in I,'

as well as the thea efie cit.

-7-

(6)
Next, substitution from epadors (1) and (2), sinmation wer all haiseholds and use cf the fact
that

=

1

yields,

r+(c-yi=3+ [2lD(.1L2E d2')
Mn -

= I in any markS tü]ibñua Thercfat, along the ontaim (4),

Mitre the ecSny" impact ci the It! tar change, (i-fl dp Idi, has Ita netted cit.
Now, diff&enliatixig the cbjeclive funclicn (3) s4th respect to t ,

dr

di

w thtán,

H

(8)

Sulxtittthcn fr (7) into (8) yields,
(9)

dt

(10)

(11)

th is the dethtvc cf R along &xfims in 'Much the cornpaisatial cüa&4&aint is satisfied. This
n be used as a measure ef the net dwnge in wdf are.
Fx the initial equilibrium to be P.O., dR lilt must equal zero at t =0, whith nplies that,

-8-

(HhBt)_O

(12)

Thus, Pareto Ctima1ity depot ci The absaice ci any z 's vtith thange with taxes and affect
dther prthts 'z housthdd utilities.

The defining characteristic d alatalit, which (hi

traditional ]anguage) tie "non-pecuniary'

and, therefat, justify sane fcnn d govmmem intervention, is that they ait utility CT prcfit
fuxticns in the fam d the z-vañables. The %Briab!es involved may be teSned by the markel

interacd d agaats (rg. average product qualities, search 1imes avenge levels d imolervabk
effcrt

a, ith inccmplete markts, ftture pric), and indhidual agits may ban mly a neg]igib!e

impact m their levels. Nev1heis tth resulting equilibrium wifl be Pareto &effidem. As an
eaxiciy beams brreasing]y atcxnistic, the reducth impact d each iadisidual agt m the levd cf
the "external" variab1 is just counterbalanced by the increasing numb d cthers affted. This is
shown rigcrcxisly in Appendix I. Exct in the spedal ase (vdñth is unlikely to bcd generically)

flt ath B' aactly r1 each cth ast, the etistesre cf ncapecuniaxy tatalities will
make the initial equilibrium. intent and guarantee the existence cf welfare impro'4ng tax

Furth&ma; eqtati (9) pro"ddcs a simple set d nssary wnthticw chaxactexizing the
cçthnal level dtaxes in the prcce ci atmialitia Since dR Ida' = 0 is nnsary for tirnility,
cpcimal tax lewis hast the FF'Y that,
r

fl

—B'

(13)

Taxes should be incrscd until the "ccvstantntC Jcss in tax rexcuc is aactly equal to tim
marginal

value ct the abatanazt in atmaiity geinathg actMties, serc "castam-ratC thartges

in taxes revmue are the thang in revmue that wculd have cccuxed at the existing tax nt

its

8. A trplc aaiqie ry hp darify mv tzigta-y d1s rule n S alied p2cdce. A x as auo ua'iel that
actidats will always be ixivialiy trzfdth. lt'.'c'., sacitt x utreases wll ruiuce the renie id&d by
tie tax (at cnn nt5). Tlt tax sinild r btas wr this Vas in mtive aacdy toianc5 dr tmgü21 tnfi ct
rduaicm in cani acits m,

-9-

fl ajjit d this papa is devcied to applying çuatic (12) in a variety d familiar welfare
situations.

IL Apllcztlozs
As noted in the introduction, the most fruithi] area for applying equation (12) is in the field cf

infomational atnliti. There are several reasa for this. First, infcrmatioxtal 1ernalitics are
almost invariably market-med laud in ¶he sise that they afft ailocatits indirectly twgh their

impact ci mark equilibña (e.& by affetthg the avenge quality d a bet oozenccus, but
thsdcnaUy identical, cunnnlity vbith ct&s the market place) ntber than theciiy thraigh the

impact d me agent ci anotr. Therefrr; &stingtdslñng market mediated at&na1iti fran

tra&thmalIy p=iaiy m dtti he1z clarify what is at issue.

Second, the. impact ct infcnmational

atnalid th includes amplicated trants which añse from changes h market equilibfla.

Ithng these ecuniaq" eff1s tit they net ait greatly simplifi the analysis. Third, the
welfare analysis d inf national cqth]ibria has bcn greatly cccç2icated by the vmiety 'f
irifamatiaI stuctr that are assumed Ccnstrained Pareto cçtima d many diff&t soils have
bern ax con1inue to be defin4 and thsavered. It sn useful, threfore, to ask a cimp1 question
namely, Ix a given izformaticn structure, are thee simple tax intavciticx3 thich vvifl improwe

tare in the cnxpa6cn ssc used here? Focusing Os conwensatai cbang5 h gosnnnl
revue (i.e. a Id:) ailos*'s this kind d question to be answS relatively easily and produc
pdicy

czipticsMiith can then be based ai changc in thserab1e markd quantities.

In this section d the paper, simple maids d mans in&ventim are developel fcr advase

seIticn, sina1ling, insizanc; queue ratioing and imp!ete fisk mark cqyiiilria.
A. Atherse Sekctlon

flt simplest case in which the analysis can be applied is to markets with asymmetricaUy

ástribi.ed information and hetcgmcus quality. The basic model fcr these situations s
&vdapS by Akdof (1970). To simplify even

we wJl asswne that thee is cnly a single

such csimtdity and that the are no cth atenaiki. Buyers will be assumed to draw xmom1y

- 10 -

fran the market in th the comctlity in question is ctfced icr sale, Seflers know the quality cI
tat they are selling. Buys know aily the avenge quality in the market as a vdtote. We v411

assn, in addition, that buyas are perfectly informed about and care cniy abnit the average
quality ci what they bay. Raiisticaflybuyas may also care about the range f pcsTh1e qualities,

bat taking this into accazm wtld dithge tt analysis 4rly in thiass ways and ww]d greatly
ixrtase its complexity? IS S denise the quality d each unit ci the hetercgois conmedJty, and 0
denae the awrage quality in the market place.

The real situaticn con' inding mct dce1y to this sitçle modd is a iabcr markS in wbich
firms hire blindly fran a — d workers d hetacg&nis quality.
In tcs ci the male] ct tit paper, the z h cwtcrs si1i consist cf a single elemmi wlñcii is equal

to

(although househoith 'itch do nct pmthase the commixilty may have du'IdzO).

Similarly, z for all fimis will have a single clement equal to 0. Formally,

I= E1'(q;O)
ax

if i1(p,O).
hit these draimstar, equaticm (12) 1cr a small tax, dr, becrzncs
(14)

Sinir if frrreases and E decreases with 0, this rnm that any intuvealkn tth increases
average quality in the mat place is benthdal. This, any small tax which ireases the quality d
the hetargenis azmmiity is always ba3efidalya
9. lIt simçie cr apj%es sally d1 to a tuaüm in t*h bsyas pirthase thy a limited autter ci ite ant r

aat dt indvidual qsalies death In that

aite e'peted utlity (the açpcpriate twifare
m dt nnn aix! spr& cf the dstnhtcn cf "quaIit in the markec —.

Inre) li

eet

wit trhaw in the zxmniw
9a A qniai that arise bee is td ag, thMng the cpersiaice ci pality ci
tmbed Ire. The nv, in getral, is in (See Stiitz-Weiss, (1981), Srig½, (1976)). Bit there are daair

in itth they will, e.g. hm labcr is

at a tut hinaghail, in which diet re a large nsztr d ançtoyezs.
TI#n & supçly d labaus 1 te sextiaUy imaffnd by any snge firm. Hare, a firm wit hate in
w
a

ge in u d the wkn ug; and cnn cktain a norken at a lava wage.

y

— 11

-

What is surpxising about this result is its simplicity. The fact that an increase in 0 involves the

sale ci higher quality inputs by same households suggests the neth for a careful balancing ci the
increased cost ci these sales by avner households against the benefits to purchasers. Yet no such

alculation is iIIIpIiS by equation (14). The nessary balancing ci the costs ci selling higher
quality itcns is being done by ac households in the prrss ci madmizing utility. Changes in I
vbich result fran dianges in x 1! by owner households (in response to changes in the- market price)

are part ci the pecuniary imrct ci the original tax change. As such, they net ost. Ths accounts
for the simple farm ci the final pdicy prescription.

A tyica1 nak d tax changes leading to changes in average allity añses 'Miere different
ability groups have &fferc labor supply elasticities. If high ability xkes haw great supply
elasticities than Icv abiity workers, a small prqxirtiouate wage subsidy vAil increase average
quality.

Finally, it should be neted that there is, at least in pripl; an thservahle basis far judging the

tthes d gov-nment tax pdicy. Assuming that the average "quality" d labor entering a

partiaflar marks an be maiitaed (slicrt cC determining the 'Quality" d each individual worker)
by, far aaniple, taking a statistiol sample, any pclicy cC "small" taxes 'Much increase this quality is

a baida1 cne!t'

t SlgtSUng' SaeSng
lit question cC 'Miether a tax has benthdal or harmful effts an a signalling/screSng
equilibrium't an be addressed in a similar way. The principal difference is that signalling
10. A qietci that ttnalIy axis at this juncute is cit S axzptisatics req.dred by (4) cn act'tally te caniei ax

gisti S uiorrrat availakie to fir go.rnt. flr acit decent, in wnaturally, 01 cibat the gnrnrr lmats

S ectt to ciuith lww an mx are a'ozlab!e. If the ga'anxt is nsnicrS to catnnky taxes ant a unifc-m
tax and hiavs fit dzamactda ci each ci M dasses ci nnns (hit in the dass to 1th any çntic War
keqi
iSivithial Latp) then Pareto irqrtwing cennaSty taxes ciii in gawal, a& as big as the winter ci taxaUe
onnxEties strictly esc M (i.e N > M). La fit gnwezx resuict indi to tax thares tith keep oth class ci
cersanes, acqit the first, at a ghti lecd ci utility. As a rule, fit ciii require M -1 taxes (ate fri each ginip aceet

the fir&). fltn let fir gannrzt thaxe the tax ci a further cnncdry (say — 1), zldng thmiltans thanes in
the M —1

tax to lzq the classes ci i&nters at all their Øvai levd ci udhiry. If the aigimi ezpilThrium is in

P.O., Sn in general a 'aj.Ate tax change ci this nd ciii! cu cihich rais rarnie. This requir5 M taxes aM,
drrciare, M +1 canadties.

11. Sitalling1satng t&ibria invtht ruaa in citich thfrnmtim is on'.eye1 actively '
activdv by biyers. The wadidaEl imdel ci this kind ci eqtntbñn a ecvdCped

sellers aM/cr scught
Speice (1973), Sdghitz (1975) cx

Rhild anl Stititz (1977) is actually Qst in slightly difereer terms than that çresetxai here In nut familiar
sesiais ci the rirrid Thins df çzice-quantlry ccnraas ihjea to sdf-selecn train. Tha dfficilry ciith usng

12-

equilibria invdw, even in the simplest case, two separate qtality ladices, ca for those who acquire

a signal and a scan! for thoss who do not Let these be deniJ by O and 02 rcspecthvly and

assume that cnly firms are affted

their 'levels. Since signals are costly and wages must,

therefore, dçcid pitive!y cii signals, we wifi assume that 01 > 02.
Applying equation (12), the net impact d a small tax dx is,

(15)

IF

Asstuting that firms dnw at random from the pods d wcrkas with and without signals and that

the numb

Since

I

firms is large, this reduc appratircately to,

oil/n is

pcsitive (i.e.

Han average swrk quaiity leads to higher profits), it follows

immediately that any tax iEch increases the astrage quality in bcth the signalling and non-

signalling — is benthdal. lit wwld be tnse cf a tax
average in the signalling

tb disccurage trkets, t

are Itv

— but above the average d the ncn-signalling —, frcm acquiring the

signal, Again the simplidty d this ruIt follows frat the fact that many complicated "pecuniary

transfa effects are ignortd.

If the value ci higlrr 4uality to a fin is t1y propcrtional to the nmub& cf wcr]cas cia
particular type that it its, then epadon (16) can be rewxittm as,

these rdds in e ptn rc is that they irrtuds tao stnte thpanures frut the usual full-inimnatim An
Eta.' zr&I. Fimc, they en?xdy izrawlee idaxrntim ant this aspt d the jrotiem is. v.e hpe, caixurS i

per. Seconi, r &ist nxthathsra ax asscciat &fiithis d cpclibxia ued in dr
sigaiiixsatng ds dff fran d usual Wabitan famulacims (these thanges are largely rpniUe Icr t
xm-ociszmce gthL-xm in ant sigmllü rzreb). Matar, fty dff in ways that rmke it àxpasbIe to tnk tI
"stall' agem. Nevttlts, it is gsUe toaty tt arch cI this pr to aUhx/scrzix pThria ci dt
ussal sat (Nm-pwary atetalides arise teuse the aaaais d a't firm aiSt the se]i.sdeaim almraints d ie's).
Hnvey, icr tt sake cI mty ci jresezxaüct dn vaiiatn U dt
g/scrteting cit wPJ za te dsoissed in
fcrrnuiadai ci dth

ts per.

- 13 -

dR

dt

80i o

802 a

t a0

at

di =tE —-i
iag(
4)i—=—
, ao, F s11

(17)

n1Oq

—s

—

aoj

n(isthenumberciwcrkscft)pei bfrel&yfzrrnf,n1 isthetotalfrumberctvivrkencflwei

8g(

i ai

o,4

11

furtha- assume that the otrall average quality ci the laba f& is vatted by the signal

and is fixed, then:
002

oI

&n1

—

—

Suhetitu&n fran this ccprsion into (17) yields:

(18)

The first tam in (18) captur the "sorthig" wiuc ci the signal. It is the irovement in quality in

tIe signalling — (i.e. 801/at) multiplied by the diffntial value ci "qualItf for wcrkers from the
signalling compared to the non-signalling pci If "quality" is mae important for signalling wts

then this term will be psidve and, tirreicre, a tax which inses the quality tiThe signalling —

iill tmd to be beathcial. U this un-ease in quality is athieved by xe&cing the number ci vtrkns

tsignai(i.e.OnjIat C O),t

msndtermin(18)willalsobepctitM(sbce$j —az> 0

and 011882> 0) and the tax Will be unambiguously benthdal (raneniber that this applies to the
se where overall avenge quality is czzlst2nt).

Furthermore, if there is m "sorting" (pure hierarchichal saeen!ng) cft (i.e.

• 14 -

aj/a81 = a jIaOiJ , then

(19)

ath a snail tax itch it&c the amotmt ef signalling is beneficial.
Finally, if the ainal equilibrium inws no signalling (i.e. n1 = 0), then (19) again applies.

C. Mot HanS and Imvnax
In the ase cf mcràl hazard arising from insurance contracts, an "1cna]itf arises because the
proths d insuraxe firms (at given ievds d pdicy prices) depend m an. undavaNe average levd

d xe taken by subscriber hcusebdlds. This could be inaifled directly, treating purchasers cf
imwne a3 a &tias 'Od" (similar to advase se1ticr) sith au average "quality" which in
Ut instance tu]d be the level d care ex&dsal in adding acck1entC.'2 Havesu, in an bsurance
situation, a strong ase can be made that the teclma]cgy d prorviding insurance is tharacterized lr

cinstai retir to scale and, as a result, the necessary dthntiv v&ich t&lie eiuaticn (12)
may not exist. Faztunatdy 'with CRTS, firms are an inseriiia1 part d the nxxleL The CRTS

t)mdogy an be subsumzi dth into the lIOUSdICId

st

a into the ncn.CRTS firms *hich

pride tI inputs to Ut CR18 tedmdogy. The fundamental ru1ts d the paper are act altered.
Modelling the insurar problem in this way pros4des a usu1 cppcrtuthty to show why.

Msunm fx thp1idty that the tmivse cf ixured ags consists ct iCicitiCal households and

that a simlar level cf effcrt wbth rednc the t cf acddaits cannot be thsa by insurers. Let
baisth1th maximize,'3

E[U"(x, h, eh)],
12, The avral hazard issic maiwass far are than inszne prab.ent mrT1y cznixued. }bweve, the lminnce"
emçie captres dt tntlarrnal mnze d the issues icvdstd in the hde raie I zraal hazard pestin
13. Acci&u lases re &ibsunri in this fimcda,. This famulathi assunrs that d IrXIiVICIUaI cznün hizmdf to all rm
there ciI1 be an acdt. CXxr rrstdts hid & ie gewa
anuire cqaidtw pia m }amtg
fatnulatiaL

Wt

• 15.

nibject to the crnstraini tbat

q

(x'—w") +(pfr,j3 _1h —ta' 1/s 0,
F

wtct E here &wta an aptatkt acrs stata ci natures p!" is a vtcr ci huraixe jnymaits

acres stata ci natut (is i4. the first demait ci 0, is the

ymmt made to bc*sse&,ld

I, instate&nature1),p(,i) istumdfawne(tüthmaydepaidwx',but
dis ituation is tcrftd at iaigth ltaw), 1' is itt lest] ci "care" aerciscd by Inistid Is and
is the "averagC Ievd ci re cwcised by all lniseldth, is:

i=-fr
and h

is the irdvi&ial aidcn'mrt seat

With anEtaS returns to scale in the inance industzy and tisk rt*stral inststors equffibrium in

the imwaire industry ili:

2,i)

=E(pPJ?)

(the_COhtrCtfl.c, eqgi4rtwa d

This eat be substituted into the btsthcid hidgd cusstza?int so that lnisthdt thrue x!I gjph
A.

at wmaxini7aE[&'isubjt to the traint:
q .(x..wh) +E(t[e) _,h
where the

—p 'if s OF
p

n be treated as a rica] utility fimctia.

fiixdm E

For a nafl tax, di, the dmnge in maximum ptS utifity fcr an indisidual lxwtild is,"
dE[CJh]

di

[di

di

.

dl
di

—

dE(pfrfldi
di

di

Mc is the marginal ptul utility ci irtcrce to &xisthdd h. In crder to irnire that
14. Ths is te
ewdc3x

pr6al tt'miw cf dr Upangian nith rjzu

ttaca

di • ntith etails

a nigk faward awEca&n d S

• 16.

household Ii suffs no net las in utility,

iL_(wh_xh)a_Eakr
dt
dr F

d'r/
di

dE(pfli) •g
di

dt

Summing aer all hOUSthCIS and applying the same simplificatiais used in Sectkn I above, the net

impact pa unit cf tax, d:, is

H

di

di

Since dE (is's fl/di should be negative (more care reduces imurance payments), any small tax
which btreases bousethid dfixts at azddt avoidance wifi imprcwe svlfare. Mcrecwer, lit net
soda]

value ci tim tax change is just equal to t reduction in pted level ct casualty iasuiaxc

pamiits. Again this is an thsvab1e wiequxe agaimt vbith the d&iory ii a tax thtemtnlia
on be mrasurS.
This axiclusion rum ccxmtc to the cnntthSl idea that competitive insuzarice markets aight

not to be inttfaI with as Icg as a onpditive equilibrium S5t3 (see for example, Shaw1
(1979)). However, in mt d these mcdds, tb iasurance industry is consthuted so that ix set cf

tarn n alter the ks'S d ore. Shying why this CXaixs reveals a grt deal abait the ajnpriate

role d gov&nt intcivticn
If we assume that imu?ance osts on be made to depeid a the crcplete vwtor 1 household
anuxnption, equilibrium in a ccrnpitive insurance industry ifl imply that,

y(pft,xh,.j) =E(p,i(x),xh)
te the c in queslicni is ncxv that d bousehoith 'iidth consumption vector x ' sixe the
haisehoich txntinde a separate insurar dass. thd these ccuxfitiais, Ut cost cl insurance tat
in the net sccial imjnct apresdon i]] be,

15. Ncre that as r diaries. the cçxin1 piicy, t, 1 change, bit 'by the ewdcçe checrern, this dir tçs cz.

-17-

-

dl?

dt

= :s dE(pji(xh)) ____
H

di

di

t'e xIl is bdng held constant as taxes thange. However, if taxes do not affectx' then they will

.notaffte'
Therefix; where insurance premia are aiali&nS cn x tax interventions will not be able to

improve overall cozimn

welfare16

The ultimate pclicy aitim is wtiether insurance firms can

mat iSvidual Kucebid consumption levels or whether it is t icr the govnnent to concJ

aerall ammpdon levels via tan'7
D. IncnnMe Markets
An aiany witbait a full set ci Arrow-Dtcu contingent cornmcdity markets is me in stcb
many annmothties are cxnipcsities in the same way that a draw from a labor — ci hetercgns

quality is a onite. When d,Anes in demand diange market pxics, the nature ci the cinpcthe

product will then thange As a result, althcugh the ixtcn ci "quality" is no longer unamhiguous,
nall tax intervtnticm will Alrnnct invariably aist sthith can improve an original market allocation.

The initial a]locatiai is net, therefore, a Pareto cptimmn. The recunent cbscoveiy ci this kind ci
inefikiency shaild ifl cnntinue to be a surprise.18

A simple maid ci the phnrvmaicn imthed is me with two pexioch. Asswne, that, in pericxl
two, the state ci nature may take on me ci k value. Assinne further that there is a single store ci

value, denctul goal zero, whe. price in paid two depench on the state ci nature %st1ich
materializes at that dmeP Let an n-dinwnional

vtcr s = (s ,

s) &ncte the. price ci the

stored value 9ood in tens of the numeraire good in each of the period two
16. tr aigimi cneitht uilibiii smy LIII ax be Paiuo dhiet, bit cnnnxlry nx wilL ax hdp. Par a

tharaeizaüm d S qtl x pdicy s Arncu aid Stigiitz (1981).

17. Atnilar

bit siigbdy r canicatS amlt caii be applied to the ackene ttiai case reatui xIie

18. Mu dse zuitreitdsca.as cI dispktnitrriit nLoa andZeckhause (1981).
19. Are cantiticnal apprcsch wuild S to fdlow flaznaxi (1967) aM Stigiitz (1972), tibo assn that the inve&trtrc

a ranthn renirn. If thee at grcunS f gtinr iaaveeiai in the rr rauictive nt&1 used hre (in
— yidds
d rea1 renna to the inwsnwr — is frced at zero), then there are ztain1y gromth fa gatrment
hreweitiai in the rre general nnd.

18 -

states of nature.

The value of this

vector

will depend upon market condi-

tions in period two which depend, among other things, on prices and the aflount
of the good zero produced in period 1.
cnly

If the store—of value good is the

item cf cailtal, that a household's apteJ utility at the benSg cf period 2. depends at its

ho]dings1x. ci this — at that thneajxithevtcr ctpxices, s. Fur eachx8 ands,thcreis a

fuirtim V'(x

s) bith desthbes the zzaxinvirn expected utility cf housdacid h in peziczl 2. For

czxtazss, j' h n be writtai;
it
.t h
V h (x0;s)
k

1a.

where bk is the probability that state k matthaflzect The wftx x is the consumption which

mzathetnilutyilhctsethldh duxingpeiiod2bstatek. Tthttthtomaximize4(x)
subject to the ccnstraint that

S x0x
there I

here denctes the lump ram hxaiie d hctsthdd h phs iZ sales ci the numahe —in

statek inpaicñ2.
linking forward fran the girrr±ig cf paiod 1, we will asswne that a housthdcFs tsm poicd
apected utility is the sum tilts apected utilities in period 1 and pexicxl 2 separately. Formally:

4(xt,x; s) ut(x) +v"(4; s)
x

(20)

demses anzumption paic 1. Housebolds shc4d maximize this two pedod apected

utility subject to the usual idget anstraint.
Now wnthd the impact cf a small change in period I prices. It will lead to a zeadjustinait in

,

paled 1 consum,tiai wine ts will S cut. In additicn, IL will 1d to change in Ufll x0
pirchased
overafl

by this mms, to thang in the

vector

s. In qiatim (20), the vtor s

mtezs the

utility fwrticn cbrtly as a kind d awnaflty. Like the quality variable in the advse

seIwai aample it describes the "canjxsiüon" d a ticket in a icttay. In this instance, the Icttay

is a suequent value lcttuy instead c( a qua]ity lctteiy. This changes in the 'priceCs are non-

pecuniary atffmlid nthu than pniary temaiiths h the traditional sse.

- 19 -

Applying ecjuation (12) to this simple maid a small change in taxes, di, viu1 have a net impact

&E
k

H

j

di

where x is the marginal utility ci inecine to household A in state k.

Therefore, in general, taxes

l]l ernst which vill imprat overall welfare. Models which alude ciliate (e.g. Tharücnd
(1967)) typically impose anñticns wider iiñch ds/dt =0 or householt arc indifferent to the
pattern ii pica wIIth crcurs across states ci nature (i.e. av1Vas = 0). For erample, Diamcnd
(1967) achieves this by having aily a single — so that 'k =

I for all k wider all drcunastances.2°

lit coaticns insolved arc vay special ma.

When infatuation is iiupedeci and seaxth (fransacdcris) are costly, the beir5ts and mts ci
aitering a mat thai depend cn variables ciher than price. For instance, the return to a worker
aitaing the labor markct depaxis bcth on the length ci time that he has to search far a job as l

as the wage he receives once he is anplc'ed. And the length ci time that an individual has to
search depexis on the search activities ci ether individuals.

Similarly, in product markets, first

e first served apeues then serve to balance supply and

dnnarwl• The laigth ci the oyeue may again depend on the actions ci ether firms and individuals?'

!Inbotheasatlmreisana:ta.nality The question is whether these externalities re-

suit in markets being pareto! efficient. We now show how these external-

ities can b analyzed using the framework of this paper.
4

20. Gmsns tnt uthich &Ids -O have &ti idetffi by Stiglicz (1982), It cati&n a tuatim in th the
tnd-value gtrid yidds a rartn inn in nte k. Then, if &rtd icr the stcre'd-value —is CcbbDcag1as,
its o1 'value is ia1epaxi ci the e s aS ontmns are iSiffr to the partn ci a pica aaas ntes ci
21. Similar atcnalitie arise tkien firr tarn bear n curt cEde thing and raiSng cs ci lathiduals, and individual

qñt rats Sjzid ci the aicis ci criw frzm. Still cthe search euenaliti3 tith rmy te aml)ni tisn a

fraxrntrk me dxse ntce dz tharacaisa (quality) ci ind;iduals arriving at a &m are affed by the çotica ci

Ser fin

•20In

this

seticn, we investigate queue ratiming

a. 9

crz example in this category. The reasons fa

lwking at queues are tluw-fdd. First, they have nct becn investigated as thoroughly

uilibña?2 Second,

the

structure

equilibrium usefully illustrate the

ef

the ntx!els

is

quite gena1. And,

s cf circwnstanccs in

es

Search

third queue raticnJng

I1th competitive equilibria are Pareto

ent in ways 'with mcst comtntionai srch models do not.
Again,

to facilitate the apcticn, t will use a ny mp1e modd. Let theit be a singje gocd,

sutscript 1, producS by a single facta, subscript 0. Assuim that the factor, referred to as labor, is

ineiastiolly supplied and is the iiugeajre. The "gwC is supplied in N separate marks iMS

I =1,... N in each cf whith firms guarentee a thffnt waiting time. Let,
—

RI

umupricecft1moarinn1ari4i =1,

"' N,q

(qj, '' qN)

othwiinm&kdi=1,"N,

7, • averagewaitingtimeforconsumersinmarkdi =1

N,T =(T1, '•

TN).

Each cf the i markets are Sumcd to be cnpedtive with Ink &ms and zms tattg prica as
give; and consumcs taking waiting times as given.

Hcusehthh ifl be assumed to thith up thdr ixwthases among litsevaai mzi]n La,

— (xt,

4)—

ao!purcfiasesbyhouscho1dh

H

Haiselwild utility ll be assumed to depend at x h and, dso, iniplidtly ci the waiting time

aswciatedisithxh. j
uh(xIT,w_p;?,L

w

—

total supply d mba

r?)

a utilityfunctioncfbouscholdh,

labcr inccxnc,

V.An exception is Trmian Belwely's
with

Transactions

Costs."

unpublished paper,

"Equilibrium Theory

. 21

L

.

non-worked hours?3

Firms procbice the single goal subject to the constraint that they meet the specified waiting
times for their market segments. Let,

1, '' F,

• labcrcbvtedtoproducticmctaxtputbyflnnf

- labor desvted to handling queue tnnnhers,
- Lf(y{) a Laborrecpñrementfusticndfrnf pro±scingy{ tmitscicnput.
a Q(T,, .y{) a Functkn cW5nirig the service labor required by finn f

to supply an

cutputy{ with awaiting timer1.
Msuining, for simplicity, that each firm participates h cnly me markets profits far friii f

are,

I pjy{ —(L-1'(y{) +Q"(Tj,y{)).
Profits are maximized ocr a chrilce Cf attput, y{, and the market I (characterized by {pj, T1}) in

which the finn dicxrn to participate.

An equilibrium set Cf prices equates supply and dent'M in eadi Cf the markets (wa igecre, as

always, aister prothms). The atem to which this equilibrium involves 'eaI" aternalities
depends m the form Cf the cpiaie service funoticn, Q1.

The simplest alternative is to essume that each finn makes available y{ units d cutput at the

begirming Cf each market paicd. Qistaners line upto pwthase a single staMard tnt size each

Thus, letting the standard size be 1 cit ci Yi firm I

ean

apect y( custoruffs. These mtst be

serviced in Zr1tits d time which requires a service nt;
—

savicerateforfirmf =y{I2Tj.

This sersicente Cf asstoms per ttt time will determine the led d service labor. Lets

23. Waitii tixrts T cit te assnS m lx rates çer units cznurS utich implies that there is a axazd at giartity.
Also thice T represem 'arage" waiting times, we sll1 asswrt that anwr are nsk uaat wnh rea variatia,S
in waiting time araind fit arage.

•22-

the senice rate attained by

yf0

units ct Iabcr.

Then

Q'iy{,T,)

crt4(y{12T,).

A queue service fuirtim ci this nd ccntains no z-varialt and hence no "real" at'naliti
Thus, ttt COIIIpeUtIVe

afloatiai

will be irrrminie

to

Pardo impmving tax intesvenücms?4 Omue

times an observable quality variables and by themselves do not lead to inefficient market allocations.

Because firms can control their queue lengths

by controlling output there are no non—pecuniary externalities.
However, aS models which are chnctexized by such atnilt can easily

Assinne, icr exampl; that levds d
each

te tcribes±

mtput, y{, and prices are thermi bthre the beginning d

mark pthod. Befcre gcing to a maiket, inzlisiduals know the price and the aptS queue

lgtb; cmiy after they go toa market do they 1rn the qurn 1gth assodated with each particular
frna 'within the market. Assume, that hOUS&CIth

appear

ranthnly thraiglnit the m&k pericd

aril join the shortest qunie withn the maxth belcnging to a firm tkce unsdd aatput aceeds the

demaix! cf caans already in line. Queue length far any particular wxxlor will depend ai the
queues facing cther vendcn. As a result, service mt
waiting time,

reqtñred

to meet

the

standard apected

fl, iB depad m The que lengths cf t arms stch depaid, in turn1 cii their

seiMcc nt. In a market equflibtiurn with repeated paicth and actual

savke vcsU ccpialling

apated am, tim profit fincticm Cf me Em can be wñttm,
PaY

24. The finn is

rn, ci rrse, rlly rethctS

T (1J(y{) + Q(T,, y{, i&))

m thaiz cnly those pfr aid senice Ievds (q.taze Ieigth) dfa'ei by t
ahff (p. F) anbinarim thich stuild
nrkas) ath aich that, at the qsantizi dexmnded, the
puthased by iañi&sS (givei the a1ua d p aix] T
firm mak a ptfit.
fizzm. An implicit asswnpücn ci

aw am1ys is that there dxs ax aist any

in t

-23-

-

vector ci

the service labor iiçuts ci uher finns (ett inchxng frrmf).

in this formulation, there are d ly'real"eziernalitia and, tising equation (12), the nct social
impact cia tax,

, is

dR_ yaQt 8yfj
dt

or

Moreaer, the apprcpriate recticn ci govanmit pdicy can readily be dctermined by aaniining
the impact ci taxe w the service burdem ci firms?5

The range ci pcsthble models, including those in

ccosumers bear aternality related

waiting cats, gos far beyond the simple variaños described here. This brief discossirm is not in
any way intended to be definitive. What should be dear, however, is the value ci the underlying
framework for assssing rapiy the welfare implicaticr ci differert queuing cx search formuiaticns.

ILL Cairht
This paper developed a general mhcxkio2J within vbith a wide range d market mediated

atcna1iti n be amlzed. In concluding, lxx aspects ci air analysis should be strsed.
First, the reasoim that pecuniary ternalitis can be ignored in ft ig.ttet ecmje go far
ttyccd fit coiñthn that eathindividual has a negligible impact at prics. Smd, crimpethive
market cncrthes with ircftrfxt infcr±ation (whether this gives rise to adverse sdecticn, ignalling
and scrning, or moral hazard problems) and incomplete marks MU be tharacterized by vbat we

bait identified as market-meiatth externalities, ci a kind 'tth result in the market equilibrium

being pareto irffxt. ( the csher hand, there are sine drcumstaxas in which the presice ci
queues dos ad, in itself, imply that marks are inefficient. Thrd, the pec'imiary tts can be
identified and eliminated in many vtifare calalatioi by the rigorous and repted applicaticn ci
the etvelope theorem. Finally, ding this, and apprrcbing many informational externalities (as
25. It slndd te d that this is the thatte in rcict wz at oncmt opz ttt tha th'e thaste in cette ans.

24.

as tarnaEties arising wi ci oxily transactcrs, queues, cc) like standard noa-pecuniary

cctnalities mables aie to identify both the apprwriate &ectkn ci çolicy intex-venticgi and
cbsavable msmes ci their succsM applicatica.

Ah1
In crder to investigate fit nature if petmiaiy atana]itie in the tradlitional sise, the natural
starling pdnt is to nnmine the impact if a small .'balaxS budget" shift in aces &mantl?' Let,

di0a.

(ds?,dst5,

ds? — q ds°-' sliftncWnMfatlmimnwairegacd,

is0 - (N —1)

lit

shift,

vwta

if shif&in thnnt far the N -1 nwnerthe goads.

iT0, may be ascribed dUn to'a shift in the danard if a

trw Inadicid. An analcgais shift with is?

—p is0 could

be

tglo-lnssehdd

a to Cy if a

dtd and ascribed to a th&ige

inttviabytheSvcsertfrmn
Assuming taxes are wchanged, the resiltiag change in markd —is,

tip 'dq=F'ds0,

I —

L!Pk

- -- lj,

k =2,

N

Iacr4an if then if n-msmafreexcess dmiands.

dq j

_

Wc aswme that the aceS dnni fwrtica are dfrtiable and that I is imsiflgt at the

••-

The change

in ixotne cessary to maintain the utility la1 ci hzistild Is in the face if a

dumge in price tip

26.

dq is,

02y IaxS ba tie rzmke seese U

t are ccai&irç dirges in cqullibiiwn afloadn. An wf,alanrS gift in

ess dnnd wald peda die Snxr €1 a w quøibrua
27. Since 4 -daj in dr pes htaiice, ft imka new talk abn dt aCCtiaC tint ticrk dt p eat q
sqarardy.

vtas

A-2

=E:+E4c+*]_a'1 kA*÷*))
Summhig over all lxnneMth aid ztagthzing that

=1 aid
4=yt, E=?', Ia"
H

/ = h idth a total is change in govatment ixrane rç—--tion,

HP H P q F Ii'
71r tctaI change in the gova'mnent surplus (a these r-

dq

are paid) is,

dR/dp=t._IEt(1J-+Ej_)+Ii( Vii-*J•
Mattaxlevddzcotbsbecaies,

tr(t÷tI

+z.ii(ijL÷ijfl.

As a ftmcfia ct the iltial dimvge in aces detnaal, the is diange in the gournt surplus'3 is,

gIs

dp

ds0

'

'

P
9— IRh
This

(&&}

represenb the is social imrct d the ithtial dirge in pri aid, thus, the eainiarf

28. tIe aprScn in ut• (An) Mcw ipu3 de arunaIiti grand ty thar in nswz$t that 15uk hue
____
inrn eBSCS. This is za tie tecawe the diai in qunim art itgliglUe. Th4r an
rtghgWt Pt ft is the ad keqtg track ci tait related ereliSs th ath peaty te zrzadnl
bzxdrs vitinit affiii de talc aibnte ci S a1yth, Fcr ñgcr •n ould aatn that (1) wiiwtptian ant
po±icthx ci S amtthn — gnta m anlin and (2) lnthd axe cutstSd so n Sir
cnenradng allaarrt ci S nnaire gtS. Also 'e assn St the aiz*I di tft Mfex t z

.tt

A- 3

afllityV associated with aiginal diange in drrinM ds.

U cnly rcmin' to be showntt a id:0 dccs act vanish as the mmibn ct IniseMds bccanes

IrgeTodotbsJet,

IcfraaimcfIaatkhdtyvem=1---M(is.pmu=nunterc1househtf
typem)

- rtnitdfinuscftypel =1, "' L phouscSd(Le.p,H =ninntcd&mscf
Slur dz'idp and dz'idq ciaght ifl to be LId by the nut cf ho%mcSlch,

H—ZwH

p

dz

dz

-&f1rZ
'1— 'r(for firms of type!

-dz
flt matrix i? will

ii 4,! di

i7Tf05aIt1.

th2nge with Ut nhln*ex d Innahrlth H. Similarly,

9=// .IP,

'PS EEt'(+

:)

andM shaddbeinstianttothnngainH.

3.Ths t t b S —-

d the Sm d S pçe inSt the &/dp,drldq rm 4ffe fran S
tithe bxly ci S . ltnvvu, in tvth , vttn1liSs will r ntt Mt &lw, ij and Et at zeofa

aft lnSidth and fins Mt S z s at

affted by diange in nrrlzt pices (t ósa we fatitoss). If
dz'/dt a dztI& we zert th n a rule (dz"/dp '+d/Jdq) and (dz*Idp +d?fdq) will te mi-zn This
1d m P& irnpirg aWraflum axe jrisely
(again in gal), S cmlidn tat with —

a

With

peoitharf euntis d, in at

n

BffiUOG9Apuy

Akerlaf (1970), G., 'The Market for Lemons: Qialitative Uncertainty and the Market
MediSsm," Quarterly Journal c/Economics, LX)OCIV, 84,288-300.
Arixtt, it. and Stig]itz (1981), J., 'Moral Hazard," Unpthlished Manuscrift

Bewicy, Truman, tqui]ibrium Theory th Transacdcn Ccsts," forthccrning manuscript.

tiamcS (1967), P., 'The Rde Cf a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model WIth
Talmdogical Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 57,759-776.
I)ianiaid (1979), P. and E Mas]dn, "An Equilibritun Analysis d Search and Breach Cf Contract, I:

Steady State," Bth Journal 1 Eccixta, Vd. 10, Na 1, pp. 282-318.

flanacnS, P.. and McFadden (1974), D. L., 'Sane Uses d the Expenditure Function in Public

Fm;" Journal of PubliC Economics, 3,321.

Dixit (1979), A, "Rice Changes and Cktirmim Taxation in a Many Ccnswner Econany," Journal
of Public Economics, 11.143157.
Harberger (1964), A, "Measurnnent cf Wast;" American Economic Review, 54,58-76.

Harberger (1971), A, "Three Pcstu1at icr Applied Welfare Eczinathcs An bnewretative Essay"
Journal c/Economic Literature, Vd. 9, No. 3, 785-797.
Lipsey, R and Lancasta (1956), IC., 'The General Theory d Second Best,?' Review of Economic
Studies, 24, 11-32.

lining, L and Zecjtha'u.sa (1981), R, "Peciniary Externalities Matter When Ccntingent Oairns
Markets Are Itnuiplete," Unpu Wished Paper, Han-aid University.

Martensen, (3979), D., 'The Matching Pmccss as a NmCo<perative Game", Nczthwtern Math
Ccater Thscizsion Paper, No. 284.

Newbery, B. and Stiglitz'(1982), J., "The Choice Cf Th±rique and the Optimality d Market
Equilibriwn With Rational Expectations" Journal of PoWical Economy, VcI. 90, No. 2,
223-24 6.

Rather, R nd Stig]iiz (1976), J., "A Ncn-Caicavity in the Value Cf Informaticn," Dept. Cf
University d CJiforrña, BakSey.
Rahctild, M. and Stiglitz (1977), L, "Equilibrium in Canpetitive Insuraire Markets An Essay cn
the Economia d Imperfect Information," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XC, 90, 629650.

Shavell (1979), 5., 'On Moral Hazard and Insurance," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCIII!, 93,
541-562.

Spence (1973). E, '7th Market Signalling," Quarterly Journal qf Econom its, LXXXVII, 87, 355-

374.

Starrett (1980), I). A, 'Measuring Externalities and Second Best Distcrticns in the Theory d bra!

I

Public Coois," Eccn,mndca, Vd. 48, No.3, 627-642.
Sdglitz (1972), 1. E., "On tin OpthaJity ci the Stck M2Iket Mocaticn ci Investment," Quarterly
Journal f Economics, LXXXVI, 86, No.1,55-72.

Sdglitz (1975), J. E, "flue Thecry 'd Screethig E&catim and the tXstributioa d Inccme,'
American Economic Review, Vd. 65, Na 3,283-300.

Stiglitz (1982), L 11, 'The Ir.effideiry ci the Stock Market ETA1ThrIWn, Review q( Economic
Studies, XLIX, 241-261.

Sdglitz, (1970, J.E, Prices and Queues as Screttg DScts in Ccmpeiithe Markets," ]MSSS
th. repcrt no. 212, Stanford 11th.
Stiglitz1 JE. and Weiss, A (1981) "Credt Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Infcrmation1"
America's Economic Review, Vd. 71, no. 3,393.410.

