                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     VALUE BASED COST SHARING MEETS THE THEORY OF MORAL HAZARD:
         MEDICAL EFFECTIVENESS IN INSURANCE BENEFITS DESIGN

                                          Mark V. Pauly
                                         Fredric E. Blavin

                                       Working Paper 13044
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13044


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Mark V. Pauly and Fredric E. Blavin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Value Based Cost Sharing Meets the Theory of Moral Hazard: Medical Effectiveness in Insurance
Benefits Design
Mark V. Pauly and Fredric E. Blavin
NBER Working Paper No. 13044
April 2007
JEL No. I11

                                                   ABSTRACT

The conventional theory of optimal coinsurance rates in health insurance in the presence of moral
hazard indicates that, in situations of equal risk characteristics, coinsurance should vary if the price-responsiveness
or price-elasticity of demand for different medical services varies, and should be larger for the more
price responsive services. An alternative theory called "value-based cost sharing" indicates that coinsurance
should be lower for services with higher (marginal) benefits relative to costs. This paper reconciles
the two views. It shows that, if patient demands are based on correct information on benefits and costs,
the conclusion of the conventional view is identical to the conclusion from the value-based approach.
If patient demands differ from correct demands, it is shown that optimal coinsurance depends both
on the extent and direction of information imperfection and on price-responsiveness or price elasticity.
The paper also shows, as an alternative to adjusting coinsurance to deal with information imperfection,
that providing better information which affects patient demands can be superior if uninformed patient
demands exceed informed patient demands, but value based cost sharing can be superior to providing
information (even if the cost of information is minimal) when patient demands fall short of informed
demands. An extended numerical example illustrates these points.

Mark V. Pauly
Health Care Systems Department
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

Fredric E. Blavin
Ph.D. Candidate
Health Care Systems Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
fblavin@wharton.upenn.edu
Introduction.

   Almost all private insurances in the United States leave some fraction, usually modest, of

spending on covered services unreimbursed. While the proportion of personal health

expenditures American consumers pay out of pocket has fallen slightly over time, the absolute

dollar amount of such cost sharing has risen, along with unit prices and total spending. The

advent of tax-subsidized high deductible insurance linked to health savings accounts has

heightened interest in many observers, and concern in some, about the effects of cost sharing in

voluntary insurance.

   Compared to full coverage of expenses, out of pocket payments have two effects, one certain

and one highly likely. Such payments expose the insured to higher financial risk (compared to

full coverage) if above-average spending or costly illness occurs. They also provide incentives

for lower levels of medical care use. The basic theory of insurance design when there is a

tradeoff between risk protection and moral hazard is well known (Pauly, 1968; and specifically,

Zeckhauser, 1970). The fundamental idea is that consumers should be willing to sacrifice a

modest amount of financial protection in order to experience stronger incentives to avoid the use

of care of low value relative to its price. Incentives are necessary because insurers are incapable

of determining exactly what losses are because they cannot tell precisely what illness has

occurred (Pauly, 2007). However, recent research and policy discussion has raised anew the

question of whether and how the still-limited but growing evidence base for medical care might

be used in the design of insurance. Specifically, is evidence of medical effectiveness useful for

the design of benefits that are efficient? An interesting and important recent analysis suggests a

positive answer. First under the label of “benefits-based cost sharing” and then under the new

term “value-based insurance design,” Mark Fendrick and Michael Chernew have proposed




                                                 3
“tailoring copayments at the point of service to the evidence-based value of specific services for

targeted groups of patients” (2006, p. 17; Fendrick et al., 2001). A more recent elucidation says

that coverage design should depend on costs as well as medical benefits, that is, on the cost-

quality tradeoff in a particular set of clinical interventions (Chernew, Rosen, and Fendrick,

2007).

   To our knowledge, no one has spelled out the differences, if any, between the levels of cost

sharing that would have been specified as (second-best) optimal under the two theories. If

marginal benefit or demand curves are or should be based on evidence, will the optimal level of

coinsurance indicated by the theory of moral hazard differ from that under a value-based

approach? Reconciling the two approaches will also require describing more carefully what

measure of “evidence-based value” might be appropriate for that theory. While the link between

theory and practice is never exact, there has been some interest in and even some appeal to

benefits or value based cost sharing by some employers and insurers. In this paper we explore

the question of whether and when taking such value into account might make a difference for

efficient insurance design.

   We show that if consumers and the physicians they consult both base demand and advice on

the same information about medical effectiveness, ideally as accurate as the state of knowledge

and evidence allow, the two approaches (properly defined) give the same message about optimal

benefit design. However, there are some informal descriptions of the value based theory which,

if used, would incorrectly suggest differences in such cases. In these full information models,

coinsurance levels do not depend only on evidence about medical benefits and, moreover, to the

extent that they do depend on such evidence, it is not the typical single summary measure of

average or marginal effectiveness often invoked by evidence-based guidelines. Rather, the key




                                                 4
information is full schedule of marginal benefits and, to the extent that this schedule varies

across consumers based on health status, income, or health preferences, on that variation as well.

    More specifically, the primary determinant of the optimal level of coinsurance is, in the

words of Phelps (2003, p. 328), the person-level “price responsiveness” of the demand or

marginal benefit curve under full information, or, more elaborately, the configuration of the

curve, and not any specific single measure or concept about the marginal effectiveness of

medical care per se. If the demand or marginal benefit curve is linear, the measure of price

responsiveness is its slope; if the curve is constant elasticity, it is the elasticity. In the

diagrammatic and numerical analysis that follows we will use linear demand curves, but the

conclusions will carry over to constant elasticity curves as well.

    However, if information used by consumers (or individual physicians) is less perfect than

that available to planners, optimal cost sharing will be affected. Optimal coinsurance will then

depend on the extent and nature of the imperfect information, but it will still depend on demand

or marginal benefit price responsiveness. Specifically, if actual demand curves fall short of true

curves, coinsurance should be lower than under fully informed demand, but should still vary with

price responsiveness. Optimal coinsurance levels relative to full information reverse if actual

demand curves exceed fully informed curves, and price responsiveness still matters. However,

the rationale for altering benefits in all cases is based on the optimal level of risk protection; in a

paradoxical sense, when the dust clears, medical benefits per se ultimately need not matter in

benefit-based cost sharing.



Clearing the underbrush.




                                                    5
   We want to focus on insurance design in situations where the primary effect is purely

medical, in the sense of better health per se. Consequently, the question of optimal cost sharing

when one type of care produces cost offsets, which has been treated at length elsewhere (Pauly

and Held, 1990), will be ignored. Of course, virtually any care that improves subsequent health

probably also impacts subsequent medical spending, but that spending effect will not be

considered. This also means that the empirical experience of some benefits managers who have

emphasized the alleged ability of selectively lower cost sharing for certain services to lower

overall spending (Newhouse, 2006) is not directly relevant to the contrast between theories that

we want to draw.

   We will also assume that “optimal insurance” means insurance that maximizes consumer

welfare (generally in the sense of expected utility) so we will not be directly concerned about

apparently large effects on physical measures of health except as they affect expected utility, nor

will we attach a value to “containing cost growth” or cost levels per se. Finally, and more

substantively, we will interpret the Chernew-Rosen-Fendrick definition of “the cost-quality

tradeoff” (2007) as equivalent to basing (relative) value on cost-effectiveness ratios. One

implication of this is that what is potentially relevant is not a comparison of “interventions with

the highest value or effectiveness” with interventions with “little or no proven health benefit.”

Cost needs to be considered also. If an intervention of the first sort is very expensive and one of

the second sort is very cheap but has a little health benefit, coinsurance might be the same for

both. Moreover, if costs change (e.g., if an effective medical device becomes more expensive),

then cost-sharing should probably change as well. Finally, we will interpret the value-based

view as not limiting coverage only to services whose marginal benefits always and everywhere




                                                 6
exceed their cost; (second best) optimal insurance in the presence of moral hazard may involve

accepting use of services whose value is less than cost.

    We will model cost sharing only as proportional coinsurance, not considering copayments,

deductibles, upper limits, and stop-loss features often present in real world insurance plans.

Partly this is for simplicity, but also because it corresponds with the classic treatment of moral

hazard.



Most of the Zeckhauser Model in a picture.

    The classic statement of optimal coinsurance in health insurance was provided by Richard

Zeckhauser in 1970, in a paper that emphasized the desirability of departing from uniform cost

sharing (ignoring the administrative costs of doing so) if care for different illnesses provided

different configurations of marginal benefit. Figure 1 shows two demand or marginal benefit

curves for two different illnesses, A and B, for a representative consumer. Assume that the unit

price of care is normalized to $1, and also assume that initially the coinsurance is set at the level

C1. Now suppose we consider lowering the coinsurance rate to C2. Because this reduction

triggers a larger increase in quantity for illness A, it is clear that the addition to welfare cost is

larger for illness A (at MWCA) than for illness B (at MWCB).

    Lowering the coinsurance rate will also increase the risk protection provided by the

insurance, and the consumer will place a positive value on this. Assume that the variance of

medical expenses is the same for both illnesses, so that the marginal risk premium associated

with the increase in coverage is the same for both. The initial coinsurance rate will be the

optimal rate if the increase in welfare cost just equals the marginal risk premium. It is clear that

if this equality was satisfied for illness B, it will not be satisfied for illness A. The optimal




                                                    7
coinsurance rate for illness A, the more price-responsive demand or marginal benefit curve, will

be higher than that for illness B. The reason why this is so is because the higher marginal

welfare cost for A compromises the consumer’s desire for risk protection; alternatively, we could

say that B can be “better covered” in terms of risk protection because doing so causes less of an

increase in use of care whose marginal benefit is less than its marginal cost.

   This is the standard economic model of optimal coinsurance. If these demand curves also

represent marginal benefit curves, how would they be characterized in the value-based approach?

We first need to face a watershed difference in perspective. The moral hazard approach is

intended to specify coinsurance that will lead to the optimal quantity of care. Simple value based

approaches do not view coinsurance as determining different amounts of some service that a

person might use, but rather as determining whether the person uses some service (for example,

filling a prescription for an anti-hypertension medication) at all (with the quantity assumed to be

predetermined, once the person has decided to use). That is, in the simple value based approach,

there is no role for more or less; the only question is whether or not. So to have a fair

comparison, we need to specify a value based approach in which marginal values vary with

quantity of a given service.

   Here is why. In the value based approach sometimes people are thought to differ in their

benefit from the predetermined quantity (rather than all being average), but more typically

services are either characterized as “high value” (for all, at the predetermined use protocol) or

low value. In such a world, variation in coinsurance plays no role: coinsurance should either be

zero or 100%, depending on the cost effectiveness of the intervention; there is no moral hazard in

this simple value based view, because moral hazard only occurs if some service is high value for

some patients at some quantities but low value for other patients at other (larger) quantities.




                                                  8
Rather, in the simple view coverage should be full for interventions whose cost effectiveness

value is less than a target threshold, and zero for all others.

    To generate discussion, we therefore first re-interpret the value based approach from the

quantity-variation perspective, recognizing that this may not be how it is usually conceptualized

in the informal literature. The most obvious point then is that, when there is diminishing

marginal benefit associated with quantity variation, there is no simple way to rank care for each

illness has having higher or lower “proven effectiveness.” For either illness in the diagram, the

marginal effectiveness of care is high at low quantities and low at high quantities. There are no

universally high value or low value services; value depends on quantity.

    The best way to deal with this problem is to think of a standard cost effectiveness model with

multiple possible interventions. For example, one might compare screening programs for cancer

that screen at different intervals. The marginal benefit then is the change in benefit from a

(small) reduction in the interval between screenings, and one can calculate the incremental cost

effectiveness ratio from going from a given program to the next more frequent program.

    This incremental or marginal formulation challenges some of the typical language. For

example, at uniform coinsurance C1 and the quantity associated with it, the marginal

effectiveness of care (per dollar of cost) is the same for both illnesses when the consumer is in

well-informed equilibrium; cost-effectiveness will not differ. Care may not have the same

average effectiveness (per dollar of cost) across illnesses under uniform coinsurance, but it

should have the same marginal effectiveness. At coinsurance rates which are not trivially low,

informed patients will not be consuming care of “little or no proven health benefit.” (They might

be consuming care of high potential health benefit that is currently unproven beyond a shadow of

a doubt by evidence, if the expected benefit is high enough, however.)




                                                   9
   Even when we use the same language, however, the two approaches still differ. If the

coinsurance rates are set optimally for these two illnesses, the marginal cost-effectiveness ratios

will differ. With higher coinsurance rates for illness A, its marginal cost effectiveness ratio will

be higher than that for care for illness B. But this divergence in cost effectiveness ratios will be

optimal as far as consumers are concerned, since lowering the coinsurance rate for A would

cause a larger welfare cost for that illness; the improved health that would result would not be

worth the additional resource cost that would have to be incorporated into the insurance premium

and the out of pocket payment. In other words, cost effectiveness information or measures alone

are not sufficient to specify optimal insurance coverage.

   One might also look at the average cost effectiveness ratios for illnesses A and B; with the

demand curves as drawn it is higher for illness B than for A. So it would in this example be

correct to say that the optimal coinsurance rate should be lower for the illness with the higher

average ratio.

   However, this correlation need not occur. Consider demand curve for illness C in Figure 2;

this curve is drawn as having the same slope as the demand curve for illness B. But note that

marginal benefit is higher at every quantity for illness C than for illness B. However, as can

easily be seen, the marginal welfare cost that would be associated with this illness at C1 is the

same as that for illness B. If the marginal risk premium was also the same, the optimal

coinsurance rate would be the same for both illnesses even though the average benefit at any

quantity is not. Of course, at the same coinsurance rate the marginal benefits per dollar would be

equalized; optimality requires using a larger quantity of the more beneficial service—but

uniform coinsurance in this case would bring that about.




                                                 10
    To sum up: if consumer demand curves coincide with true (or, if evidence is sufficient,

evidence-based) marginal benefit curves, the standard economic theory will still be correct even

if value-based considerations are incorporated. It will, however, not be identical with a model

that says that coinsurance should be determined solely by marginal (or average) evidence-based

medical benefit.



Adding imperfect information.

    Now we assume that patient-consumers do not initially have demand curves that map the

marginal benefit curves generated by evidence. Patients might not have been fully informed by

their physicians, or they might not understand the information they have been given. Such

imperfection in physician behavior might lead patients to use demand or marginal benefit curves

that either fall short of or exceed the true demand curves. There are many ways in which

imperfect information can affect demand or perceived marginal value curves. Let us initially

assume that the uninformed curves have the same slopes as the true curves, but are shifted to the

right or left.

    So in figure 3 assume that the illness A and B demand curves are shifted to the left as shown,

to D′A and D′B; patients underestimate marginal benefits at every quantity. At the full

information optimal level of coinsurance, but with the new imperfect information demand curve,

the marginal welfare cost is now less than before, at MWC′B. If we assume that the marginal

risk premium remains the same, it is clear what ought to happen: the optimal level of coinsurance

for either illness A or illness B should fall. However, because demand shortfall leads to smaller

quantities demanded (and therefore lower losses, relative to the perfect health state), the marginal

risk premium will also be lower. It is plausible (though not guaranteed) that the marginal



                                                11
welfare cost will fall by more than the marginal risk premium. We will assume here that this is

so.

      The reason why coinsurance can be lowered is that doing so now causes less marginal

welfare cost (e.g., MWC′B) at every quantity than in the full information case. That is, the

reason to lower coinsurance is not to move use to a particular cost-effectiveness level, but rather

because lower welfare cost at the margin allows insurance to do a better job at its main function,

spreading risk. The positive impact on access and health is an incidental benefit of taking

advantage of a reduction in cost of risk protection. Of course, the higher marginal benefit from

the units whose use is now induced is what produces that cost reduction, so one could also give a

cost effectiveness explanation.

      How far should coinsurance fall? Not by as much as would push medical care use up to the

level that would have been demanded with informed demand and optimal coinsurance, or level

C3, but somewhere in between C3 and C1, depending on what the marginal risk reduction curve

looks like.

      For illness A, although the results are not shown, it is easy to conclude that its optimal

coinsurance rate should probably also move down. It is likely that the new coinsurance rate for

illness A will remain higher than the new rate for illness B as long as imperfect information

shifts both marginal benefit curves to the same extent. So, as before, marginal medical

effectiveness relative to cost only provides part of the information needed to determine the

appropriate value based coinsurance rate. That rate also depends on the slope or elasticity of the

marginal benefit curves, and the form of the person’s utility function in disposable income,

which determines the marginal risk reduction curve.




                                                   12
   The argument in situations in which information imperfection leads to a demand in excess of

the perfectly informed demand is symmetric. Coinsurance rates probably should rise to choke

off welfare cost, but should still depend on slopes and utility functions as well as on the extent of

information imperfection.



Pay to improve information?

   Given the optimality and equivalence properties associated with the fully informed demand

or marginal benefit curve, it would seem that it would be desirable to provide information to

consumers to move closer to those curves if the cost of doing so is not too high. But this

conclusion may not follow. Suppose that, absent costly information, patient demand falls short

of the truth as in the “primed” curves. Then coinsurance rates as noted can be lowered, and more

protection against risk provided. Yet the quantity can still be driven to a more efficient level,

and without spending any real resources informing patients. That is, for illnesses or types of care

where people tend to underuse because of imperfect information, that imperfect information

itself reduces the effects of moral hazard and so should not be removed, certainly not at positive

resource cost. It is salutary ignorance.

   But now the case of misinformed overuse is not symmetrical. In the case of overuse, if

information is not very costly, it may be better to provide information to shrink demand rather

than deter overuse by exposing people to higher coinsurance and more risk. That is, it is

wasteful to tell people about underuse as long as demand shortfalls relative to the truth are not so

large that they cannot be moved to the optimal level by zero or higher cost sharing. (Negative

cost sharing also adds risk.) In contrast, it may be worthwhile to counsel patients away from




                                                 13
overuse rather than force them to put more skin in the game as an alternative. Leave underusers

in the dark, but inform overusers.



A classic numerical example.

   To illustrate the effect of patient misperception on the optimal coinsurance rate, we present a

numerical example based on the extended illustration of the optimal coinsurance rate in Phelps’

textbook, Health Economics (2003). Phelps discusses the impact of insurance coverage with an

assumed 20% coinsurance rate for a hospitalization insurance that provides coverage for the

demand curves and loss probabilities indicated in Table 1 (p. 362). He also assumes that

consumers have a risk aversion parameter r = -0.0003. He shows the total welfare cost of this

level of coverage (assuming linear demand curves), compared to no coverage, and the net risk

premium for that level of coverage, assuming that insurance has a 10% loading. The main point

he makes is that the total welfare cost, at $80, is less than the net risk premium, of $136, so the

person would be better off buying insurance with 20% coinsurance than remaining uninsured.

But 20% is not the optimal coinsurance rate in this example. (While Phelps provides a formula

for calculating the optimal coinsurance rate, his formula assumes a constant elasticity—rather

than a linear—demand curve, and so is not applied to this problem.) The unit price is $500.

   To illustrate the influences that determine the optimal coinsurance rate in the linear demand

curve example, we first assume that the demand curves are correct reflections of the marginal

benefit from inpatient care, and show what the optimal coinsurance rate is. Then we assume that

patient information imperfection leads to a particular backward shift of the evidence-based

demand curve, and show how the coinsurance rate should be altered to compensate. Table 2

shows the total and marginal welfare cost, and the total and marginal risk premiums, for the




                                                 14
insurance policy and demand curves in Phelps’ example. Beginning at 100% coinsurance, the

marginal welfare cost is greater than the marginal risk premium. As coinsurance is reduced, the

former rises and the latter falls, and the two become equal at a coinsurance rate of about 0.46.

An assumption here is that “efficient” physicians will not recommend quantities in excess of that

which would be demanded by an informed patient at the optimal coinsurance rate, since at that

rate the marginal benefit from additional use falls well short of the marginal cost. There should

thus be no noncompliance if physicians provide recommendations based on perfect knowledge

and (identical ex ante) patients make their decisions based on that perfect knowledge, the optimal

coinsurance rate, and their own values for health and financial risk.

   Table 3 shows the comparable risk premia and welfare costs for a demand curve shifted

backwards by imperfect information by 0.5 days in both illness events. The welfare cost at any

coinsurance rate c* along the new demand curve is now the welfare cost from the original

demand curve at c + 0.4. For example, the welfare cost at c* = 0.2 is the welfare cost at c = 0.6,

or 20, and the marginal welfare cost is now 4.7, not the 9.7 as in the full information case. In this

example, it turns out that the optimal coinsurance rate is between 0.3 and 0.35, substantially less

than the perfect information optimal coinsurance rate of 0.46.

   Note that imperfect information shifts down the marginal welfare cost curve, but it also shifts

down the marginal risk premium curve. In the example, and in most plausible cases, the

downward shift in the former is greater than the downward shift in the latter, so the optimal

coinsurance rate falls. (It would be possible to think of utility functions where this need not

occur, but they would be unusual.) Note also that the new optimal coinsurance rate falls between

the original value of 0.46 and the coinsurance rate that would produce the same level of use as at

the no-ignorance optimal rate, given imperfect information, which is about 0.1. The reason why




                                                 15
the coinsurance rate does not fall this far is because the total and marginal financial risk

reduction is lower along the lower demand curve.

   There is, however, a potential problem in simply saying that the employer or insurer should

offer the plan with the optimal coinsurance rate. Misinformed consumers who judge insurance

relative to their perceived marginal benefit curve will not find a policy with a coinsurance rate of

0.33 to be the one they find most attractive. Rather, if they judge coverage by using their own

curves (and the insurance premiums associated with those curves), they would prefer a

coinsurance rate of 0.55. It could even happen (though it does not happen in this example) that

misinformed consumers could think themselves better off with no insurance at all than with

insurance that tricks them into doing what will turn out to be the right thing, but is ex ante

perceived to be of less value relative to its cost. The employer or insurer could offer only the

optimal plan, and refuse to offer plans consumers think they like better, but that might be

awkward. If consumers could be convinced that their own marginal benefit curves are wrong,

they might go along with this paternalism—but they might not be easy to convince or, if

convinced, might then change their demand curves back closer to the true ones with a higher

optimal coinsurance rate.



One final illustration.

   We now make demand more price responsive, setting quantities at 20% coinsurance at 5 and

10 respectively. As might be expected, the optimal coinsurance rate (calculations not shown)

now is higher, at 0.64, compared to the 0.46 for demand curves with less steep slope. Next we

impose the same ignorance-induced backward shift in the demand curve of 0.5 days at every

coinsurance rate. The optimal rate now becomes 0.55 (versus 0.33), making the point that even




                                                 16
with identical magnitudes of consumer misconception or noncompliance, the optimal

coinsurance rate depends on the price responsiveness of demand. However, the change in the

optimal coinsurance rate generated by the same amount of consumer ignorance is smaller in this

more responsive case, because the size of the coinsurance reduction needed to push the quantity

of care a given amount back closer to the optimum is smaller. But the optimal coinsurance rate

from the consumer’s point of view is now about 0.7, so the divergence between the socially

optimal and privately optimal rates grew.



People differ.

   Thus far we have implicitly been using a model in which consumers are identical in terms of

the marginal benefit schedules for health and their levels of risk aversion. If this uniformity is

not present (in either dimension), optimal coinsurance levels should differ. To the extent that

people attach different values to given health outcomes and different values to financial risk,

they may not prefer coinsurance rates that reflect only evidence based medicine. What is

relevant in terms of health values is not, however, everything that affects clinical outcomes. If

new evidence caused a uniform shift in a given marginal benefit or marginal value curve, holding

its slope constant, assuming that the risk premiums do not change, coinsurance rates should stay

the same. That is, people who are sicker, or who attach a higher value to health, should face the

same coinsurance rates as others. At those rates they will use more care, and that additional use

should be reflected in higher premiums. But if people with different preferences can be

identified, coinsurance need not be affected. It is a change in preferences that affects the slope or

elasticity of marginal health benefits—the extent to which marginal benefits decline with more

health and more use—that matters.




                                                 17
   We believe we know very little about how the shape of demand curves varies across people,

if it does vary. Consideration of variations in financial risk aversion also matter. The person

with low levels of risk aversion who is highly responsive to out of pocket payments should have

high values of coinsurance regardless of the level of medical benefits.



Manipulating demand for care and the demand for insurance.

   The final question, as suggested in the numerical example, is whether consumers would

prefer and choose insurances which used value based cost sharing to correct overuse and

underuse. Making these corrections increases what we might call their ex post expected utility.

But if consumers are making decisions about insurance having their misinformed demand curves

in mind (and believing them to represent true marginal benefits) they may not prefer insurance

that makes them override their current best judgment, wrong as it may be. Of course, if the

reason for underuse is known and acknowledged reluctance to do what one ought (take a

medicine with side effects to prevent an asymptomatic disease), the split-personality consumer

might prefer this kind of insurance. Seeing how people would feel about such insurances—

policies that generally would lead to better health relative to spending after the fact, but may not

seem so before the fact—is part of our ongoing research.



Conclusion.

   The only reason to use nonzero coinsurance is to control moral hazard. Moral hazard only

occurs if the insurer cannot precisely tell what illness (loss) state the person is in. When and if

the evidence base for the marginal benefit of medical treatment associated with particular

patients at different illness levels ever becomes complete, cost sharing can be dispensed with




                                                  18
entirely; insurance will pay in full for efficient care and pay nothing for care whose benefit falls

short of cost. But with today’s imperfect medical knowledge, coinsurance has a role to play.

   Measures of medical professional judgments on effectiveness are part of the information

needed to develop more targeted cost sharing (assuming more variation is administratively

feasible), other influences will matter, in addition to such evidence. The shape of the marginal

benefit curve, the consumer’s risk aversion, and the effectiveness of provision of more

information, and the cost of the intervention all will be important.




                                                 19
References

Chernew, M. E., A. Rosen, and A. M. Fendrick, 2007, “Value-based Insurance Design,” Health

   Affairs 26.2, w195-w203.

Fendrick, A. M., and M. E. Chernew, 2006, “Value-Based Insurance Design: A ‘Clinically

   Sensitive’ Approach to Preserve Quality and Contain Costs,” American Journal of Managed

   Care 12.1, 18-20.

Fendrick, A. M., D.G. Smith, M. E. Chernew, and S. N. Shahet, 2001, “A Benefit-Based Copay

   for Prescription Drugs: Patient Contribution Based on Total Benefits, Not Drug Acquisition

   Cost,” American Journal of Managed Care 7.9, 861-869.

Newhouse, J. P., 2006, “Reconsidering the Moral Hazard-Risk Avoidance Tradeoff,” Journal of

   Health Economics 25.5, 1005-1014.

Pauly, M. V., 1968, “The Economics of Moral Hazard,” American Economic Review 58.3, 531-

   537.

Pauly, M. V., 2007, “Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard: Implications for Health Insurance

   Markets,” working paper.

Pauly, M. V., and P. J. Held, 1990, “Benign Moral Hazard and the Cost-Effectiveness Analysis

   of Insurance Coverage,” Journal of Health Economics 9.4, 447-461.

Phelps, C. E., 2003, Health Economics, 3rd ed. Boston: Addison Wesley.

Zeckhauser, R. J., 1970, “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk

   Spreading and Appropriate Incentives,” Journal of Economic Theory 2.1, 10-26.




                                             20
     FIGURE 1



 $




                           P = MC
             MWCB
                    MWCA
C1

C2
               DB          DA

                                    M




        21
           FIGURE 2


 $


           DC

     D′B



                            P = MC
                     MWCB   MWCC
C1

C2


                                     M




                22
             FIGURE 3


$




     D′B


           MWC′B

                                       P = MC
                        MWCB
                               MWCA

C1
C2
C3                        DB            DA

                                      D′A       M




                   23
                       TABLE 1
          A Detailed Calculation of Welfare loss

Probability        Uninsured Demand         Insured Demand

    0.3                    3.0                     4.0
    0.1                    8.0                     9.0




                           24
                                          TABLE 2
                     Replication of Phelps Example with 10% Loading
       Marginal Welfare Cost, Marginal Risk Premium, and Optimal Coinsurance Rate

         Moral Hazard     Marginal                           Marginal
 C       Welfare Loss    Welfare Cost   Risk Premium       Risk Premium       Net Gain

  1           0.0             0               0.0               0.0              0.0
0.95          0.3            0.3              14.0             14.0             13.7
 0.9          1.3            0.9              27.6             13.6             26.4
0.85          2.8            1.6              40.7             13.1             37.9
 0.8          5.0            2.2              53.2             12.5             48.2
0.75          7.8            2.8              65.1             11.9             57.3
 0.7          11.3           3.4              76.3             11.2             65.1
0.65          15.3           4.1              86.8             10.5             71.5
 0.6          20.0           4.7              96.5              9.7             76.5
0.55          25.3           5.3             105.2              8.8             79.9
 0.5          31.3           5.9             113.1              7.8             81.8
0.45          37.8           6.6             119.9              6.8             82.1
 0.4          45.0           7.2             125.6              5.7             80.6
0.35          52.8           7.8             130.2              4.6             77.4
 0.3          61.3           8.4             133.5              3.3             72.3
0.25          70.3           9.1             135.5              2.0             65.2
 0.2          80.0           9.7             136.1              0.6             56.1
0.15          90.3           10.3            135.3             -0.9             45.0
 0.1         101.3           10.9            132.8             -2.4             31.6
0.05         112.8           11.6            128.7             -4.1             15.9
  0          125.0           12.2            122.9             -5.8             -2.1

                                                   Net gain is maximized at C=.46




                                              25
                                          TABLE 3
       Re-Calculation of Optimal Coinsurance Rate, Backwards Shift in Demand by .5 days
         Marginal Welfare Cost, Marginal Risk Premium, and Optimal Coinsurance Rate

                                                           With 10% Loading Fee
         Moral Hazard       Marginal        Risk Premium        Marginal
 C       Welfare Loss      Welfare Cost         Gain          Risk Premium         Net Gain

  1           N/A              N/A                 0.0             0.0                  N/A
0.95          N/A              N/A                 11.5            11.5                 N/A
0.9           N/A              N/A                 22.7            11.2                 N/A
0.85          N/A              N/A                 33.4            10.7                 N/A
0.8           N/A              N/A                 43.7            10.3                 N/A
0.75          N/A              N/A                 53.5            9.7                  N/A
0.7           N/A              N/A                 62.6            9.2                  N/A
0.65          N/A              N/A                 71.2            8.5                  N/A
0.6           0.0              0.0                 79.0             7.9                 79.0
0.55          0.3              0.3                 86.2             7.1                 85.9
0.5           1.3              0.9                 92.5             6.3                 91.2
0.45          2.8              1.6                 97.9             5.5                 95.1
0.4           5.0              2.2                102.5             4.5                 97.5
0.35          7.8              2.8                106.0             3.5                 98.2
0.3           11.3             3.4                108.5             2.5                 97.2
0.25          15.3             4.1                109.8             1.3                 94.5
0.2           20.0             4.7                109.9             0.1                 89.9
0.15          25.3             5.3                108.8            -1.1                 83.5
0.1           31.3             5.9                106.3            -2.5                 75.0
0.05          37.8             6.6                102.3            -3.9                 64.5
  0           45.0             7.2                 96.9            -5.5                 51.9

                                                      Net gain is maximized at C=0.33




                                             26
