                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   TECHNOLOGY AND THE DEMAND FOR SKILL:
             AN ANALYSIS OF WITHIN AND BETWEEN FIRM DIFFERENCES

                                           John M. Abowd
                                          John Haltiwanger
                                              Julia Lane
                                         Kevin L. McKinney
                                          Kristin Sandusky

                                        Working Paper 13043
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13043


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007

The authors wish to acknowledge the substantial contributions of the Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics (LEHD) Program staff at the U.S. Census Bureau. This document reports the results of
research and analysis undertaken by the U.S. Census Bureau staff. It has undergone a Census Bureau
review more limited in scope than that given to official Census Bureau publications. This document
is released to inform interested parties of ongoing research and to encourage discussion of work in
progress. This research is a part of the U.S. Census Bureau's LEHD Program, which is partially supported
by the National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093 and SES-0427889 to Cornell University
(Cornell Institute for Social and Economic Research), the National Institute on Aging Grant R01~AG018854,
and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views expressed herein are attributable only to the authors
and do not represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, its program sponsors or data providers.
Some or all of the data used in this paper are confidential data from the LEHD Program. The U.S.
Census Bureau supports external researchers' use of these data through the Research Data Centers
(see www.ces.census.gov). For other questions regarding the data, please contact Jeremy S. Wu, Assistant
Division Chief, LEHD Program, (Jeremy.S.Wu@census.gov http://lehd.dsd.census.gov ). The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by John M. Abowd, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, Kevin L. McKinney, and Kristin Sandusky.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technology and the Demand for Skill:An Analysis of Within and Between Firm Differences
John M. Abowd, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, Kevin L. McKinney, and Kristin Sandusky
NBER Working Paper No. 13043
April 2007
JEL No. J23,J24,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of technology investments on the demand for skilled workers using longitudinally
integrated employer-employee data from the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics Program infrastructure files spanning two Economic Censuses (1992 and 1997). We estimate
the distribution of human capital and its observable and unobservable components within each business
for each year from 1992 to 1997. We measure technology using variables from the Annual Survey
of Manufactures and the Business Expenditures Survey (services, wholesale and retail trade), both
administered during the 1992 Economic Census. Static and partial adjustment models are fit. There
is a strong positive empirical relationship between advanced technology and skill in a cross-sectional
analysis of businesses in both sectors. The more comprehensive measures of skill reveal that advanced
technology interacts with each component of skill quite differently: firms that use advanced technology
are more likely to use high-ability workers, but less likely to use high-experience workers. These results
hold even when we control for unobservable heterogeneity by means of a selection correction and
by using a partial adjustment specification.

John M. Abowd                                       Kevin L. McKinney
CISER                                               California Census Research Data Center
391 Pine Tree Road                                  University of California, Los Angeles
Cornell University                                  4250 Public Policy Building
Ithaca, NY 14850                                    Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                            kevinm@ccrdc.ucla.edu
John_Abowd@cornell.edu
                                                    Kristin Sandusky
John Haltiwanger                                    U.S. Bureau of Census
Department of Economics                             4700 Silverhill Road
University of Maryland                              Suitland, MD 20233
College Park, MD 20742                              lee.k.sandusky@census.gov
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu

Julia Lane
University of Chicago - NORC
lane-julia@norc.uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

       “…the widespread introduction of new technology has brought new employment
       opportunities and rising relative wages to those with the highest levels of human
       capital. However, this new technology has also helped to bring about higher than
       normal job losses, particularly among unskilled workers, and put a premium on
       being able to adapt to new workplace challenges.”1

       How sensitive is the demand for skilled workers to technological change? How sensitive
is the demand for unskilled workers? Since skill has different dimensions—partly experience and
partly basic ability—how is the demand for different types of skill affected? Progress on
answering these questions has been limited by substantial empirical challenges. The appropriate
unit of analysis is the firm, yet traditional measures of human capital at the firm level are limited,
and difficult to decompose into experience and ability. In addition, detailed firm-level measures
of technology are difficult to obtain. Finally, it is rare to have longitudinal data that permit an
examination of changes in the way that firms behave over time.
       This paper uses new data that remedy many of these deficiencies. We exploit innovative
measures of human capital that permit the identification of different dimensions of skill—both
observable and non-observable. We use these to create detailed multi-dimensional statistics of
the human capital composition of a firm’s workforce. We then match this firm-level information
with other data that includes information about a firm’s inputs and outputs, including the use of
advanced technology. We use these skill data, wage rates, output measures, and technology
variables to directly examine the way in which technology differences across businesses affect
the types of workers that are employed in the current and following years.
       Consistent with the related literature, we find a strong empirical relationship between
technology and skill in a cross-sectional analysis of firms. The richness of our data allows us to
take a step beyond this literature, however, to examine how various components of skill interact
with technology. We find that technology interacts quite differently with each skill component.
Firm-level technology investments in capital such as computers and software are positively
linked to overall human capital and unobservable individual ability, but not to measured
experience. Indeed, we find evidence that the demand for experience is inversely related to the
adoption of advanced technology. We are able to make this distinction because our data allow us

       1
          Ehrenberg and Smith (2005), from the online summary of Chapter 15, “Unemployment” available at
http://wps.aw.com/aw_ehrensmith_mlaborecon_9/0,10673,2205850-,00.html. (cited March 4, 2007).


                                                   1
to estimate and decompose human capital into unobservable person effects and measured
experience effects. In addition, we address another empirical problem encountered by all related
research; the problem of unobserved factors linking the choice of technology to workforce skill
demand. Specifically, we use the longitudinal nature of the data to exploit our knowledge of firm
survival (which is likely to be linked to these unobserved traits) to control for firm deaths in our
cross sectional analysis. We also conduct a partial adjustment dynamic analysis to explore how
firms’ actual and desired demand for skills evolve over time.
        The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we briefly review the recent literature and
discuss the underlying conceptual framework. Section 3 describes the data and the measures of
technology and skill used in the analysis. Section 4 provides basic facts about skill, technology
and technology bundling in the data. Section 5 is the core of the paper including the estimation of
the relationship between the demand for skill and technology. Concluding remarks are provided
in section 6.
2. Background and Conceptual Framework
        The availability of longitudinally matched employer-employee data permits the
generation of new insights into the relationship between technology and skill at the firm level. As
noted in the introduction, earlier work has faced substantial empirical impediments. Although the
unit of analysis should ideally be the firm, researchers have often been forced to use industry,
rather than firm-level data, and the data have often only been available in manufacturing. In
addition, researchers using such industry data have only had crude measures of human capital
available to them. Conversely, researchers using individual-level data, with richer measures of
human capital, have had access to very limited information on the firms at which workers are
employed.
2.1. Summary of Major Previous Studies in Relation to This Paper
        The ideas pursued here have roots in several literatures. One literature examines the
evolution of businesses within industries. This work relates technological change, including the
adoption and diffusion of new technologies (broadly defined) with the associated organizational
changes, including the demand for skilled workers.2 The other strain focuses on the implications
of these changes for the evolution of wage inequality, which we will not elaborate in this paper.


        2
          Relevant papers include Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998), Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987), Berman, Bound
and Griliches (1994), Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002), Caballero and Hammour (1994), Campbell (1998),


                                                      2
        We begin by reviewing the major industry-level time series evidence on the relationship
between technology and skill. Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994) used four-digit data from the
Annual Survey of Manufactures for 1959 to 1989, which were augmented to include measures of
the capital stock and price indices for the inputs, to examine the changing demand for skills in
response to changes in technology. Their measure of skill was the ratio of non-production to
production workers.3 They found that the increased use of non-production workers within
manufacturing industries was directly related to the increased investment in computers and
research and development. Very little of the increase was associated with increased demand for
goods produced by non-production worker intensive manufacturing industries.4 Micro-data on
individuals have also been used extensively to create industry and industry-occupation time
series to study the impact of technology on the demand for skilled workers. While such data
inherently miss important features of the relationship that can only be captured using enterprise
or establishment micro-data, it is important to note the major contributions from this source.
Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) studied the period from 1940 to 1996, measuring skill with
educational attainment as reported in the decennial Censuses of Population and Housing Public-
Use Micro Samples and the Current Population Surveys (CPS), aggregated to the industry level.
They added computer-use data from the October CPS, and three other sources, as a technology
measure. They found that the rate of skill upgrading was greatest in industries that were more
computer intensive, which they interpreted as supporting the complementarity of education and
information technology.
        Integrated employer-employee micro-data are still relatively rare but have already been
used to study problems like the ones we pose here. Although the focus of their study was the
relation between human resource management (HRM) practices and productivity, Ichniowski,
Shaw and Prennushi (1997) provided direct evidence on skill-technology trade-offs for the single
type of steel finishing process they studied. They used extensive production-line longitudinal
data, collected on site, for the specific technologies adopted and the HRM practices used. Their


Chari and Hopenhyn (1991), Caselli (1999), Davis and Haltiwanger (1999), Doms, Dunne and Troske (1997),
Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1989), Dunne, Haltiwanger and Troske (1997), Haltiwanger, Lane and Spletzer
(forthcoming), Hellerstein, Neumark, and Troske (1999), Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi (1997), Jovanovic and
MacDonald (1994), Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993), Katz and Murphy (1992), and Kremer and Maskin (2000).
        3
          These data are now known as the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database (Bartelsman, Becker and
Gray, 2000).
        4
          Dunne, Haltiwanger and Troske (1997), using establishment-level micro-data, were also forced to use the
same crude measure of skill.


                                                       3
employee skill variables included directly measured recruitment and training components of the
HRM system. They concluded that a particular combination of “high-performance” HRM
practices, which included selection and training of skilled workers, was highly complementary
with the successful adoption and integration of information-technology intensive capital
investments. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) directly studied the complementarities
between employee skill and information technology capital for the period from 1987 to 1994.
Their employee skill measures included education, occupation, and an employer-assessed “skill
level of work” variable data that came from a single cross-sectional survey of organizational
practices and labor force characteristics conducted in 1995 and 1996. They merged longitudinal
data on information technology capital, measured for the same organizations as completed the
cross-sectional organization survey, with enterprise-level financial data from Compustat to
construct their other measures of inputs and output. Their study comprised the about 300 large,
publicly-traded firms. They found that increased use of information technology capital was
directly related to increased demand for skilled employees. Hellerstein, Neumark, and Troske
(1999) used a cross-section of integrated employer-employee data based on matching the 1990
Census of Population and Housing long form data with data from the 1989 Annual Survey of
Manufactures. Their worker skill measures included education, occupation, and age. Their
technology measure was the capital stock that has been developed for the ASM establishments,
which is the same capital stock measure we use in this paper. Although the focus of their study
was on estimating the difference between pay and marginal productivity, they do provide some
mixed evidence about the complementarity of capital and skilled labor, which is positive in their
main analysis (Table 3), but negative in other specifications (Table 4).
       Largely based on establishment-level micro-data, the growing literature on firm dynamics
makes clear that there is tremendous between-firm heterogeneity in choices of technology (see,
e.g., Doms, Dunne and Troske, 1997, Dunne, Haltiwanger, and Troske, 1997, and Haltiwanger,
Lane and Spletzer, forthcoming). In addition, Haltiwanger, Lane and Spletzer (forthcoming)
found that firms are remarkably heterogeneous in the ways in which they organize themselves
and that heterogeneity is remarkably persistent. Thus, much change occurs not because existing
firms reorganize their existing production, but rather because new firms enter and displace old
firms, or because firms with successful production techniques expand at the cost of their less
successful, contracting, counterparts (Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan, 2001).



                                                 4
        There have clearly been important strides in advancing our understanding of the
relationship between technology, organization and the demand for skilled workers, measuring
technology at the firm level and measuring human capital using observable workforce
characteristics. For clarity, we summarize here the differences in our analysis in comparison to
this previous literature. Unlike Berman et al. and Autor et al., we use micro-data and not
industry-level time series. In contrast with all of the studies mentioned above, our measure of
employee skills is based upon both observable and unobservable (to the statistician) components
of human capital. The unobservable component is derived from the estimated person effects in a
longitudinal wage equation that also includes employer heterogeneity. In our data, the effect of
education on wages is captured by this person effect and is not measured directly. Like
Hellerstein et al. (for observables), but unlike the other studies above, we summarize the entire
distribution of human capital and its components within each business unit. Like Ichniowski et
al. and Bresnahan et al., our analysis is at the business-unit level; however, we use a pseudo-
establishment—either a single establishment or the aggregation of all establishments owned by
the enterprise and operating in the same county and two-digit SIC. Our workforce skill data are
available for each year from 1992 to 1997. Output and capital are only available in the Economic
Census years 1992 and 1997. Information technology investments are only available in the
survey year 1992 (Annual Survey of Manufactures and Business Expenditures Survey). So, this
component of our analysis is the mirror image of Bresnahan et al., who used longitudinal data on
the information technology variables but cross-sectional data on the employee skill measures.
Our analysis sample is based on three large states (California, Florida and Illinois), unlike the
ones cited above which were national samples of the U.S., except for Bresnahan et al., who used
a convenience sample. However, even though the Hellerstein et al. study used a national frame,
there were serious data integration limitations in the methodology used to create their data.5
Consequently, our study includes four times as many establishments, establishments from both
manufacturing and services (including trade), and characteristics of the employees that are based
on the universe of workers, rather than a one-in-six sample, who were integrated using both
identifier and probabilistic record linking methods. To aid comparison with national samples, we
constructed appropriate weights.


        5
          These data are known as the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database (Troske 1998). See the
discussion in Abowd and Kramarz (1999).


                                                    5
        To fully implement our research model, we must derive the relationship between skill
demand and technology at the firm level in a manner that accommodates measuring the
distribution of skills, both observable and unobservable within the firm. Then we must derive an
explicit empirical representation of that relationship. The new measures of individual skill must
be empirically summarized at the firm-level. Finally, we must account for the timing of our firm-
level measures of technology in the empirical analysis. The remaining sub-sections provide
details on our approach to each of these challenges.
2.2. Describing the Relation between Technology and the Demand for Human Capital at the
Firm Level
        Although not mutually exclusive, technology adoption can occur in two ways: new firms
that enter can have different levels of technology than do the ones that exit, and/or continuing
firms can change the way in which they do business. Thus, there are two ways to examine the
impact on human capital. In the first case, we can examine between-firm changes in technology,
paying particular attention to firm entry and exit dynamics, and relate that to between-firm
changes in human capital. The second case can be investigated by examining within-firm
changes in technology and relating them to within-firm changes in human capital.
        Our theoretical approach is based on a simple model of workforce choice as a function of
technology (broadly defined). Suppose firms are faced with a production relationship given by:
                                              y jt = F ( Z jt , L1 jt ,..., LBjt )                             (1)

where yjt is output for firm j in period t, the vector Zjt, indexes the state of technology including
tangible and intangible capital (like organizational capital), and Lbjt is the number of workers of
type b, where b indexes both observable and unobservable characteristics. Treating Z as quasi-
fixed, cost minimization for a given output level yields (using Shepherd’s lemma) the
generalized demand for workers of type b as given by:
                                 S bjt = S ( Z jt , y jt , w1 jt / wBjt ,..., wbjt / wBjt ,...)                (2)

where Sbjt is the share (or perhaps cost share depending upon the specific functional form for F)
of type b workers, b = 1, K, B , and wbjt is the appropriate shadow wage rate of type b workers.6



        6
          Note that the shadow wage may differ from the actual wage due to bargaining, internal labor market and/or
rent sharing behavior. Our proposed analysis of earnings dynamics described below will shed light on internal labor
market and rent sharing considerations.


                                                               6
       In this framework, the demand for workers of type b by a particular firm depends upon
the type of technology adopted (Z), the nature of the firm-worker type complementarities, the
scale of operations and the relative shadow wages. In considering the implications, it is important
to emphasize that there are many reasons that firms, even within the same industry, adopt
different technologies. For example, Z may reflect differences in managerial/entrepreneurial
ability, vintage, location, or other aspects of physical and intangible capital. As a result, not only
will firms within the same industry exhibit heterogeneity in their demand for workers of type b
but this heterogeneity may vary over time as conditions (e.g., available technologies or other cost
or demand shocks) change and due to firm life cycle effects.
       The empirical implementation is based on various specifications of this simple model,
namely:
                   S bjt = α 0 + ∑ α 1k Z kjt + ∑ α 2 b ln (wbjt wBjt ) + α 3 ln y jt + υ bjt     (3)
                                  k              b


where the coefficients α1k indicate the effect of different types of technology capital, Z; the

remaining coefficients have the conventional share equation interpretation, and υ bjt is the share

error term. The coefficient estimates from cross sectional (or pooled cross sectional data) will
shed light on how observable indicators of technology Z are related to human capital across
businesses.
       There is a clear challenge associated with estimating equation (3); unobserved factors are
likely correlated with both the level of skills and the level of technology selected by the business.
For example, high ability managers may be more likely to both use the latest technology and
implement the best business models, including organizational and human resource practices.
Thus, the coefficient estimates for a particular component of measured Z from the level
specification may reflect difficult-to-measure firm effects rather than the independent
contribution from the measured Z itself. In the absence of suitable plant-level instruments, we
pursue an approach in the spirit of Ericson and Pakes (1995) and Olley and Pakes (1996). In
particular, we argue that many of these unobserved traits are likely to be linked with business
survival: exiting businesses are likely to have characteristics that influence the level of skills and
technology that are inherently different than the businesses that are continuers. Accordingly,
equation (3) is also estimated using a selection correction to control for such unobserved
heterogeneity that is correlated with survival.


                                                       7
       Equation (2) may be thought of as the desired, rather than actual, skill demand
relationship. Since it may take time for actual skill mix to equal desired skill mix, a simple
partial adjustment model that might capture this relationship is given by:
                                                    ΔS bjt = λ ( S bjt
                                                                   *
                                                                       − S bjt −1 )                                  (4)

or, equivalently,
                                                   S bjt = λSbjt
                                                             *
                                                                 + (1 − λ ) Sbjt −1                                  (5)

where the asterisk designates that we are characterizing desired skill, S * . In equation (5) skill
usage in period t is determined by a weighted average of the desired level of skill and the actual
level of skill last period, with the value of λ determining how rapidly a firm’s actual skill mix
approaches the desired level. For example, when λ=1, the adjustment process occurs quickly,
within one period, but the closer λ is to zero, the more periods the adjustment process takes to
converge. By recursive substitution, we have:
                    S bjt = λS bjt
                               *
                                   + λ (1 − λ ) Sbjt
                                                 *
                                                     −1 + ... + λ (1 − λ )     S bjt − k +1 + (1 − λ ) k S bjt − k
                                                                           k −1 *
                                                                                                                     (6)

       The empirical challenge in our application is that we observe the sequence of actual S bjt
                                                                             *
each year. However, we only observe all of the variables used to construct S bjt in the base
                                                                                  *
Economic Census year 1992. Although a subset of the variables used to construct S bjt is present

in the intercensal years, critical variables are not collected outside the Economic Census. We
address this data deficiency by noting that a reasonable empirical approximation to S * in the
current year might be S * in the base year. For example, the underlying innovations driving S *
could be modeled as random walk:
                                                              = S bjt −1 + ε bjt
                                                          *       *
                                                        S bjt                                                        (7)

where ε bjt is white noise. Such a partial adjustment framework permits the estimation of a series

of dynamic specifications driven by base year measures. Substituting equation (7) into equation
(3) yields the partial adjustment skill demand estimating equations:
                         ⎛ τ         l −1 ⎞⎛                                                        ⎞
            S bjt +τ = λ ⎜ ∑ (1 − λ ) ⎟⎜ α 0 + ∑ α 1k Z kjt + ∑ α 2 b ln (wbjt wBjt ) + α 3 ln y jt ⎟
                         ⎝ l =1           ⎠⎝   k              b                                     ⎠                (8)
                                             τ                       l
                     + (1 − λ ) S bjt + ∑ λ (1 − λ )                ∑ε
                                 τ                           l −1
                                                                           bjt + m   + υ bjt
                                            l =1                    m =1




                                                                     8
for t = 1992 , and τ =1,K,4 , which correspond to the intercensal years for which data on Z jt and

y jt are unavailable. In particular, if technology spending and skill demand are positively related

and if businesses adjust their skill mix gradually over time, then the coefficients on the
technology variables should increase in magnitude over time because for each additional year
t + τ we go forward, an additional (1 − λ )
                                              τ −1
                                                     times the original effect of a demand variable
accumulates in the share of S bjt +τ . In other words, an examination of the coefficient pattern over

longer and longer horizons following the information technology investment should reveal the
long run effect of variation in Z on S * .
         Another empirical challenge in implementing the partial adjustment specification occurs
because while estimates must be derived from businesses that exist in both periods for which the
analysis is based, non-surviving businesses also account for variation in the demand for labor.
Thus, the estimation of equation (8) yields inferences on the impact of base year technology on
the demand for skills in later years conditional not only on the demand for skills in the base year
but also conditional on the continuing viability of the business. The resulting selection bias in
this dynamic labor setting is analogous to the one considered in Audretsch and Mahmood (1995)
and Abowd, Crépon and Kramarz (2001). Our approach is to estimate equation (8) correcting for
selection in a manner similar to their methods, and to compare those results with uncorrected
least squares estimates.
2.3. Measuring Human Capital at the Firm Level
         One of the limitations of the existing literature relating changes in technology to skill is
that the measures of skill are quite limited. As noted above, the measure most often used from
firm-level data is quite crude—the ratio of production to non-production workers. Even for
household-level data, the usual skill variables (e.g., education and experience) capture only
limited and imperfect dimensions of skill. Thus, many studies conclude (e.g., Juhn, Murphy and
Pierce, 1993) that it is the unobserved dimensions of skill that are most important for
understanding the changing demand for skills in the workplace. This paper exploits the new
techniques developed by Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) together with very rich matched
longitudinal data on both firms and workers to identify the unobserved components of worker
skill.




                                                     9
         The Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis decomposition of log wages for individuals is:7
                                         ln wit = θ i + ψ J(i ,t ) + xit β + ε it                                 (9)

where the dependent variable is the log fulltime, full year wage rate of an individual i working at
time t and the function J(i,t) indicates the employer j of individual i at date t. The first component
of equation (9) is the time invariant person effect, the second component is the time-invariant
firm effect, the third component is the contribution of time varying observable individual
characteristics, and the fourth component is the statistical residual, orthogonal to all other effects
in the model. 8
         The fixed worker effect θ plus the experience component of xβ comprise the core
measure of human capital, called “H”.9 The human capital measures can be thought of as the
market value of the portable component of an individual’s skill. They have two components: an
individual or person effect, which does not vary over time and a component based on labor
market experience. The individual effect includes some factors that are often observable to the
statistician, such as years of education and sex; and some factors that are often not, such as
innate ability, “people skills,” “problem solving skills,” perseverance, family background, and
educational quality. The experience component is directly calculated from the data, and, as such,
is left censored at the start of the data period.10
         The econometric methodology and estimates of human capital, H and its components,
used in this paper are discussed and described in detail in Abowd, Lengermann and McKinney
(2003, hereafter ALM). There are a number of interesting findings for the period 1992-1997 that
are relevant to this study.
         First, ALM find that the new measures capture a much broader array of skills than do
traditional measures. The proportion of earnings variation that can be explained using this type
of approach is about 84%. And, in matches to the Current Population Survey–the basis for much


         7
           The vector x has a number of other controls including time effects and full quarter employment
adjustments.
         8
           When estimating the wage decomposition in equation (9), we use only dominant employer earnings,
defined as the job (person firm match) in a given year with the highest earnings. This restriction results in only one
employer per person per year.
         9
           It is worth noting that because the specification is in logs the human capital measure is relative, not
absolute. That is, in comparing two workers who differ in H by 0.1 we would say that the two workers differ in
human capital by ten log points (approximately ten percent).
         10
            This left-censoring is ameliorated by estimating the number of years of labor force experience an
individual accumulates prior to the first appearance in the data.


                                                           10
analysis of earnings and employment outcomes–they find that only a small fraction of the person
specific effects can be explained by education, sex, and race.
        Second, they find that although the overall distribution of human capital shifted to the
right over the time period considered, the effects of the different subcomponents of skill are very
different. The shift to the right was substantially due to changes in the person effect dominating
changes in the experience effect: entering workers, while generally less experienced than
continuing workers, were otherwise more highly skilled. Finally, they found a marked tendency
for firms—both economy-wide and within the same industry—to hire either relatively high
skilled workers or low skilled workers, rather than hire large amounts of workers in the middle
part of the distribution.
        These interesting results suggest that the empirical implementation of equations (3) and
(8) should incorporate the overall measure of human capital and its separate components. The
empirical implementation also requires converting measures calculated at the individual level to
firm-level proportions that denote shares (S) of particular types of skill. In order to implement
this conversion, we follow ALM’s approach and generate economy-wide distributions of each
skill measure in the reference year 1992 for all jobs active at the end of quarter 1.11 Using these
economy-wide distributions, we then calculate the threshold for each quartile of the distribution.
Notice that these thresholds are fixed and determined by the reference year’s labor market. Next,
we generate firm-level kernel density estimates of the distribution of each skill measure. These
firm-level estimates of the distribution of human capital, and its components, are estimated
separately each year that a firm appears in the estimation sample. The measure of the proportion
of highest-skill workers in a firm is then defined to be the proportion of the firm-level workforce
that is above the economy-wide 75th percentile vis-à-vis the reference year 1992. In this manner,
a firm that increases its demand for the highest-skill workers will display an increased proportion
of employment in this top quartile over time. Similarly, the proportion of the firm’s workforce



        11
           Quarterly earnings are reported by each covered firm regardless of whether a person worked for one day
or for the entire quarter. For firms with a high level of worker inflows and/or outflows, the total number of
employees at a point in time is likely to be significantly smaller than the number of employees that ever worked at
the firm during the quarter. To more accurately represent the skill distribution on a given day, we use an end-of-
quarter employment measure. A worker is employed at the end of quarter one if earnings are positive at the same
firm in both quarter one and quarter two of that year. We also use all possible jobs when constructing our firm skill
measures. Although only dominant jobs are used in the estimation of equation (9), we assume that a worker’s skill is
transferable across employers and use this information when calculating each firm’s skill distributions.


                                                        11
that is below the economy-wide 25th percentile for the reference year is used as a measure of the
proportion of lowest-skill workers.
2.4. Measuring Technology at the Firm Level
        Another empirical challenge is developing direct measures of technology, particularly
ones that are comparable across sectors. Clearly, physical capital intensity is a natural candidate,
as are direct measures of the use of information technology such as computers or computer
software. In addition, changes in other observable dimensions of a firm’s activity may prove
useful. For example, since information technology has been associated with a variety of changes
in the manner of doing business, variation in the relation between inventory and sales might
prove a useful indicator of changes in supply chain management technology.
        Several quite interesting direct measures of technology are available, and are described in
what follows. However, in common with the rest of the literature, much is left unmeasured,
especially with regard to the intangible capital components of technology. An indirect way of
capturing some firm heterogeneity is to use the firm effects from the estimated wage
decomposition in equation (9), ψ J( i ,t ) . These reflect the component of the wage rate that is due to

unmeasured firm heterogeneity. Such firm effects presumably reflect many factors, one of which
is rent sharing—that is, firms may share rents from high levels of profitability/productivity,
which may in turn be related to the type of technology (broadly defined) that has been
implemented at a business. Including the firm effect in a regression, then, permits an indirect
assessment of difficult-to-measure components of the technology of a business, for which the
firm effects serve as a potential control.12
3. Data Sources and Processing
        The analysis in this paper is made possible by new Census Bureau data13 that are derived
from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Program, (LEHD) infrastructure file
system. This file system integrates information from state unemployment insurance data with
Census Bureau economic and demographic data.14 Such integrated data permit the construction


        12
            Of course, the latter connection is interesting in its own right given the open question of whether high
human capital businesses also have high firm effects.
         13
            The data development has been generously supported by both the National Science Foundation and the
National Institute on Aging as part of a social science database infrastructure initiative.
         14
            See Abowd et al. (forthcoming) for a description of the infrastructure file system structure, and Abowd,
Haltiwanger and Lane (2004) for an overview of the LEHD data development effort. The methodology used to test
the integrity of the individual identifier system is described and analyzed in Abowd and Vilhuber (2005), The


                                                        12
of longitudinal information on workforce composition at the employer level. The LEHD
Program represents a substantial investment made by the Census Bureau in order to permit direct
linking of its demographic surveys (household-based instruments) with its economic censuses
and surveys (business and business unit-based surveys).
3.1. Unemployment Insurance Wage Records and ES-202 Data
         The unemployment insurance (UI) wage records are discussed in more detail in Abowd et
al., (forthcoming), but a brief overview is provided here. To manage its Unemployment
Insurance program, the Employment Security Agency in every state collects quarterly
employment and earnings information. The quarterly wage reports, which contain a record for
every employer-employee pair, enable us to construct a longitudinal data set on employers.15 The
employer’s four-digit Standard Industrial Classification is then added from another
administrative file, the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) also known as the
EQUI report from the ES-202, collected as a part of the state’s employment security program.
According to the BLS, which cooperates with the states to develop coding standards for the
QCEW, 98% of all private, non-agricultural employment is covered by employer reports.16 The
advantages of the UI wage record database are numerous. The data are frequent, longitudinal,
and essentially universal for covered employment. The sample size is generous and earnings
reports are more accurate than survey-based data. The advantage of having virtually universal
coverage is that movements of individuals to different employers and the consequences of those
moves on earnings can be tracked. It is also possible to do longitudinal analysis using the
employer as the unit by selecting businesses that qualify for a particular analysis, then
reconstructing their complete employee rosters at every point in time the firm had positive
employment.
         An important limitation of the UI wage records as maintained by the individual states is
the lack of any demographic information on employees. The links to Census Bureau data
overcome this limitation in two distinct ways. First, the micro-data are linked to administrative
data at the Census Bureau containing information such as date of birth, place of birth, and sex for


methodology used to test the integrity of the business identifier system is described and analyzed in Benedetto et al.
(forthcoming).
          15
             When computing the wage decomposition we use all available data for three states: California 1992-2002,
Florida 1993-2002, and Illinois 1990-2002. Florida data for 1992 are not available and we used 1993 skill
distributions instead. All other Florida data for 1992 were measured in 1992.
          16
             See BLS Handbook (2007), Chapter 5, page 4. This chapter was last revised in 1997.


                                                         13
almost all workers in the dataset. Second, as discussed in the previous section, the staff at the
LEHD program have exploited the longitudinal and universal nature of the data to estimate fixed
worker and firm effects, according to an exact least squares solution of equation (9).17
3.2. Economic Census and Business Survey Data
        The information in the UI wage records is also quite limited with regard to characteristics
of the employer. We overcome this by linking the UI data to detailed information on individual
firms available in each of two economic Census years (1992 and 1997). The analytical datasets
that we constructed from these merged files have the employer as the unit of analysis. We
measure many key variables; output, the distribution of human capital within a business,
employment, wages, entry, exit, and also some proxies for Z (see below). The measures of
human capital within the business were constructed using the methodology described in section
2. In particular, for each firm, a measure of the share of its workforce in each year from 1992
through 1997 that is drawn from each quartile of the economy-wide human capital distribution is
constructed. These four human capital summary statistics are constructed for each of the three
measures of human capital: overall, the person effect component and the experience component.
        The measures of Z (i.e., observable measures of technology) are derived from
information collected from the Economic Censuses, although the availability varies by sector and
by year. One of the two primary sources for this information is the subset of businesses in the
Manufacturing Economic Census who are also in the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM).
ASM businesses are asked a set of detailed questions that enhance the basic information covered
in the census. Similarly, a subset of non-manufacturing businesses (i.e., retail trade, wholesale
trade and services) in the Economic Censuses is sampled in the Business Expenditures Survey
(BES). We will refer to the sectors covered in the BES as “services.” The questions in the BES
are similar to those asked in the ASM.
        Several different measures of 1992 technology are constructed. Three measures reflect
the use of newer, more computer-oriented technologies: investment in computers as a proportion
of overall equipment investment, spending on computer software and data processing services as
a proportion of annual sales,18 and total inventories as a proportion of sales.19 More traditional


        17
           The computational methods are described in Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz (2002). Software and technical
documentation available at http://lservices.ciser.cornell.edu/cg2/html/index.html (cited March 4, 2007).
        18
           The measure of computer investment is the same as used in Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) at an
aggregate, industry level and by Dunne, Foster, Haltiwanger and Troske (2000) at a micro level.


                                                      14
measures of technology use, such as the capital stock per worker, are also used. All but the
computer investment question is asked again in 1997 for ASM businesses; unfortunately neither
the computer investment nor the capital intensity measures can be constructed in 1997 for BES
businesses. The lack of computer investment data in 1997 is a substantial limitation and is the
primary reason that we focus the cross-sectional analysis on 1992 and do not investigate the
relationship between changes over time in technology and skill.
        Of course, in spite of this diversity of available technology measures, there remain many
aspects of technology use that we are not able to quantify. One possibility is that many of these
unobserved traits are correlated with the time-invariant firm effect, ψ J(i ,t ) . For this reason, ψ J(i ,t )

is included as a proxy for technology that cannot be directly measured. The firm effect, although
a useful control, captures many other potential factors so that caution is required in interpreting
the impact of this variable.
3.3. Construction of the Ex Post Weight
        A major technical issue related to the analytical sample is the construction of an ex post
weight that corrects for the fact that our estimation sample is based upon human capital measures
for aggregated business entities, which relate to unemployment insurance accounts and
workplace locations, whereas other data come from the Census Bureau’s economic censuses and
surveys, which have a frame based on the Business Register. To correct for this feature of the
analysis sample, we construct pseudo-establishments from the ES-202 data that can be related to
similarly constructed entities from the Business Register.
        The ES-202 based-establishments are aggregated to a unit based on the Federal Employer
Identification Number (EIN), state, county, and industry (two-digit SIC). These identifiers are
also present on the Business Register, where they are used to form similar entities. The resulting
entities can be used to form a crosswalk between the ES-202 and the Business Register. The
resulting crosswalk allows the linkage of the human capital distributions to the data from the
Economic Censuses, ASM and BES. Thus, the unit of analysis is a pseudo-establishment. Within
a particular state, single-unit employers in the ES-202 system generally relate one-to-one to
single-unit employers in the Business Register and, hence, in the Economic Census. Multi-unit

        19
           Inventory holdings act as a proxy for integration of information technology, which we do not observer
directly. One advantage enjoyed by businesses with access to more sophisticated information technology (IT)
networks is an enhanced ability (lower cost) to engage in more synchronized delivery of both inputs and outputs.
Such scheduling abilities reduce the firm’s need to hold costly inventories.


                                                      15
employers on either side of the analysis are aggregated, but only within state, county and two-
digit SIC.
         Because of the sampling designs used in the ASM and BES, large establishments and
large firms are over-represented in those surveys. However, three traits of the complex, linked
pseudo-establishment dataset we construct make the establishment-level weights provided on the
ASM and BES unsuitable for our analysis. First, the provided weights are establishment weights
whereas our unit of observation is often some aggregation of those establishments, which we
have called a pseudo-establishment. Establishments that were sampled into the ASM and BES
may be combined with un-sampled establishments when we aggregate within-state multi-units to
the pseudo-establishment level. Second, we use data from three states only.20 While samples
such as the ASM and the BES are nationally representative by industry and size class if the
provided weights are appropriately used, these surveys and weights were not designed to produce
figures that are representative of certain industries and size classes in smaller geographic areas.
Finally, match problems such as industry and geography coding discrepancies and differences in
the scope of industries covered account for additional divergence in the universe as characterized
by the LEHD infrastructure files and Economic Census-based samples.
         To correct for the effects of non-uniform linking probabilities for the various source files
used in our analysis samples, ex post weights were constructed as follows. First, we computed
the fraction of employment by industry and establishment size class for establishments within the
ES-202-based universe for which a human capital distribution can be calculated.21 This fraction
is the numerator of the ex post weight. Second, we computed the fraction of employment by
industry and establishment size class for establishments that were matched. This fraction is the
denominator of the ex post weight. Such weights have the property that the weighted size
distribution of employment by industry in our matched sample matches the size distribution of
employment by industry in the ES-202 universe of establishments for which human capital
distributions were computed.

         20
            We created firm level HC distributions and firm dynamics information for three states, California, Florida
and Illinois, for the period 1992 through 1997. These were the only three states in the ALM data files that could be
used consistently over the period spanning the two Economic Censuses (data for Florida are not available in 1992,
instead we used the 1993 data as a proxy for 1992).
         21
            The universe is all businesses in the ES202-based data sample that have at least five employees at the end
of Q1 with HC estimates and are in Economic Census in-scope industries. We exclude the smaller establishments
(fewer than five employees) from our analysis because we cannot compute within firm distributions of skill reliably
for such businesses (i.e., no KDE estimates for the smallest units).


                                                         16
       We used the same weights in the dynamic specifications, even though the dynamic
models were estimated for continuing establishments only, because the estimation sample
includes later-year skill measures linked to 1992 business traits. Thus, the estimation sample is
affected only by the point-in-time link between ES-202 data and the business surveys. For this
reason, use of the same 1992 ex-post weights should correct for sampling and matching and, at a
minimum, produce yearly estimates that are representative of continuing businesses that were
alive in 1992.
3.4. Selection Equations
       The ex post weighting does not correct for the behavioral consequences of businesses that
exit. The partial adjustment model of equation (8) can only be estimated in each year using the
sample of surviving businesses, and the ex post weight adjustments make this sample
representative of continuers. However, it is possible that continuers differ from exiting
businesses in some unmeasured way that is correlated with both technology spending and skill
demand. Failure to account for this difference may produce biased estimates. For this reason, in
the estimation of equations (3) and (8), we adjust for selection by estimating a separate exit
selection equation for each year (1992 through 1996) using the sample of all pseudo-
establishments that are active in 1992. We estimated this selection probit using the universe of
businesses in the ES-202 data for 1992 that are both in-scope in industries covered by the ASM
and the BES and that have at least five employees with HC estimates active at the end of Q1. The
selection equation estimation is not restricted to the matched ASM and BES cases because
selection is not modeled as a direct function of the observed technology. Instead, the likelihood
of exit from the ES-202 universe from 1992 to 1996 is specified as a function of log labor
productivity, the log change in population of the county in which the business is located between
1992 and the selection equation year (1992-1996), the log change in sales in the two digit SIC
industry in that county between 1992 and 1997, and indicators for firm size, firm location
(whether the business is located in a suburb, rural area, or central city in 1992), and legal form of
organization (whether the firm is a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation). In addition,
all variables are interacted with an industry effect so that the impact of, say, size on exit is
permitted to vary by industry (industry effects are at the major industry level of aggregation).
The results of the selection analysis, while not reported, are sensible. For example, as is common
in the firm dynamics selection literature, low labor productivity businesses are more likely to exit



                                                 17
as are businesses in areas with increasing market demand. The probit estimates are then used to
construct inverse Mills ratios that are included in the estimation of equations (3) and (8).
3.5. Wage Rate Data
        We measure the shadow wage rate of skill group b using the ratio of the county-level
mean wage of the relevant skill group to the overall county mean wage for the county where
each business is located. Thus, for example, if the skill group is the proportion of workers at the
business above the economy-wide 75th percentile (highest skill group), then we measure
wbjt wBjt as the ratio of the county-level mean wage of workers above the 75th percentile to the

overall county-level mean wage. Separate wage rates were estimated for every skill group, state,
county, and year in the estimation sample using the complete set of individuals available on our
three-state UI wage record files.
4. Human Capital and Technology: Basic Facts
        We now turn to the main point of the paper: exploring the influence of a firm’s use of
technology on its demand for human capital. The analysis is rich in the sense we delve into the
relationship in multiple dimensions: by economic sector (manufacturing vs. service sectors); by
skill level of the workforce (quartiles of our skill distributions); by type of skill level (overall,
person effect and experience); by type of technology (capital per worker as well as indicators of
newer, more computer-oriented technologies); by type of variation (between and within firm);
and with and without selection controls.
        How much variation is there in the levels of skill and technology across firms? Table 1a
reports statistics that describe the manufacturing (ASM source) and service (BES source)
distributions of human capital and the different measures of technology.22 In order to capture the
heterogeneity across businesses, each business is ranked by its position in the distribution of the
relevant measure, and we then report the 10th, 50th and 90th percentile of that distribution. The
results indicate substantial variation across businesses in both the distributions of skill and of
technology. For example, in the manufacturing sector, the business at the 90th percentile of the
upper quartile person effect distribution has over 40 percent of its workers in the upper quartile
while the 10th percentile business has less than 10 percent). There is also evidence of substantial
variation in computer intensity across businesses. The 10th percentile firm in both the

        22
         The results are weighted to be representative of the typical firm in the economy. Because the biggest firms
employ by far the largest number of workers, this is very different from an employment-weighted sample.


                                                        18
manufacturing and service sectors has zero percent of equipment investment in computers while
the 90th percentile business in each division has over 50 percent.23
         How important is selection likely to be in explaining changes in skill and technology over
time? One striking feature that is uncovered by our analysis, and evident from an analysis of
Table 1b is that almost half of all businesses that existed in 1992 were no longer in business by
1997. This finding is quite consistent across sectors. Since previous work by ALM found that the
distributions of human capital are very different across continuing, exiting and entering
businesses, it is likely that these differences are in turn correlated with differences in the
adoption of technology.24
         In order to investigate this possibility, we first examine whether there are observably
different patterns in the technology and skill mixes across businesses in the 1992 cross-section as
a function of survival. The summary statistics for exiting businesses compared to continuers
shown in Table 1c make clear that exiting businesses do, in fact, look substantially different from
continuing businesses. In particular, they tend to be smaller, less skill intensive (overall), and less
technology intensive—particularly in computer and software investment in the manufacturing
sector. Of interest is the fact that the different components of skill perform somewhat differently
in the two sectors. Although exiting firms are uniformly less skill intensive (using the person-
effect measure), manufacturing firms have both higher shares of lower quartile workers and of
top quartile workers in terms of their person effects. The experience characteristics of the
workforce are much less systematically related to exit. Technology measures also work
differently in the two sectors in that businesses exiting manufacturing have much higher
measures of the wage equation firm effect, ψ , than do continuing firms, while the opposite is
true in the service sector. The results in Table 1c provide prima facie evidence that controlling
for selection is likely to be important in analyzing across-firm differences.
         The other potential source of variation in skill and technology across time is within-firm
adjustment. As noted in section 2, the absence of key technology measures in 1997 limits our
ability to examine the dynamic link between technology and worker skill. We do, however, have
the same rich measures of human capital in 1993 through 1997 that are available to us in 1992,

         23
             We also find (but do not report in Table 1a) that there are a number of businesses to the far right of this
distribution that in 1992 spent all equipment investment on computers. This suggests that some businesses are
actively upgrading to advanced technology in 1992 while others are not.
          24
             The resulting selection issues are discussed in the next section.


                                                          19
and these data permit us to examine how the distributions of different dimensions of skill at
continuing businesses compare from one year to the next. This section, then, examines how
differences in technology across businesses in 1992 is related to skill differences across
businesses in 1992 and further examines how a given choice of skill and technology in 1992 is
related to further adjustments in skill demand in the following years.
        Table 1d presents a view of these relationships by providing 1995 human capital
summary statistics for continuing businesses. A comparison of the 1995 medians to the 1992
medians for continuing businesses in Table 1c provides some insight into how the demand for
worker skill changes over time, since this approach holds (approximately) constant the
composition of the group over which the statistics are created.25 A comparison of the medians in
Table 1d with the continuer columns in Table 1c reveals that the median continuer has markedly
different skill demand in 1995 than in 1992. Continuers in both sectors demand an even lower
share of low overall human capital workers and low experience workers and an even higher
share of high human capital and high experience workers in 1995 than they did in 1992. The
comparison of the distribution of skill as measured by the person effect reveals, however, that the
pattern of increased demand for higher skilled workers varies across sectors. A very large fall (of
nearly ten percentage points) in the share of bottom quartile person-effect workers is evident in
manufacturing, combined with a rise of over six percentage points in the median share of high
person-effect workers. The opposite pattern is the case in services: the median non-
manufacturing continuer has a median share of high person-effect workers that is nearly ten
percentage points lower in 1995 than in 1992. These patterns indicate that, in addition to sizeable
differences across types of businesses in the demand for skill, we also find that continuing
businesses modify their human capital inputs over time as well.
5. The Link between Technology and Human Capital
        This section discusses our estimates of equations (3) and (8). The first set of estimates
presented below is based on the matched sample described in section 3 and uses the ex post
weights26 constructed in the manner described in section 3.27 Two sets of specifications were

        25
            The two samples are only approximately equal due to firm deaths among the 1992 continuers group that
occur during 1996 and 1997. These firms are still active and included in the calculations for continuers in Table 1d,
while in Table 1c these firms are included in the exiters group.
         26
            The estimation sample we use varies across sectors and specifications. In each case, steps must be taken
to ensure that the estimated relationships between technology and skill are representative of the desired population.
The procedure for developing ex post weights for establishments (or EIN county SIC pseudo-establishments in the


                                                        20
estimated: one with and one without industry effects. Since the results are quite similar whether
or not industry effects are included, only the latter are reported. Twelve different measures are
used for the dependent variable in equation (3)—the share of workers at the business from each
quartile of the 1992 economy-wide human capital distribution using three different measures of
human capital. The between-firm relationship between technology adoption and workforce
human capital is captured by means of estimating equation (3) using cross-sectional data for a
sample of businesses. The ASM technology measures are used in the estimation for the
manufacturing sector and for a sample of service sector businesses (retail trade, wholesale trade
and services) the technology measures from the BES are used. All Table 2a and 2b regression
results control for log(sales), the county relative wage for the skill proportion that is the
dependent variable, and indicator variables for business age as well as the variables shown in the
tables.28
         Selection corrected results are also reported. The role the selection correction plays in the
level (equation (3)) and partial adjustment (equation (8)) specifications is somewhat different.
For the level model, the selection correction is included as a control for unobserved
heterogeneity that may be simultaneously correlated with survival, human capital, and
technology. For the partial adjustment model, the selection correction is a direct control for the
sample selection induced by the use of continuers in the estimation of the partial adjustment
specification. The reported standard errors are appropriately corrected for this two step
procedure.
5.1 Between Firm Variation: Findings from the Cross-section Model
         The results from the cross-section model containing all five technology measures as
explanatory variables are reported in Tables 2a (without selection controls) and 2b (with
selection controls). These results demonstrate that there is a strong empirical relationship
between technology and skill. Firms that use more technology employ a lower proportion of low-


case of multi-units) from the ES-202 data associated with the UI wage records is discussed in section 3. For the 1992
cross-sectional analysis, the ex post weights render the estimation sample representative of the same population that
the ASM and BES represent. These same weights, when applied in estimating the partial adjustment model, lead to
an estimation sample in each year that is representative of the yearly population of continuing (from 1992)
businesses.
          27
             This approach provides one way to exploit the variation in human capital and technology within and
between industries reported (at least for human capital) in ALM (2003).
          28
             We tried specifications with all relative prices in the control variables. The results are not substantively
different..


                                                          21
skill workers and a higher proportion of high-skill workers than do their non-technology using
counterparts. To illustrate this finding, consider the role of computer investment in Table 2b. The
estimated coefficients using the overall measure of skill for the top two quartiles are positive and
for the bottom two quartiles are negative in both the manufacturing and service sectors. In the
service sector, all of the estimated effects are statistically significant while for the manufacturing
sector they are statistically significant for the top and second quartiles.
       The novel aspect of the results is that the relationship between technology and skill
differs substantially depending upon which measure of skill is used. We find, for example, that
the relationships between computer investment and the person effect component of skill are very
similar to those for the overall measure of skill. However, we find that firms with a higher
proportion of computer investment are less likely to hire the most experienced workers (workers
in the top quartile of experience). This finding holds up in spite of the controls for business age
category, suggesting that the negative correlation between computer investment and worker
experience is not simply the result of firm vintage effects.
       These different patterns across the dimensions of skill are quantitatively important.
Combining the summary statistics from Table 1a with the results from Table 2b on the difference
in computer investment between the 90th percentile business and the 10th percentile business
shows that the implied difference in the share of workers in the highest quartile of the person
effect distribution is about three percentage points higher at the 90th percentile business. The
analogous computation yields a five percentage point higher share of high person effect workers
in services. These patterns hold for other measures of technology as well. For example, we find a
positive relationship between skill and capital intensity in manufacturing and between
inventories relative to sales and the software share in both sectors. More capital-intensive units
are more likely to have highly skilled and less likely to have less skilled workforces using the
overall measure of human capital. Alternatively, businesses holding more inventories in 1992
relative to sales are more likely to have low skilled and less likely to have high skilled
workforces. Similar patterns hold for the software share.
       The contrast in the person effect and the experience component of skill is also evident
when alternative measures of technology are included. For example, although there is
consistently a direct relationship between capital intensity and human capital in manufacturing,
regardless of whether the overall measure or the person effect is used, the consistency is quite the



                                                  22
opposite when the dependent variable is the experience measure of human capital. Not only is
the relationship much less consistent, but in some cases (such as the demand for the third and
fourth quartiles of the experience distribution in manufacturing), firms that have higher capital
intensity have lower proportions of highly experienced workers.
       The cross sectional specifications also have a variety of controls including a control for
unmeasured technology, selection, and business age. The relationship between unmeasured
technology, ψ , and human capital demand is positive in the uncorrected least squares
regressions but negative in the selection-corrected specification. One possible reason for this
result is that ψ serves as proxy for unobserved heterogeneity, which may be related to
entrepreneurial or managerial ability. Managerial ability might simultaneously drive the adoption
of new technology and the employment of highly skilled workers.
       Although the coefficients on the business age category controls are not reported in the
regression tables, nearly all coefficients are found to be significant. The impact of business age
on the various measures of skill demand is presented in Figure 1. These charts separately plot,
for the bottom and top quartiles, the predicted demand by firm age-group for experience and skill
(as measured through composite experience and the person effect components, respectively).
Results for manufacturing and services are shown in separate graphs. The figures show that the
demand for high person-effect workers is decreasing in firm age for service businesses and
decreases monotonically with age among manufacturing businesses. Manufacturing businesses
eleven to twenty-four years old demand fully six percent fewer top quartile person effect workers
in 1992 than do the youngest businesses. The manufacturing demand for top-quartile experience
workers is, in contrast, everywhere increasing in business age with businesses aged 11 to 24
demanding nearly ten percent more top quartile experience workers than do businesses that are
no more than one year old. Exactly the opposite patterns are found for the predicted demand for
low experience, low person-effect workers. Thus, it appears that workers with lower skill but
more experience are more heavily concentrated at more mature businesses while younger
businesses are more likely to employ high skilled workers with less experience.
       A repeated theme in the reported results is that the relationship between technology and
skill differs substantially depending on what measure of skill is used. For example, although
there is consistently a direct relationship between capital intensity and human capital in
manufacturing, regardless of whether the overall measure or the person effect is used, the


                                               23
consistency is quite the opposite when the dependent variable is the experience measure of
human capital. Not only is the relationship much less consistent, but in some cases (such as the
demand for the third and fourth quartiles of the experience distribution in manufacturing), firms
that have higher capital intensity have lower proportions of highly experienced workers.
5.2 Adding Within Firm Variation in Human Capital: Findings from the Partial Adjustment
Model
        In order to examine within firm adjustment in the absence of broad 1997 technology
measures, we take advantage of a major strength of our dataset—the availability of human
capital measures in all years from 1992 to 1997. We use the partial adjustment model specified
in equation (8) to examine the relation between initial technology investment in 1992 and
subsequent adjustments to skill demand among continuing firms. This approach permits us to
examine whether skill demand for continuing businesses evolves over time in the anticipated
way.
        We estimated 48 separate partial adjustment equations (four skill quartiles by three skill
measures by four years) for each of the two industry groups—manufacturing and services. In
order to summarize the results, we present the full set of estimated coefficients, including the
selection control variables, in Table 3 for one year (1995). We also present the implied changes
in the demand for skills over time for one key right hand side variable, computer investment, in
Figures 2a (manufacturing) and 2b (services).
        Starting with the results on computer investment, we find dynamic patterns that largely
reinforce our cross sectional results. Controlling for 1992 skill demand, those businesses with
higher levels of computer investment in 1992 have progressively higher estimated demand for
the highest skilled workers from 1993 through 1996. Similarly, they demand a progressively
lower share of the lowest skill workers. This finding holds for manufacturing and service sector
businesses, regardless of whether we measure skill with the person effects or the composite
measure. However, the finding is reversed when the skill measure is experience. In particular, as
time passes since the investment, more computer intensive businesses in both sectors exchange
their lowest experience workers for workers in the 2nd quartile of the experience distribution.
Thus, more computer intensive businesses shift towards workers with experience below the
median, which is consistent with the cross-section results.




                                                24
       The patterns of coefficients in Tables 2b and 3 are quite similar, although, not
surprisingly, the orders of magnitude of the coefficients in Table 3 are smaller, both because of
the presence of 1992 skill level controls and because the relationship is only estimated over
continuing firms. It is worth noting, however, that the implicit long run multiplier effects derived
from Table 3 are quite large. For example, consider the impact of computer investment on the
top quartile of skilled workers measured by person effects in non-manufacturing. The coefficient
estimate in Table 3 is 0.0191 which compares to the cross-sectional estimate from Table 2b of
0.0835. However, computing the long run multiplier for the Table 3 coefficient yields an implied
effect of 0.095. Thus, even when exploiting the within-firm variation in the demand for skills, we
find large impacts of technology that varies by the different dimensions for skills.
6. Concluding Remarks
       We began by raising a number of empirical questions. How sensitive is the demand for
skilled workers to technological change? How sensitive is the demand for unskilled workers?
Since skill has different dimensions—partly experience and partly basic ability—how is the
demand for different types of skill affected?
       This paper provides answers to some of these questions by using new measures of human
capital matched to multiple measures of technology derived from substantial amounts of
information about a firm’s inputs and outputs. These data and measures were used to directly
examine the way in which technology differences across businesses affect the types of workers
that are employed in current and following years.
       We found a strong positive empirical relationship between advanced technology and skill
in a cross-sectional analysis of firms. While this latter result largely confirms the findings in the
literature, it is worth emphasizing that our results hold using more comprehensive, richer
measures of skill. Moreover, the more comprehensive measures of skill permitted investigating
the relationship between skill and technology in a richer way. We found that advanced
technology interacts with different components of skill quite differently: firms that use
technology are more likely to use high-ability workers, but less likely to use high-experience
workers. These results hold even controlling for unobservable heterogeneity by means of a
selection correction and by using a partial adjustment specification.
       In terms of specific measures of technology, the capital intensity, the computer
investment, and the computer software expenditure intensity of a business are all positively



                                                 25
related to the share of high-human-capital employment at the business. Accounting for changes
in the demand for human capital across businesses is more difficult. This difficulty stems in part
from data limitations in measuring changes in technology consistently across businesses, and in
part from the persistent difference in the ways that firms organize themselves. We have tried to
overcome these limitations by examining how technology spending in one year impacts the
evolution of skill demand in later years. We found relationships that are consistent with those
obtained in the cross section.
       As always, more work remains to be done. The evidence in this research suggests that as
firms adopt more technology they are less likely to employ experienced workers. This result has
clear implications for the future as technology changes and the workforce ages: an important but
relatively neglected topic in the literature on the relationship between skill and technology. The
longitudinally-integrated employer-employee data used for the current analysis is ideal for such
an undertaking, and the extension of the LEHD Program to a complete, national, longitudinal job
frame is likely to yield many more insights. We regard this topic as a high priority for future
research.




                                               26
References

Abowd, John M., Robert H. Creecy and Francis Kramarz, “Computing Person and Firm Effects
     Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data,” U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD
     Program Technical Paper TP-2002-06 (April 2002), available online at
     http://lehd.dsd.census.gov/led/library/techpapers/tp-2002-06.pdf (cited March 4, 2007).

Abowd, John M., Bruno Crépon and Francis Kramarz, “Moment Estimation with Attrition: An
     Application to Economic Models,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 96,
     No. 456 (December 2001): 1223-1231.

Abowd, John M., John Haltiwanger and Julia I. Lane, “Integrated Longitudinal Employee-
     Employer Data for the United States,” American Economic Review Papers and
     Proceedings, Vol. 94, No. 2 (May 2004): 224-229.

Abowd, John M. and Francis Kramarz, “The Analysis of Labor Markets Using Matched Employer-
     Employee Data,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics,
     Volume 3(B), Chapter 40 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999), pp. 2629-2710.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz and David Margolis, “High Wage Workers and High Wage
     Firms,” Econometrica, Vol. 67, No. 2 (March 1999): 251-334.

Abowd, John M., Kevin L. McKinney and Paul A. Lengermann, “The Measurement of Human
     Capital in the U.S. Economy,” U.S. Census Bureau, LEHD Program Technical Paper TP-
     2002-09 (March 2003), available at http://lehd.dsd.census.gov/led/library/techpapers/tp-
      2002-09.pdf (cited March 4, 2007).

Abowd, John M, Bryce E. Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin L. McKinney, Marc
     Roemer, and Simon Woodcock, “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the
     Quarterly Workforce Indicators” in T. Dunne, J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts, eds., Producer
     Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the
     National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming), available online from
     http://lehd.dsd.census.gov/led/library/techpapers/tp-2006-01.pdf (cited February 28, 2007).

Abowd, John M. and Lars Vilhuber, “The Sensitivity of Economic Statistics to Coding Errors in
     Personal Identifiers,” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, Vol. 23, No. 2 (April
     2005): 133-152, JBES Joint Statistical Meetings invited paper with discussion and
     “Rejoinder” (April 2005): 162-165.

Audretsch, David B. and Talat Mahmood “New Firm Survival: New Results Using a Hazard
       Function,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 77, No. 1 (February 1995): 97-103.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz and Alan Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
       Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (November 1998):
       1169-1214.



                                              27
Bartel, Ann P. and Frank R. Lichtenberg, “The Comparative Advantage of Educated Workers in
        Implementing New Technology,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 69, No. 1
        (February 1987): 1-11.

Bartelsman, Eric J., Randy A. Becker, and Wayne B. Gray, “NBER-CES Manufacturing
       Industry Database” (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2000)
       available online at http://www.nber.org/nberces/nbprod96.htm (cited March 8, 2007).

Benedetto, Gary, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kevin L. McKinney, “Using Worker Flows
      to Measure Firm Dynamics,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics (forthcoming)
      available at http://lehd.dsd.census.gov/led/library/techpapers/tp-2003-09.pdf (cited March
      11, 2007).

Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches, “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
      U.S. Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, No. 2 (May 1994): 367-398.

Bresnahan, Timothy, Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information Technology, Workplace
       Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 1 (February 2002): 339-376.

Bureau      of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Methods (2007), available               online   at
         http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/homtoc_pdf.htm (cited February 28, 2007).

Caballero, Ricardo and Mohamad Hammour, “The Cleansing Effects of Recessions,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 5 (December 1994): 1350-1368.

Campbell, Jeffrey R. “Entry, Exit, Embodied Technology, and Business Cycles,” Review of
     Economic Dynamics, Vol. 1, No. 2 (April 1998): 371-408.

Caselli, Francesco, “Technological Revolutions,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 1
        (March 1999): 78-102.

Chari, V.V. and Hugo Hopenhayn, “Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Diffusion of New
       Technology,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, No. 6 (December 1991): 1142-65.

Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger, “On the Driving Forces behind Cyclical Movements in
       Employment and Job Reallocation,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 5 (December
       1999): 1234-1258.

Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne and Kenneth R. Troske, “Workers, Wages, and Technology,” The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 1 (February 1997): 253-290.

Dunne, Timothy, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and Kenneth Troske, “Wage and Productivity
      Dispersion in U.S. Manufacturing: The Role of Computer Investment,” NBER Working
      Paper No. 7465 (January 2000).



                                              28
Dunne, Timothy, John Haltiwanger and Kenneth R. Troske, “Technology and Jobs: Secular
      Change and Cyclical Dynamics,” Carnegie-Rochester Public Policy Conference Series,
      46 (June 1997): 107-178.

Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts and Larry Samuelson, “The Growth and Failure of U.S.
      Manufacturing Plants,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 4 (November
      1989): 671-698.

Ehrenberg, Ronald and Robert S. Smith, Modern Labor Economics Theory and Public Policy, 9th
      Edition (Boston, MA: Pearson Addison Wesley, 2005), summary available online at
      http://wps.aw.com/aw_ehrensmith_mlaborecon_9/0,10673,2445962-,00.html (cited March
      4, 2007).

Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes, “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
       Empirical Work.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 62, No. 1 (January 1995): 53-82.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and C.J. Krizan, “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
        Microeconomic Evidence,” in Edward Dean, Michael Harper and Charles Hulten, eds.,
        New Directions in Productivity Analysis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001),
        Chapter 8.

Haltiwanger, John C., Julia I. Lane and James R. Spletzer “Productivity Differences Across
       Employers: The Role of Employer Size, Age, and Human Capital,” American Economic
       Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 89, No. 2 (May 1999): 94-98.

Haltiwanger, John C., Julia I. Lane and James R. Spletzer, “Wages, Productivity and the Dynamic
       Interaction of Businesses and Workers,” Labour Economics (forthcoming).

Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark and Kenneth R. Troske, “Wages, Productivity, and Worker
        Characteristics: Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions and Wage Equations.”
        Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 17, No. 3 (July 1999): 409-446.

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw and Giovanna Prennushi, “The Effects of Human Resource
       Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,” The American
       Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3 (June 1997): 291-313.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald, “The Life Cycle of a Competitive Industry,” Journal
       of Political Economy, Vol. 102, No. 2 (April 1994): 322-47.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce, “Wage Inequality and the Rise in the Return
       to Skill,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 3 (June 1993): 35-78.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
       Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1 (February 1992): 35-
       78.



                                              29
Kremer, Michael and Eric Maskin, “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill,” NBER Working
      Paper, No. 5718 (August 1996).

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
       Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, Vol. 64, No. 6 (November 1996): 1263-1297.

Troske, Kenneth R. “The Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database,” in Labor Statistics
       Measurement Issues, J. Haltiwanger, M. Manser, and R. Topel, eds., (Chicago: University
       of Chicago Press, 1998), pp. 371-403.




                                             30
                                                                                                                                                Figure 1

                                                                Predicted Share of Bottom Quartile Workers in                                                                                                                   Predicted Share of Top Quartile Workers in
                                                                            Manufacturing 1992                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.400
                               0.400




                                                                                                                                                                                             0.350




                                                                                                                                                          Predicted Skill Demand Share
                               0.350
Predicted Skill Demand Share




                               0.300                                                                                                                                                         0.300




                                                                                                                                                                                             0.250
                               0.250




                               0.200                                                                                                                                                         0.200




                               0.150                                                                                                                                                         0.150

                                                                       Age 0 to 1           Age 2 to 5          Age 6 to 10          Age 11 to 24                                                                                Age 0 to 1           Age 2 to 5          Age 6 to 10          Age 11 to 24

                                                                                                    Business Age                                                                                                                                              Business Age

                                                                                Human Capital       Person Effect      Experience Component                                                                                               Human Capital       Person Effect       Experience Component



                                                                Predicted Share of Bottom Quartile Workers in                                                                                                                   Predicted Share of Top Quartile Workers in
                                                                               Services 1992                                                                                                                                                  Services 1992

                                                               0.400                                                                                                                                                    0.400
                                                                                                                                                                                         Predicted Skill Demand Share
                                Predicted Skill Demand Share




                                                               0.350                                                                                                                                                    0.350




                                                               0.300                                                                                                                                                    0.300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.250
                                                               0.250



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.200
                                                               0.200


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.150
                                                               0.150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Age 0 to 1           Age 2 to 5            Age 6 to 10      Age 11 to 24
                                                                          Age 0 to 1            Age 2 to 5           Age 6 to 10      Age 11 to 24
                                                                                                     Business Age

                                                                                    Human Capital    Person Effect       Experience Component                                                                                                 Human Capital    Person Effect       Experience Component




                                                                                                                                                     31
                                                               Figure 2a

                                              Manufacturing (ASM) Computer Investment

              0.0300

              0.0200

              0.0100

              0.0000
Coefficient




                        1993 1994 1995 1996       1993 1994 1995 1996      1993 1994 1995 1996      1993 1994 1995 1996
                         1st                       2nd                      3rd                      4th
              -0.0100   Qtile                     Qtile                    qtile                    Qtile


              -0.0200

              -0.0300                                                                      Human Capital
                                                                                           Person Effect Component
              -0.0400                                                                      Experience Component

              -0.0500
                                                                Year by Quartile



                                                               Figure 2b

                                                Services (BES) Computer Investment

              0.0300

              0.0200

              0.0100

              0.0000
Coefficient




                        1993 1994 1995 1996       1993 1994 1995 1996      1993 1994 1995 1996      1993 1994 1995 1996
                         1st                       2nd                      3rd                      4th
              -0.0100   Qtile                     Qtile                    qtile                    Qtile


              -0.0200

              -0.0300                                                                      Human Capital
                                                                                           Person Effect Component
              -0.0400                                                                      Experience Component

              -0.0500
                                                                Year by Quartile




                                                                    32
                  Table 1a: 1992 Summary Statistics for Human Capital and Technology Measures
                                               Annual Survey of Manufactures             Business Expenditures Survey
                                               10th           50th         90th          10th          50th           90th
                                            percentile percentile percentile percentile percentile percentile
Proportion of workforce in bottom
quartile of human capital (overall)           0.054          0.178        0.434         0.087         0.307          0.581
Proportion of workforce in second
quartile of human capital (overall)           0.135          0.232        0.352         0.140         0.236          0.341
Proportion of workforce in third quartile
of human capital (overall)                    0.141          0.258        0.408         0.097         0.206          0.343
Proportion of workforce in fourth
quartile of human capital (overall)           0.099          0.260        0.469         0.035         0.182          0.455
Proportion of workforce in bottom
quartile of human capital (person effect)
                                              0.071          0.211        0.473         0.081         0.268          0.506
Proportion of workforce in second
quartile of human capital (person effect)
                                              0.146          0.239        0.357         0.141         0.242          0.352
Proportion of workforce in third quartile
of human capital (person effect)
                                              0.131          0.239        0.377         0.124         0.217          0.339
Proportion of workforce in fourth
quartile of human capital (person effect)
                                              0.094          0.241        0.443         0.063         0.210          0.470
Proportion of workforce in bottom
quartile of human capital (experience)        0.079          0.185        0.351         0.128         0.341          0.627
Proportion of workforce in second
quartile of human capital (experience)        0.194          0.271        0.351         0.159         0.259          0.367
Proportion of workforce in third quartile
of human capital (experience)                 0.140          0.214        0.289         0.070         0.153          0.265
Proportion of workforce in fourth
quartile of human capital (experience)        0.190          0.305        0.425         0.086         0.200          0.356
Log Sales                                     6.745          8.434       10.486         6.016         7.506         9.520
Computer Investment Share                     0.000          0.024        0.551         0.000         0.025          0.580
Software Share (x100)                         0.000          0.000        0.004         0.000         0.000          0.000
Log Capital Intensity                         2.512          4.006        5.228         2.152         3.765         10.173
Inventory/Sales                               0.024          0.094        0.285         0.000         0.007          0.203
Ψ, wage equation firm effect                  -0.140         0.151        0.391        -0.520         -0.033         0.328
Notes: Percentiles are based upon matched samples (match between ES-202/UI and ASM and ES-202/UI and BES) and
use our ex post sample weights. Sample sizes are 4,643 pseudo-establishments in manufacturing and 9,460 in services.
Percentiles reported in this and subsequent tables reflect the weighted average of the value in the three percentiles
centered on the reported percentile.




                                                            33
Table 1b: Share of Businesses (by Sector) that Exit
between 1992 and 1997
                                             Share Exiting
Sector                                          Businesses
Manufacturing                                        0.445
Retail Trade                                         0.505
Wholesale Trade                                      0.473
Services                                             0.478
Source: Authors' calculations from the ES-202 universe.




                           34
   Table 1c: 1992 Summary Statistics for Continuing and Exiting (by 1997) Businesses
                                              Manufacturing             Services
                                                th                     th
                                              50 percentile          50 percentile
                                          Continuers Exiters Continuers Exiters

Proportion of workforce in bottom quartile of
human capital (overall)                        0.184       0.208        0.289       0.339
Proportion of workforce in second quartile of
human capital (overall)                        0.245       0.242        0.238       0.236
Proportion of workforce in third quartile of
human capital (overall)                        0.258       0.254        0.210       0.199
Proportion of workforce in fourth quartile of
human capital (overall)                        0.240       0.214        0.185       0.161
Proportion of workforce in bottom quartile of
human capital (person effect)                  0.286       0.312        0.210       0.226
Proportion of workforce in second quartile of
human capital (person effect)                  0.269       0.264        0.219       0.217
Proportion of workforce in third quartile of
human capital (person effect)                  0.215       0.208        0.232       0.223
Proportion of workforce in fourth quartile of
human capital (person effect)                  0.188       0.177        0.292       0.279
Proportion of workforce in bottom quartile of
human capital (experience)                     0.185       0.178        0.328       0.337
Proportion of workforce in second quartile of
human capital (experience)                     0.235       0.237        0.231       0.229
Proportion of workforce in third quartile of
human capital (experience)                     0.246       0.248        0.194       0.187
Proportion of workforce in fourth quartile of
human capital (experience)                     0.298       0.296        0.181       0.171
Log Sales                                      8.461       8.377        7.646       7.199
Computer Investment Share                      0.026       0.015        0.025       0.027
Software Share (x100)                          0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000
Log Capital Intensity                          4.022       4.028        3.839       3.484
Inventory/Sales                                0.093       0.096        0.006       0.010
Ψ, wage equation firm effect                   0.132       0.181       -0.019       -0.042
Sample size                                    2,659       1,984        5,618       4,022
Notes: Percentiles are based upon matched samples and use ex post sample weights.




                                            35
                  Table 1d: 1995 Human Capital Summary Statistics for Continuing Businesses
                                              Annual Survey of Manufactures         Business Expenditures Survey
                                                10th        50th        90th        10th        50th        90th
                                             percentile percentile percentile percentile percentile percentile
Proportion of workforce in bottom quartile
of human capital (overall)                        0.039       0.148       0.404       0.064       0.260        0.561
Proportion of workforce in second quartile
of human capital (overall)                        0.124       0.237       0.371       0.140       0.243        0.354
Proportion of workforce in third quartile of
human capital (overall)                           0.142       0.278       0.437       0.105       0.220        0.368
Proportion of workforce in fourth quartile
of human capital (overall)                        0.103       0.261       0.485       0.045       0.196        0.471
Proportion of workforce in bottom quartile
of human capital (person effect)                  0.067       0.201       0.469       0.074       0.255        0.505
Proportion of workforce in second quartile
of human capital (person effect)                  0.147       0.250       0.378       0.149       0.254        0.369
Proportion of workforce in third quartile of
human capital (person effect)                     0.132       0.248       0.400       0.126       0.222        0.360
Proportion of workforce in fourth quartile
of human capital (person effect)                  0.090       0.224       0.434       0.059       0.200        0.461
Proportion of workforce in bottom quartile
of human capital (experience)                     0.050       0.149       0.296       0.097       0.283        0.597
Proportion of workforce in second quartile
of human capital (experience)                     0.174       0.250       0.335       0.157       0.258        0.370
Proportion of workforce in third quartile of
human capital (experience)                        0.169       0.238       0.317       0.084       0.185        0.308
Proportion of workforce in fourth quartile
of human capital (experience)                     0.217       0.338       0.468       0.091       0.209        0.385
Notes: Percentiles are based upon matched samples (match between ES-202/UI and ASM and ES-202/UI and BES)
and use our ex post sample weights. Sample sizes are 3,248 pseudo-establishments in manufacturing and 6,402 in
services.




                                                        36
Table 2a: Regression of Skill Mix on Technology --1992 Cross-section, No Selection Controls
                                            First Quartile        Second Quartile         Third Quartile         Fourth Quartile
                                        Manuf. Services Manuf. Services Manuf. Services Manuf. Services
Total Human Capital
Capital Intensity                      -0.0474* -0.0066* -0.0181* -0.0011* 0.0246* 0.0014* 0.0391* 0.0066*
                                        0.0021       0.0005     0.0014     0.0003      0.0015     0.0003      0.0022      0.0005
Computer Investment Share              -0.0259* -0.0671* -0.0251* -0.0177* 0.0015                 0.0064      0.0548* 0.0784*
                                        0.0078       0.0064     0.0051     0.0036      0.0056      0.004      0.0083      0.0061
Inventory/Sales                        -0.0413* -0.1113* 0.0002            0.0058      -0.0058 0.0760* 0.0334* 0.0279*
                                        0.0134        0.014     0.0087      0.008      0.0096     0.0087      0.0142      0.0133
Software Share                           -0.045 -0.4788* -1.0853* 0.3767* -1.2177* 0.0011                     2.7053* 0.0734
                                          0.438      0.2659     0.2846     0.1517      0.3161     0.1651      0.4652      0.2534
Ψ, wage equation firm effect           -0.1901* -0.2521* -0.0094 -0.0282* 0.1220* 0.0988* 0.0938                         0.1819*
                                        0.0104       0.0049     0.0068     0.0028      0.0075     0.0031        0.011     0.0047
Person Effect
Capital Intensity                      -0.0553* -0.0028* -0.0071* -0.0014* 0.0256* -0.0003 0.0351* 0.0048*
                                        0.0022       0.0005     0.0013     0.0003      0.0014     0.0003      0.0022      0.0005
Computer Investment Share              -0.0399* -0.0589* -0.0082 -0.0265* -0.0055                 0.0037      0.0579* 0.0830*
                                        0.0083        0.006      0.005     0.0038      0.0053     0.0038      0.0081      0.0062
Inventory/Sales                         -0.0129 -0.1208* 0.0029           0.0263*       -0.019    0.0847      0.0185      0.0081
                                        0.0143       0.0132     0.0085     0.0083      0.0091     0.0084      0.0138      0.0136
Software Share                            0.035     -0.5661* -1.7203* -0.0049 -0.7323* 0.0287                 2.6976* 0.5305*
                                        0.4686       0.2517      0.279     0.1582      0.2977     0.1604      0.4545      0.2596
Ψ, wage equation firm effect           -0.1699* -0.1513* 0.0273* -0.0301* 0.1011* 0.0418* 0.0553* 0.1418*
                                        0.0111       0.0047     0.0067      0.003      0.0071      0.003      0.0108      0.0048
Experience
Capital Intensity                      -0.0051* -0.0098* -0.0066* 0.0028* -0.0011 0.0035* 0.0137* 0.0034*
                                        0.0017       0.0006     0.0011     0.0003      0.0009     0.0003      0.0014      0.0004
Computer Investment Share                0.0006 -0.0162* 0.0237* 0.0189* -0.0022                  0.0082 -0.0224* -0.0113*
                                        0.0062       0.0075     0.0041     0.0036      0.0035     0.0033      0.0052      0.0044
Inventory/Sales                        -0.0750* -0.019          0.0167* -0.0549* 0.0307* -0.0075 0.0255* 0.0813*
                                        0.0106       0.0165     0.0069     0.0078        0.006    0.0072      0.0089      0.0096
Software Share                          -0.2963      0.4908     -0.4288 -0.2246 1.0326* -0.0662                -0.313     -0.201
                                        0.3471       0.3134     0.2282     0.1488      0.1967     0.1373      0.2915      0.1828
Ψ, wage equation firm effect           -0.0860* -0.2154* -0.0160* 0.0549* 0.0102* 0.0518* 0.0911* 0.1082*
                                        0.0082       0.0058     0.0054     0.0028      0.0047     0.0026      0.0069      0.0034
Note: All models control for log(sales) and the county relative wage for the skill mix in question. Regressions use ex post
sample weights. Sample sizes are 4,643 pseudo-establishments in manufacturing and 9,460 in services. Coefficients that
are statistically significant at the five percent level are starred and coefficient and standard error are shaded in grey. All
models control for business age as indicator variables: one year or younger, age two to five years, age six to ten years, age
11 to 24 years and age 25 or older. For single-unit businesses, the age measures the establishment age. For multi-unit
pseudo-establishments, the age variables capture the age of the oldest establishment linked to the EIN, state, county, two-
digit SIC unit.




                                                              37
Table 2b: Regression of Skill Mix on Technology --1992 Cross-section, With Selection Controls
                                            First Quartile        Second Quartile         Third Quartile         Fourth Quartile
                                        Manuf. Services Manuf. Services Manuf. Services Manuf. Services
Total Human Capital
Capital Intensity                      -0.0473* -0.0064 -0.0181* -0.0012 0.0246* 0.0014                       0.0391* 0.0065
                                         0.0066      0.0066     0.0046     0.0037       0.0052    0.0041        0.007     0.0062
Computer Investment Share               -0.0253 -0.0678* -0.0250* -0.0176* 0.0012 0.0066* 0.0542* 0.0789*
                                         0.0138      0.0018     0.0096     0.0010       0.0108    0.0011       0.0146     0.0017
Inventory/Sales                        -0.0395* -0.1133* 0.0004            0.0061      -0.0063 0.0765* 0.0322* 0.0292*
                                         0.0044      0.0059     0.0031     0.0033       0.0034    0.0037       0.0047     0.0056
Software Share                         -0.1649* -0.4987* -1.0995* 0.3797* -1.1726*                 0.006      2.8011* 0.0863*
                                         0.0063      0.0112     0.0044     0.0063       0.0049    0.0069       0.0067     0.0105
Ψ, wage equation firm effect            -0.0069 -0.0071 0.0264* 0.0070* -0.0087                   0.0031      -0.0147 -0.0028
                                         0.0102       0.005     0.0071     0.0028        0.008    0.0031       0.0107     0.0047
Inverse Mills Ratio                    -0.0216* -0.0063* -0.0027 0.0009* 0.0087* 0.0016                       0.0181* 0.0041*
                                         0.0022      0.0005     0.0015     0.0003       0.0017    0.0003       0.0024     0.0005
Person Effect
Capital Intensity                      -0.0552* -0.0026 -0.0071 -0.0014 0.0256* -0.0004 0.0350* 0.0047
                                         0.0072      0.0064     0.0045     0.0039       0.0047     0.004       0.0067     0.0064
Computer Investment Share              -0.0392* -0.0598* -0.0082 -0.0265* -0.0057 0.0041* 0.0573* 0.0835*
                                          0.015      0.0017     0.0094     0.0010       0.0098    0.0011       0.0141     0.0017
Inventory/Sales                        -0.0112* -0.1234* 0.0029 0.0263* -0.0195* 0.0860* 0.0175* 0.0094
                                         0.0048      0.0057      0.003     0.0035       0.0031    0.0036       0.0045     0.0057
Software Share                         -0.0888* -0.5913* -1.7254* -0.0048 -0.6855* 0.0405* 2.7832* 0.5430*
                                         0.0069      0.0109     0.0043     0.0066       0.0045    0.0068       0.0064     0.0109
Ψ, wage equation firm effect           -0.0329* -0.0003 0.0288* -0.0012 -0.0011                   0.0002       0.0026     0.0021
                                         0.0111      0.0048     0.0069     0.0029       0.0073     0.003       0.0104     0.0048
Inverse Mills Ratio                    -0.0227* -0.0080* -0.001            0.0000     0.0088* 0.0038* 0.0167* 0.0040*
                                         0.0024      0.0005     0.0015     0.0003       0.0016    0.0003       0.0023     0.0005
Experience
Capital Intensity                       -0.0051 -0.0099 -0.0066            0.0028      -0.0011    0.0036      0.0137* 0.0034
                                         0.0049      0.0083     0.0031     0.0037      0.0028     0.0035       0.0043     0.0046
Computer Investment Share                0.0007      -0.016     0.0238* 0.0190* -0.0022 0.0082* -0.0226* -0.0115*
                                         0.0103      0.0022     0.0066      0.001      0.0059     0.0009       0.0091     0.0012
Inventory/Sales                        -0.0749* -0.0185* 0.0169* -0.0547* 0.0308* -0.0076* 0.0251* 0.0808*
                                         0.0033      0.0074     0.0021     0.0033      0.0019     0.0031       0.0029     0.0041
Software Share                         -0.3031* 0.4958* -0.4473* -0.2224* 1.0298* -0.0675 -0.2833* -0.2056
                                         0.0047       0.014      0.003     0.0062       0.0027    0.0058       0.0042     0.0078
Ψ, wage equation firm effect            0.0554* 0.0163* 0.0001 -0.0115* -0.0334*                   -0.01     -0.0224* 0.0052
                                         0.0076      0.0062     0.0048     0.0028       0.0043    0.0026       0.0067     0.0035
Inverse Mills Ratio                     -0.0013 0.0016* -0.0036* 0.0007* -0.0005 -0.0004 0.0058* -0.0015*
                                         0.0017      0.0007     0.0011     0.0003       0.0009    0.0003       0.0015     0.0004
Note: All models control for log(sales) and the county relative wage for the skill mix in question. Regressions use ex post
sample weights. Sample sizes are 4,643 pseudo-establishments in manufacturing and 9,460 in services. Coefficients that
are statistically significant at the five percent level are starred and coefficient and standard error are shaded in grey. All
models control for business age as indicator variables: one year or younger, age two to five years, age six to ten years, age
11 to 24 years and age 25 or older. For single-unit businesses, the age measures the establishment age. For multi-unit
pseudo-establishments, the age variables capture the age of the oldest establishment linked to the EIN, state, county, two-
digit SIC unit.




                                                              38
Table 3: Regression of Skill Mix on Technology --1995 Continuers, With Selection and 1992 Controls
                                           First Quartile        Second Quartile          Third Quartile         Fourth Quartile
                                        Manuf. Services Manuf. Services Manuf. Services Manuf. Services
Total Human Capital
Capital Intensity (1992)               -0.0078* -0.0015 -0.0049* -0.0001 0.0057* -0.0001                       0.0038     0.0007
                                        0.0027      0.0042      0.0023      0.0032      0.0023     0.003       0.0029     0.0037
Computer Investment Share (1992 -0.0137* -0.0298* -0.0081* -0.0052 0.0071* 0.0081                             0.0170* 0.0172*
                                        0.0039      0.0085      0.0034      0.0063      0.0033     0.006       0.0043     0.0074
Inventory/Sales (1992)                  -0.0056 -0.0212* -0.0036            -0.019     -0.0012 0.0239* 0.0086             0.0100
                                        0.0097      0.0081      0.0122      0.0108      0.0105    0.0092       0.0100     0.0074
Software Share (1992)                  -0.2131* -0.1362* -0.4521* 0.2222* 0.0108* -0.0531* 0.7099* 0.0047
                                         0.004      0.0048      0.0035      0.0036      0.0034    0.0034       0.0043     0.0042
Ψ, wage equation firm effect           -0.0039* 0.0007          0.0097* 0.0073* 0.0175* 0.0037* -0.0245* -0.0097*
                                        0.0009      0.0009      0.0008      0.0007      0.0007    0.0006        0.001     0.0008
Inverse Mills Ratio                      0.0074     0.0056* 0.0081         0.0027* -0.0007 -0.0038 -0.0153 -0.0044*
                                        0.0084      0.0015      0.0073      0.0011      0.0071    0.0011       0.0091     0.0013
Skill Level (1992)                      0.7821* 0.7433* 0.8785* 0.6396* 0.8602* 0.7865* 0.8343* 0.8297*
                                        0.2898      0.1823      0.2518      0.1353      0.2441    0.1297       0.3190     0.1590
Person Effect
Capital Intensity (1992)               -0.0097* -0.0002         0.0008     -0.0008 0.0075* -0.0006             0.0024      0.001
                                        0.0027      0.0042      0.0019      0.0032      0.0019     0.003       0.0026     0.0038
Computer Investment Share (1992 -0.0190* -0.0333* -0.0031 -0.0037 0.0075* 0.0113                              0.0186* 0.0191*
                                        0.0039      0.0083      0.0028      0.0065      0.0028     0.006       0.0038     0.0075
Inventory/Sales (1992)                   0.0011 -0.0277* 0.0007             0.0012     -0.0075 0.0358* 0.0051            -0.0019
                                        0.0091      0.0083      0.0102      0.0106      0.0096    0.0093       0.0093     0.0073
Software Share (1992)                  -0.8945* -0.4261* 0.1486* 0.4589* 0.3308* 0.2078* 0.6041* -0.2671*
                                        0.0041      0.0047      0.0029      0.0037      0.0029    0.0034       0.0039     0.0043
Ψ, wage equation firm effect            0.0175* -0.0101* -0.0029* 0.0251* 0.0113* 0.0099* -0.0268* -0.0230*
                                        0.0009      0.0009      0.0006      0.0007      0.0006    0.0006       0.0009     0.0008
Inverse Mills Ratio                      0.0087     0.0032* 0.0038         -0.0004 -0.0019        0.0019      -0.0109 -0.0049*
                                        0.0085      0.0015      0.0061      0.0012       0.006    0.0011       0.0083     0.0013
Skill Level (1992)                      0.8354* 0.7443* 0.8572* 0.6289* 0.8514* 0.6825* 0.7886* 0.7966*
                                         0.294      0.1783       0.209       0.139      0.2066    0.1286       0.2872     0.1618
Experience
Capital Intensity (1992)                 0.0000     -0.0036 -0.0063* 0.0010 -0.0038* 0.0019                   0.0067* 0.0012
                                        0.0027      0.0051      0.0021     0.0033       0.0019    0.0028       0.0024     0.0034
Computer Investment Share (1992 -0.0124* -0.0219* 0.0214* 0.0177* -0.0015 0.0127* -0.0022 -0.0005
                                         0.004      0.0102       0.003     0.0066       0.0027    0.0057       0.0035     0.0067
Inventory/Sales (1992)                 -0.0443*      -0.01     -0.0090* -0.0440* 0.0137           -0.0127 0.0394* 0.0474*
                                        0.0132      0.0078      0.0155     0.0116        0.015    0.0095       0.0125     0.0092
Software Share (1992)                  -0.3603* 0.2850* 0.6235* 0.1675* 0.2209* -0.2166* -0.3545* -0.2841*
                                         0.004      0.0058      0.0031      0.0037      0.0028    0.0032       0.0037     0.0038
Ψ, wage equation firm effect            0.0105* -0.0044* -0.0056* 0.0002 -0.0067* -0.0056* 0.0036* 0.0081*
                                        0.0009      0.0011      0.0007      0.0007      0.0006    0.0006       0.0008     0.0007
Inverse Mills Ratio                     0.0132* 0.0101* -0.0052 -0.0034* 0.0011                   0.0000      -0.0072 -0.0065*
                                        0.0084      0.0018      0.0065      0.0012      0.0059    0.0010       0.0076     0.0012
Skill Level (1992)                      0.5318* 0.6946* 0.3919             0.3966* 0.4709* 0.6998* 0.6498* 0.7363*
                                        0.2908      0.2195      0.2250      0.1410      0.2000    0.1220       0.2622     0.1450
Note: All models control for log(sales) and the county relative wage for the skill mix in question. Regressions use ex post
sample weights. Sample sizes are 3,248 pseudo-establishments in manufacturing and 6,402 in services. Coefficients that
are statistically significant at the five percent level are starred and coefficient and standard error are shaded in grey. All
models control for business age as indicator variables: one year or younger, age two to five years, age six to ten years, age
11 to 24 years and age 25 or older. For single-unit businesses, the age measures the establishment age. For multi-unit
pseudo-establishments, the age variables capture the age of the oldest establishment linked to the EIN, state, county, two-
digit SIC unit.



                                                              39
