                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TRADE POLICY WITH HETEROGENEOUS TRADERS:
                            DO QUOTAS GET A BUM RAP?

                                            Kala Krishna
                                            Ling H. Tan

                                        Working Paper 13040
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13040


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




We are grateful to Andres Rodriguez Clare for comments. Krishna thanks the IMF Institute and Princeton
University for providing a wonderful environment in which to work. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Kala Krishna and Ling H. Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Trade Policy with Heterogeneous Traders: Do Quotas Get a Bum Rap?
Kala Krishna and Ling H. Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 13040
April 2007
JEL No. F1,F18

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the effects of trade policy--tariffs and quotas--when importing is done by competitive
traders who are identical ex ante but differ ex post. We show that the standard equivalence results
no longer hold and the conventional ranking of tariffs and quotas is turned on its head: quotas are not
as bad for welfare as previously believed, while tariffs may restrict trade by more than originally intended.
Furthermore, the allocation of property rights (quota licenses) has real effects beyond the distribution
of rents; this, in turn, has implications for the effects of corruption on welfare.

Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu

Ling H. Tan
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
ltan@imf.org
1         Introduction
This paper analyzes the impact of conventional trade policy instruments
such as tariﬀs and quotas in a simple competitive model of supply with
heterogeneous traders facing fixed costs and capacity constraints. Traders in
our model are import distributors or agents who bring products and services
from another country into their home country for distribution and resale.
    The role of traders–middlemen who buy and sell a product but neither
produce nor consume it themselves–has been largely ignored in the interna-
tional trade literature. Yet in practice, traders play a key role in international
commerce because potential buyers (home consumers) and sellers (producers
from the rest of the world) usually cannot meet directly and conduct trades.
In other words, traders are necessary to facilitate trade. In return, they make
their money by buying low and selling at what the market will bear. A re-
cent Washington Post article (Timberg, 2006) described the activities of an
African importer thus: “He strapped $5,000 to his waist and flew oﬀ to Asia
in search of a new kind of fortune, built not on making goods but trading
them... He met with Chinese businessmen in Singapore and quickly spent
the $5,000 he brought and $15,000 more he had kept in reserve in Nigeria. In
return, he got four used Honda cars and one and a half shipping containers
full of car parts. [He] calculates that he can sell the cars and auto parts
for $34,000, a profit of 70 percent on his investment.” But trading is neither
costless nor riskless–as with any business venture, trading involves setup
costs and financial risks.1 These considerations play an important part in
the behavior of traders.
    In our model, imports are supplied by such profit-maximizing competitive
traders. There is free entry into (and exit from) the import industry: anyone
can become a trader by paying a fixed cost which allows him to buy a good
from the world market at a random price and to sell it in the integrated
domestic market at the market-clearing price. In practice, such fixed costs
typically involve, at the minimum, the cost of registering and setting up an
import business. The traders face capacity constraints, so no one trader can
dominate the market and there is perfect competition. This setup reflects
reasonably well trade in various types manufactured products where import
and export are mostly carried out by small businesses; it does not apply to
other goods such as primary commodities where an integrated world market
    1
        Examples of risks include unexpected fluctuations in prices and delivery times.


                                               2
exists, and highly specialized products with a limited number of buyers and
sellers. The model is used to understand what happens when traders get
only a part of what their eﬀorts obtain. This could be because there are
trade polices in place like tariﬀs or quotas, or because corruption transfers
rents and/or raises costs, both fixed and variable. In this manner, our work
contributes to the literature on tariﬀs (both specific and ad valorem) versus
quotas in international trade as well as that on corruption and licensing.2
    Our model can be seen as a competitive analogue of the monopolisti-
cally competitive heterogeneous firm setting common in the international
trade/industrial organization literature. In those models, it is relatively com-
plicated to obtain insights into the eﬀects of trade policy; see for example,
Melitz and Ottaviano (2005), and Baldwin and Forslid (2006). Furthermore,
those models focus primarily on export behavior. In contrast, we focus on
importers. By looking at heterogeneous traders in the absence of complica-
tions caused by product diﬀerentiation and monopolistic competition, we are
able to obtain clean results and shed some light on the pure eﬀect of cost
heterogeneity and fixed costs on the impact of trade policy in the long term
(when entry/exit can occur) versus the short term (when entry/exit cannot
occur).
    Why is it important to model the role of traders explicitly? We do so
not simply to inject a dose of realism into the analysis but because the size
of the import industry matters for the amount of trade that takes place and
the consequent level of social welfare. And the size of the import industry, in
turn, is aﬀected by the costs and risks involved in importing. This is where
our model diﬀers from the standard partial equilibrium analysis of trade
policy under perfect competition: by explicitly introducing entry costs and
an element of uncertainty for all potential traders–factors that are crucial
in determining the entry decisions of traders and ultimately, the outcome of
trade policies–we show that neglecting the role of traders can lead one astray
in evaluating the eﬀects of various trade restrictions. Thus, the fundamental
contribution of this paper lies in its implications for trade policy, which diﬀer
quite substantially from the norm.
    There is an enormous literature on the ranking of “equivalent” policies in
trade. The classic paper in a competitive setting is McCulloch (1973) which
argues that equivalence needs to be carefully defined: import equivalent po-
lices may be ranked one way while domestic consumption equivalent ones
  2
      For a survey of some of the older literature in this area, see Krishna (1990).


                                              3
may be ranked in the opposite manner. In another classic paper, Bhagwati
(1965) shows that market structure matters: while tariﬀs and quotas may be
equivalent under competition, they are not under monopoly. Since then, this
work has been extended to a variety of settings including oligopoly, uncer-
tainty, and so on.3 However, there has been no analysis of how such policies
aﬀect the size of the import industry (via entry) in a competitive setting, and
what this means for welfare. We show that when heterogeneous traders and
entry costs are introduced into the picture, quotas diﬀer substantially from
tariﬀs via their entry eﬀects. The standard equivalence results no longer hold
and the conventional ranking of tariﬀs and quotas can be turned on its head:
quotas are not as bad for welfare as previously believed, while tariﬀs may
restrict trade by more than originally intended.
    Our model also provides a new insight into the eﬀect of corruption. The
conventional wisdom is that corruption cannot be good for social welfare: to
the extent that it results in a pure transfer of rents from one set of agents
to another, it is at best neutral to aggregate welfare (though of course, not
to the distribution of welfare), but to the extent that anticipated corruption
discourages investment, it can be harmful to welfare. In contrast, we show
that there are circumstances in which corruption can actually improve social
welfare. When there is an import quota in place, the way in which the
quota licenses are distributed matters a great deal. We show that entry is
(constrained) optimal if importers have to pay for the quota licenses but
not if they are given the licenses for free according to some rationing rule,
therefore welfare is higher whenever the quota rent is captured by some
domestic agent(s) other than the traders themselves.4 This suggests that
society as a whole will be better oﬀ if the quota licenses were “sold” by
corrupt customs oﬃcials through bribery than if the quota licenses were
given away to traders by a benevolent government. The way in which quotas
are allocated thus aﬀects aggregate welfare, and not just its allocation across
agents.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 sets up the model. Section 3
characterizes the free trade equilibrium with endogenous entry of traders,
   3
      More recently, Jørgensen and Schröder (2005) compare ad valorem and specific tariﬀs
in terms of welfare in monopolistically competitive models using the standard CES utility
function introduced by Spence-Dixit-Stiglitz.
    4
      Whether the quota rents are captured by the government or by corrupt domestic
agents does not matter for aggregate welfare, only for its distribution across domestic
agents.


                                           4
and shows that this equilibrium is socially optimal. Section 4 looks at what
happens when trade is restricted by a quota set below the free trade level of
imports. For a given quota, entry will adjust (down) to the socially optimal
level but of course, the smaller the quota, the lower the welfare. We also
consider the eﬀects of selling the quota rights (by the government or through
bribery) versus giving them to the traders, and show that the former welfare
dominates the latter: the allocation of property rights aﬀects market out-
comes, and corruption can actually have beneficial welfare eﬀects. Sections
5 and 6 consider, respectively, a specific tariﬀ and an ad valorem tariﬀ that
generate the same initial level of imports as the quota. A specific tariﬀ results
in greater exit of traders and lower welfare than does a quota. An initially
import equivalent ad valorem tariﬀ reduces entry and welfare even more than
does an initially import equivalent specific tariﬀ. Section 7 concludes.


2     The Model
Assume there is an integrated domestic market for a particular good where
a single price, P , prevails. Demand in this market is given by QD (P ). For
simplicity, assume the good is not produced at home.5 Domestic consumers
cannot directly access the world supply of this good. Instead, they are served
by traders who import the good from the world market and sell it domesti-
cally. This world market is not integrated in the sense that there is no single
price that prevails: rather, there is a distribution of prices denoted by F (c)
which this small country takes as given.6
    Suppose there is a continuum of these traders with mass N. Every trader
has a fixed entry cost, fe , that he has to incur to enter the market. Once this
is paid, the trader gets a draw from the known distribution of prices F (c).
    5
      We can also interpret QD (P ) as domestic excess demand as long as domestic entry is
fixed, for the positive part of the analysis.
    6
      There are several ways to think about this. We can just assume a price distribution in
the world market without specifying where it comes from (which is what we do here). Or
we can assume that the traders do not know their productivity (or costs) prior to entry.
After entry, each trader draws a productivity, and hence a cost–he is then able to import
one unit at the world price plus his costs. High productivity traders would thus be willing
to supply at a lower price. Finally, we can think of c as inversely related to quality, which
is variable and cannot be contracted upon in the world market. So there could be a single
price in the world market per “eﬀective” unit, but profit in the domestic market is variable
due to diﬀerences in quality.


                                             5
In other words, paying the entry cost allows a trader to access the world
market at a random price and to sell in the domestic market at the domestic
market-clearing price. There are limits to the scale at which the traders can
operate as each trader has limited resources at his disposal. For simplicity,
assume that each trader has the capacity to import one unit.7
    The setup is as follows. First, the trader decides whether to enter the
market or not. If he enters, he is matched with a seller in the world market
and gets a draw of c from F (c). Depending on the draw, the trader decides
whether to buy the good or not, keeping in mind that he receives no direct
utility from the good, only the profit from selling the good domestically at
the market clearing price. If the domestic price is P , only those traders who
draw a cost of c ≤ P will choose to import the good. Thus, supply from a
unit mass of traders is F (P ). As usual, the mass of traders in equilibrium
is determined so that their expected profit at the time of entry is zero. In
what follows, we work with a static setting.8


3       Equilibrium Under Free Trade
Under free trade, if a mass of N traders enters the market, supply will be
equal to NF (P ), and the free trade market clearing price, P F (N), will be
determined by the intersection of demand and supply:
                         ¡        ¢       ¡        ¢
                       QD P F (N) = NF P F (N) .                         (1)

Note that P F (N) is decreasing in N: the price of the import falls as more
traders enter the market. The free trade situation is illustrated in Figure
1, which shows a downward sloping demand curve P D (Q) and an upward
sloping supply curve P S (Q, N) drawn for a mass of N traders.
    Consider a trader deciding whether to enter the market or not. If he
enters and draws a cost below the market clearing price, he will earn quasi
rent equal to the diﬀerence between the two, i.e., P F (N) − c; if he draws a
    7
     Capacity constraints of some sort are necessary for internal consistency of a model
with cost heterogeneity and perfect competition.
   8
     It is easy to convert this into its dynamic analogue in steady state (à la Melitz (2003))
by assuming a constant exogenous death rate for all firms, and setting the mass of entrants
in each time period to exactly compensate for these deaths. We choose not to do more
than note this in the interests of simplicity.



                                              6
                    Figure 1: Competitive Equilibrium



             P6                                        P S (N, Q)
                Q                 ½½
                 Q               ½
                  Q             ½
                   Q           ½
                    Q
                     Q        ½
                      Q      ½
                       Q    ½
                A       Q B½
        P F (N)          Q
                         ½
                        ½ QQ
                       ½     Q
                      ½       Q
                     ½         Q
                    ½           Q
                   ½             Q P D (Q)
                  ½               QQ
                 ½
                ½                    -
              0                                          Q

cost greater than or equal to P F (N), he will not import and his quasi rent
will be zero. Hence, his expected profit or quasi rent is:
                       F (N)
                      PZ                                 F (N)
                                                        PZ
                           ¡ F       ¢
           rF (N) =         P (N) − c f (c) dc =              F (c) dc   (2)
                       0                                 0

(where the second equality follows from integration by parts). Total quasi
rent earned in the economy, NrF (N), is equal to the area between the supply
curve and the equilibrium price, that is, the area OAB in Figure 1. Since
P F (N) is decreasing in N, rF (N) must also be decreasing in N.
    Entry will occur until each trader’s expected quasi rent equals the fixed
cost of entry. Hence, the equilibrium level of entry under free trade (which
we will denote by N F ) is determined by:

                                  P F (N F )
                                    Z
                        ¡ ¢
                      r NF =
                       F
                                            F (c) dc = fe .              (3)
                                    0
                                                                    ¡   ¡ ¢¢
as depicted in Figure 2. The equilibrium level of imports is QF = QD P F N F .


                                        7
                        Figure 2: The Free Entry Condition



                    6
          Rents
                         rF (N)


                                                              fe




                                                              -
                0                       NF                     N

                          RP̄
Assumption 1 fe <               F (c) dc where P̄ is the price at which demand be-
                           0
       comes zero.

     If Assumption 1 holds, there is a unique free entry equilibrium with N F >
0.9 An increase in the entry cost fe will reduce the equilibrium mass of traders
NF .
     Let us now turn to the welfare implications of our model. We know that
in the case of homogeneous goods and market power (Mankiw and Whinston,
1986) there is too much entry due to the “business stealing eﬀect”: firms do
not internalize the fact that their entry dissipates the profits of other firms
and as a result, more of them enter the market than is socially optimal.
On the other hand, in the case of diﬀerentiated products and monopolistic
competition (Dixit and Stiglitz, 1977) there may be too much entry or too
little entry relative to the social optimum. Is entry optimal in the case of
competitive heterogeneous traders?
     For any N, welfare is the sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus
   9
    In Figure 2, since rF (N ) is decreasing in N , the intersection of rF (N ) and fe will
occur at N F > 0 only if fe lies below the vertical intercept of rF (N ) .




                                             8
(quasi rent) less entry costs:
                                                     F (N)
                           Z   P̄                   PZ

             W F (N) =              QD (P )dP + N           F (c) dc − Nfe .   (4)
                         P F (N)                        0

Proposition 1 The free trade equilibrium results in a level of entry that is
socially optimal, i.e., dW F (N) /dN = 0 at N = N F .

Proof. In the Appendix.


4     Restricted Trade: Quotas
Suppose that we are at the free trade equilibrium with N F traders in the
market when a binding quota of Q̄ is imposed, where Q̄ is less than the free
trade level of imports. Traders now have to purchase a quota license from
the government in order to sell the imported good in the domestic market.
What happens to entry?
    The equilibrium is easy to depict in a picture, as is done in Figure 3. The
price in the
         ¡   domestic market (the demand price) is such that QD (P ) = Q̄; call
             ¢
       D
this
  ¡ P ¢ Q̄ . For any given mass of traders, N, the value of a quota    ¡ license,
                                                                          ¢
                                                                     D
L N, Q̄ , is equal to¡ the diﬀerence
                           ¢         between   the demand    price P    Q̄  , and
the supply price P S N, Q̄ , where the latter is given by setting supply equal
to the quota level:
                                 ¡ ¡       ¢¢
                               NF P S N, Q̄ = Q̄.                    (5)
             S
               ¡     ¢
        ¡ P ¢ N, Q̄ is decreasing in N and increasing in Q̄. The license
Note that
price, L N, Q̄ , equals the distance DF in Figure 3.
    The quasi rent function facing each trader is now:

                                           P S (N,Q̄)
                                                Z
                            ¡     ¢
                          rQ N, Q̄ =                F (c) dc                   (6)
                                                0
                                         ¡     ¢
as long as the quota is binding. Like P S N, Q̄ , rQ (N, Q̄) is decreasing in
N and increasing in Q̄. The area OCD in Figure 3 corresponds to the quasi
rent earned by all traders who enter, so rQ (N, Q̄) is equal to (1/N) of the
area OCD.

                                            9
                     Figure 3: Import Equivalent Policies



              P6                      P S (N0 , Q)           P S (N, Q)
                Q                    ½½
                  Q           ½
                              ½     ½
                   Q        ½      ½
                    Q      ½      ½
                     Q
                      Q F½       ½
        P D (Q̄) G      ½
                        Q       ½
                      ½ Q      ½
                 A   ½   H QQB½
            PF      ½       ½Q
                 C½½   D ½
                           ½   Q
                                Q
      P (N, Q̄) ½
       S
                        ½        Q
                 E    ½           Q
                     ½             Q
                    ½               Q P D (Q)
                   ½                 QQ
                  ½
                ½                       -
               0             Q̄                               Q
                                                                 ¡ ¢
     How does rQ (N, Q̄) compare with rF (N)? Define N0 Q̄        ¡ ¢to be the
                                                                D
level of N where the supply curve intersects demand at P Q̄ . This in-
verse supply curve is depicted¡ ¢ in Figure 3. Since    Q̄ is less than the ¡free¢
                                                    F
trade level of imports, N0 Q̄ must be below N . Once N falls to N0 Q̄
and below,
        ¡      ¢the quota will no longer be binding. Therefore,
                                                              ¡ ¢ for a given
Q̄, ¡rQ ¢ N, Q̄¡ will¢ be identical to rF (N) when N ≤ N0 Q̄ . When N >
N0 ¡Q̄ , rQ¢ N, Q̄ ¡< r¢F (N): this follows from Equations (2) and (6) since
P S N F , Q̄ < P F N F . This is depicted in Figure 4.                   ¡ ¢
     Equilibrium entry under the quota,  ¡  which
                                              ¢   we will denote by N Q Q̄ , is
determined by the intersection of rQ N, Q̄ and fe :

                           P S (N Q (Q̄),Q̄)
                                  Z
                                           F (c) dc = fe .                    (7)
                                  0
             Q
              ¡ ¢
          ¡ ¢ Q̄ is increasing in Q̄,Q as a reduction in the quota level de-
Note that N
creases N0 Q̄ and shifts the curve r (N, Q̄) downwards in Figure 4.

Lemma 1 The ¡equilibrium
                    ¡ ¢ supply
                            ¢     price
                                  ¡ ¢is invariant with respect to Q̄. In
other words, P S N Q Q̄ , Q̄ = P F N F .


                                           10
                Figure 4: Comparing Rents: Quotas, Specific and Ad-valorem Tariﬀs



            6


Rents
                         rF (N)


                         rz (N)


                rt (N)                                                              fe



                                                                             rq (N)




                                                                  rQ (N)
                                                                                     -
                            t         z       Q       F       q
        0                 N N0    N       N       N       N
                                                                                    N




                                                  11
Proof. This follows from comparing the free entry conditions under free
trade and under the quota (Equations (3) and (7). ¡ QSince
                                                       ¡ ¢ the¢expected quasi
                                                S
rent per trader
       ¡ F¢     must equal fe in equilibrium, P    N    Q̄ , Q̄ must be equal
     F
to P N and be independent of Q̄.

Proposition 2 If we start at the free trade equilibrium and impose a binding
quota, there will be a net exit of traders over time and the new equilibrium will
be characterized by a lower level of entry compared with free trade. Average
cost will first fall and then rise (average productivity will first rise and then
fall) as traders first change their import and then their entry decisions in
response to the quota. Once entry adjusts, in the new equilibrium, average
cost (productivity) will return to its free trade level. The price of a quota
license will fall over time as the number of traders shrinks, but it will remain
positive in the new equilibrium.

Proof. We can think of the free trade equilibrium as equivalent to a quota
set at the free trade level of imports with a mass of N F traders. Thus the
impact eﬀect of imposing a binding quota (i.e., reducing the quota from QF
to Q̄) will be to make
                     ¡ F it unprofitable
                              ¢          ¡ for
                                             ¢ incumbent traders who have cost
                   S                  F    F
draws ¡between¢ P N , Q̄ and P N to import. The supply price drops
to P S N F , Q̄ . This will lower average cost; in other words, maintaining our
analogy with the monopolistically competitive heterogeneous¡ F ¢firm setting, it
will raise average productivity. The license price is L N , Q̄ .
    Over time, there will be a net exit of¡traders
                                                 ¢     from the market.10 In the
new equilibrium, ¡ the mass
                       ¢      of traders, N Q Q̄ , is smaller¡ than
                                                                ¢ that under free
               Q                       F
trade: since r N, Q̄ lies below¡ ¢   r   (N) when  N   > N 0  Q̄ , it must intersect
                                           F                                   F
fe at a point between N    ¡ 0 ¢Q̄ and N . As N adjusts down from N               to
                         Q
its new equilibrium N Q̄ , the supply price (i.e., the cost of the marginal
trader) will rise and average cost will also rise (or average productivity will
fall). As the supply price rises, the license price falls.       ¡ ¢
    In the new equilibrium, the supply price returns to P F N F , so average
cost and productivity return to their free trade levels: this follows from
Lemma 1. Hence, entry will always adjust to completely oﬀset the reduction
in the supply price caused by the binding quota. The equilibrium license
  10
    In Figure 3, the area OAB represents free trade profits while the area OCD represents
                                               F
total quasi rent under the quota Q̄. At N = N¡ , itF ¢is clear that the quasi rent of OCD is
not enough to cover entry costs–recall that 1/N         of the area OAB is equal to fe , and
OAB > OCD. Thus, traders will exit.


                                            12
         ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢                                       ¡     ¢
price, L N Q Q̄ , Q̄ , will therefore be lower than L N F , Q̄ but will still
be positive.
    Thus, our model provides some stark but interesting and potentially
testable predictions for the path of cost/productivity in an industry in re-
sponse to a quantitative restriction. In Section 4.2, we show that this depends
on the way in which the quota rights are distributed.

4.1    Welfare Under a Quota
Let us assume that the quota rights are sold and that these revenues go to
the government. For any N and Q̄, welfare is the sum of consumer surplus,
producer surplus, and license revenue, less entry costs:
                                                           P S (N,Q̄)
                                   Z   P̄                    Z
               ¡     ¢
            W Q N, Q̄ =                      D
                                            Q (P )dP + N            F (c) dc
                                 P D (Q̄)                    0
                                   £   ¡ ¢      ¡     ¢¤
                                  + P D Q̄ − P S N, Q̄ Q̄ − N fe .             (8)

Lemma 2 The level of entry is socially optimal, given the quota level.

Proof. In the Appendix.
   Note that in equilibrium, total quasi rent exactly equals total entry costs
so welfare comprises only consumer surplus and license revenue:

                        Z   P̄
    ¡   ¡ ¢ ¢                               £   ¡ ¢           ¡ ¢      ¤
 W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ =               QD (P )dP + P D Q̄ − P S (N Q Q̄ , Q̄) Q̄. (9)
                      P D (Q̄)


Lemma 3 An increase in the quota always raises welfare.

Proof. In the Appendix.

4.2    Allocation of Quota Rent
We have assumed so far that quota licenses are sold, with the revenues ac-
cruing to the government. But this is often not the case; it is quite common
for quota licenses to be awarded to some or all importers based on certain
criteria such as past import performance. In this section, we show that the

                                              13
allocation of quota rent has an impact on the entry decision of traders. This
means that the details of quota implementation–who receives the licenses
and under what conditions–aﬀect not just the distribution of the rents, but
the equilibrium size of the import industry.
    To illustrate, let us consider the scenario where quota licenses are not
sold but rather awarded to the traders free of charge. To avoid confusion, we
will refer to such an arrangement as “free” quota to distinguish it from the
previous case where traders had to pay for the quota licenses.
    For concreteness, assume that quota licenses are tradeable. When a trader
chooses to enter, he pays the fixed cost, and upon doing so, he is allocated a
license. This allocation is certain if the mass of traders that enter does not
exceed the quota, but occurs with a probability Q̄/N if N > Q̄. Traders need
not import to get a license, they just need to enter (e.g., obtain a business
registration number). Since license markets work without friction, we can
assume that every trader that enters sells his license for L(N, Q̄) and then
buys it back¡   if his
                    ¢  cost realization is below the supply price P S (N, Q̄).
    Let rq N, Q̄ denote the expected quasi rent per¡trader        ¢ under the “free”
quota.11 If N ≤ N0 (Q̄), then L(N, Q̄) = 0, P S N, Q̄ = P F (N), and
rq (N, Q̄) = rF (N)–in
                   ¡     ¢ other words,    ¡ the ¢quotaFis not binding. But if N >
                                         S
N0 (¡Q̄), then ¡L N,¢Q̄¢ > 0 and P N, Q̄ < P (N) . Furthermore, Q̄/N <
Q̄/ NF (P S N, Q̄ ) ¡= 1, ¢thus, entrants are not assured of a license. As
a result, they obtain Q̄/N L(N, Q̄) in expected terms from selling any li-
                               P S (N,Q̄)
                                   R
censes they are given and                 F (c) dc from their productive (importing)
                                       0
activities. More compactly, expected earnings of an entrant are:

                                                              P S (N,Q̄)
                                   ∙      ¸                     Z
                     q                 Q̄
                    r (N, Q̄) = min 1,      L(N, Q̄) +                 F (c) dc.           (10)
                                       N
                                                                0

Clearly, rq (N, Q̄) > rQ (N, Q̄) for any N and Q̄, as long as the value of
the quota license is positive (i.e., when N > N0 (Q̄))–in other words, when
N > N0 (Q̄), entrants must make more in expected terms at any given N and
Q̄ than when they have to buy licenses.

    11
    Q
        ¡We use
              ¢ the lower case q as the superscript to diﬀerentiate the quasi rent function from
r        N, Q̄ , used previously.


                                                 14
                                   ¡    ¢
Lemma 4 For N > N0 (Q̄), rq N, Q̄ is decreasing in N, and decreasing in
Q̄ if the quota is close to the free trade level of imports, but increasing in Q̄
if the quota is relatively restrictive.

Proof. In the Appendix.                                                   ¡ ¢
                                                                        q
    Equilibrium entry under the “free” quota,
                                        ¡     which
                                              ¢     we will denote by N    Q̄ ,
                                      q               12
is determined by the intersection of r N, Q̄ and fe .

Proposition 3 Giving the quota licenses to traders results in more entry
and lower average cost (higher average productivity) compared to selling the
quota licenses to traders. If the quota is not too restrictive, giving the licenses
to traders can even raise entry above the free trade level. However, entry is
sub-optimally high given the quota level and equilibrium welfare is lower when
quota licenses are given away than when they are sold.

Proof. If we start at the free trade equilibrium and impose a ¡binding¢“free”
quota, the impact eﬀect will be to lower the supply price to P S N F , Q̄ , as in
the previous case; this will¡lower average
                                    ¢         cost (or raise average productivity).
The value of a license is L N F , Q̄ but unlike the previous case, this amount
is part of the trader’s profit.
     Over time, there could be a net exit or net entry of traders in the market:
if the quota is restrictive, expected quasi rent per trader falls on impact
(when N = N F ) and there will be net exit, but if the quota is not very
restrictive, expected quasi rent per trader rises on impact and there will be
net entry (from Lemma 4). If there is net exit, the supply price will rise
(average productivity will fall) as N falls; if there is net entry, the supply
price will fall further (average productivity will rise further)¡ ¢ as N increases.¡ ¢
                                                              q                  q
     In the new equilibrium,
                       ¡ ¢    the mass  of traders  will be N     Q̄  , where  N    Q̄
is greater than N Q ¡Q̄ and   ¢ F possibly   greater
                                                  ¡   than
                                                         ¢  N F
                                                                .  In   Figure
                                                                             ¡ ¢4,  the
quasi rent curves, rQ¡ N, Q̄¢  , r (N),
                                    ¡     and
                                            ¢   rq N, Q̄ coincide at N0 Q̄ ; be-
yond that point, rq N, Q̄ > rQ N, Q̄ . It follows, therefore, that there is
greater
     ¡ ¢ entryQwhen
                 ¡ ¢ licenses are given to traders than when they are sold, i.e.,
   q
N Q̄ > N Q̄ .
     In fact, it is possible for equilibrium entry under the “free” quota to
exceed N F , the equilibrium entry level under¡ free ¢trade. When the quota
is close to the free trade level of imports, rq N, Q̄ is decreasing in Q̄, so
  12
                    ¡ ¢
   Note that N q Q̄ is decreasing in Q̄ if the quota is close to the free trade level of
imports, but it is increasing in Q̄ if the quota is relatively restrictive.

                                          15
   ¡     ¢
rq N, Q̄ > rF (N), as depicted in Figure 4. 13 As a result, more traders
will be encouraged to enter the market. Thus, when the quota is not too
restrictive and the quota rights are given to the traders, the
                                                           ¡ ¢equilibrium   level
                                                         q           F
of entry would be higher than under free trade, i.e., N Q̄ > N .
    Since entry is greater when the quota rents are given to traders, the “free”
quota must remain binding in equilibrium, and the equilibrium supply price
must be lower
           ¡ ¡ compared
                  ¢ ¢ to the  ¡ previous
                                    ¡ ¢ ¢case when  ¡ the¢ quota licenses were
sold: P S N q Q̄ , Q̄ < P S N Q Q̄ , Q̄ = P F N F . Therefore, average
cost is also lower (average productivity
                                       ¡ is higher)
                                              ¢      than¡in the¢ previous case.
    Turning to welfare, note that W q Q̄, N , like W Q Q̄, N , is the sum of
consumer surplus, producer surplus, and license rents, less entry costs, for
any N and Q̄. We know from Lemma¡ 2 ¢that given   ¡ ¢Q̄, entry is optimal when
the quota licenses are sold. Since N q Q̄ > N Q Q̄ , it follows that given Q̄,
there is excessive entry under the “free” quota. In the free entry equilibrium,
when all quasi rents are competed away, welfare is made up solely of consumer
surplus:
                                           Z P̄
                         q
                           ¡    q
                                  ¡ ¢¢
                      W Q̄, N Q̄ =              QD (P )dP.                   (11)
                                                  P D (Q̄)


   It is clear from Equations (9) and (11) that welfare is lower with the “free”
quota. The reason is that license rents are not frittered away in excessive
entry when traders have to pay for their quota licenses, but are so frittered
away when they do not.
   Proposition 3 demonstrates that the common practice by many govern-
ments of devising rationing rules to distribute quota licenses leads to inferior
welfare outcomes compared to simply selling the licenses outright.14
  13
     In Figure 3, under free trade, total quasi rent is equal to the area of the producer
surplus triangle OAB when N = N F . When a “free” quota is imposed at N = N F , total
quasi rent is equal to the area of the producer surplus triangle plus license revenue, i.e.,
area OGF D. If the quota is not too restrictive (i.e., if the quota is close to the free trade
level of imports), OGF D must be larger than OAB because the increase in quasi rent from
the license revenue (rectangle DF GC) must exceed the decrease (triangle DF B): when
the quota is close to the free trade level of imports, the area of triangle DF B approaches
zero because its height (HB) and base (DF ) approach zero, but the area of rectangle
DF GC does not approach zero as fast since F G does not approach zero, though DF does.
  14
     Note that this is diﬀerent from the question of allowing quota licenses to be traded.
Even if trade is allowed, entry will be distorted by not selling the quota to begin with.



                                             16
    Proposition 3 has a further interesting implication: welfare is higher when
quota rents are not appropriated by the traders but accrue to some other do-
mestic agent(s). If quota rents are captured by the traders (under a “free”
quota), there will be too much entry for a given quota and consequently
lower welfare, but if quota rents are captured by some other domestic agent,
then entry is optimal, given the quota, and welfare is higher. In the previous
case, we assumed that it was the government that sold the quota licenses
and thereby captured the quota rent, but it could just as well be corrupt
customs oﬃcials that “sell” the quota licenses through bribery. Whether the
quota rents are captured by the government or by corrupt oﬃcials does not
matter for aggregate welfare, only for its distribution across domestic agents;
as long as the quota rents go to domestic agents other than the traders, ag-
gregate welfare will be higher than under a “free” quota. This implies that
society will actually be better oﬀ if the quota licenses are “sold” via bribery
and corruption than if they were given away to the traders by a benevolent
government. Thus, we have uncovered another channel through which cor-
ruption can have real eﬀects, rather than simply distributional eﬀects; in this
example, the real eﬀects are actually welfare enhancing.
    We will now compare the equilibrium eﬀects of “equivalent” trade policies,
that is, trade policies that generate the same level of imports as the quota
Q̄ with the free trade mass of traders, N F . This focuses attention on import
equivalence abstracting from entry, which is a likely starting point for policy
makers who typically lack the information necessary to predict the induced
entry eﬀects of diﬀerent trade policies.15


5      Restricted Trade: Specific Tariﬀs
Let us start again from the free trade equilibrium with a mass of N F traders,
and consider now a specific tariﬀ that will reduce imports to the level of the
quota, Q̄, as depicted in Figure 3. This is the sort of scenario that a policy
maker is likely to consider in choosing between a quota and a tariﬀ to restrict
imports by a certain amount. The specific tariﬀ is thus initially import
equivalent to the quota, and equal to the quota license price at N = N F :

                               z(N F , Q̄) = L(N F , Q̄).                             (12)
  15
    Our results generalize to policies that are equivalent given any number of traders in
the market, not necessarily the free trade number of traders. This is shown in Section 5.2.


                                            17
For notational simplicity, let us denote z(N F , Q̄) by z̄. In Figure 3, this
is equivalent to shifting the supply curve up by L(N F , Q̄), or the distance
DF . Pre-tariﬀ supply is NF (P ) and post-tariﬀ supply is NF (P − z̄) . The
post-tariﬀ supply curve has a vertical intercept at E where the distance OE
equals DF . The intersection of demand and post-tariﬀ supply determines
the quantity imported and the price paid by the consumer, P D (N, z̄):
                        ¡                ¢    ¡           ¢
                      NF P D (N, z̄) − z̄ = QD P D (N, z̄) .                           (13)
Note that P D (N, z̄) is decreasing in N and increasing in z̄. The marginal
trader receives the supply price, P S (N, z̄) = P D (N, z̄) − z̄ where P S (N, z̄)
is decreasing in both arguments.16
    Each trader now expects to receive quasi rent of:
                                             P SZ(N,z̄)

                              rz (N, z̄) =            F (c) dc.                        (14)
                                               0

   Since P S (N, z̄) is decreasing in both arguments, rz (N, z̄) is also decreas-
ing in both arguments.

Lemma 5 rz (N, z̄) lies below rQ (N, Q̄) for N < N F and above rQ (N, Q̄) for
N > NF .
                        F
Proof. At N = N      ¡ F, the  ¢ specific
                                      ¡ tariﬀ ¢ is equivalent ¡to Fthe¢ quota ¡so Fz̄ =¢
     F             S                S     F                 z              Q
L(N , Q̄), and P N , z̄ = P N , Q̄ , therefore r N , z̄ = r N , Q̄ .
As N falls below N F , the quota license price falls but the specific    ¡     ¢ tariﬀ
                                                       S               S
remains unchanged,
                 ¡       ¢so z̄ > L(N, Q̄); hence, P (N, z̄) < P N, Q̄ , and
rz (N, z̄) < rQ N, Q̄ for N < N F . By        ¡ an analogous
                                                    ¢           argument it can be
                           F    z           Q
shown that for N > N , r (N, z̄) > r N, Q̄ .
    Equilibrium entry under the specific tariﬀ, which we will denote by N z (z̄) ,
is determined by the intersection of rz (N, z̄) and fe . Note that N z (z̄) is de-
creasing in z̄. Furthermore, it follows from the same argument as Lemma 1
that the equilibrium ¡supply   ¢ price is the same as the free trade price, that is:
  S    z              F      F
P (N (z̄) , z̄) = P N .
  16
                                                         ¡         ¢       ¡              ¢
    This can be seen by writing Equation (13) as: N F P S (N, z̄) = QD P S (N, z̄) + z̄
and partially diﬀerentiating it with respect to N and z̄. For any given N, an increase in z̄
drives a bigger wedge between demand and supply, so the price of the marginal supplier
must fall.


                                             18
Proposition 4 If we start at the free trade equilibrium and impose a specific
tariﬀ that is initially import equivalent to the quota, there will be a net exit
of traders over time and the new equilibrium will be characterized by a lower
level of entry compared with the quota. Average cost will first fall and then
rise (average productivity will first rise and then fall) as traders change their
import and entry decisions in response to the tariﬀ. Imports will fall over
time as the number of traders shrinks. In the new equilibrium, average cost
(productivity) will return to its free trade level, and imports will be lower than
the quota level.

Proof. If we start at the free trade equilibrium and impose a specific tariﬀ
z̄, the impact eﬀect will be to make¡ F it ¢unprofitable
                                                       ¡ Ffor
                                                          ¢ incumbent traders
                                  S                  F
who have cost draws between P N , z̄ and P N to import. As in the
case of the quota
               ¡    when
                     ¢ traders have to pay¡ for the¢ licenses, the supply price
drops to P S N F , z̄ ,which is equal to P S N F , Q̄ . Hence average cost falls
(average productivity rises).
     Over time, there will be a net exit of traders from the market. Since quasi
rent under the specific tariﬀ is equal to that under the quota at N = N F
(from Lemma 5), using the same logic as before¡(when¢the quota licenses were
sold), it follows that quasi rent per trader, rz N F , z̄ is less than the entry
cost. Hence, there will be a net exit of traders. As N falls, the supply price
rises: in Figure 3, both the pre-tariﬀ and post-tariﬀ supply curves will steepen
but remain parallel to each other and anchored at O and E respectively.
     In the new equilibrium, the mass of traders is smaller than that   ¡ under¢
the quota: Lemma 5 implies that the intersection of fe with rz N F , z̄ ,
which ¡ determines
        ¢           the equilibrium mass of traders, N z (z̄),
                                                             ¡ must
                                                                ¢    occur
                                                                        ¡ below
                                                                           ¢
N Q̄ as depicted in Figure 4. Hence, N z (z̄) < N Q Q̄ < N q Q̄ and
   Q

final imports under the initially import equivalent tariﬀ will be less¡ than  ¢
the quota. In the new equilibrium, the supply price returns to P F N F ,
so average cost and productivity return to their free trade levels: entry will
always adjust to completely oﬀset the reduction in the supply price caused
by the tariﬀ.




                                       19
5.1     Welfare Under a Specific Tariﬀ
For any N and z̄, welfare is the sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus,
and tariﬀ revenue, less entry costs:

                                              Z   P̄                   P SZ(N,z̄)

              W z (N, z̄) =                            QD (P )dP + N            F (c) dc   (15)
                                      P D (N,z̄)                         0
                                              ¡           ¢
                                         +z̄QD P D (N, z̄) − N fe .

Lemma 6 Welfare is decreasing in z̄ for a given N, i.e., ∂W z (N, z̄) /∂ z̄ <
0. Welfare is increasing in N for a given z̄, i.e., ∂W z (N, z̄) /∂N > 0, for
N ≤ N z (z̄) ; in other words, the level of entry is sub-optimally low, given the
specific tariﬀ.

Proof. In the Appendix.
   In equilibrium (when N = N z (z̄)), all quasi rents are competed away so
welfare consists of consumer surplus plus tariﬀ revenue only:


                                     Z   P̄
                                                                  ¡                   ¢
      W z (N z (z̄) , z̄) =                       QD (P )dP + z̄QD P D (N z (z̄) , z̄)     (16)
                              P D (N z (z̄),z̄)


Lemma 7 A reduction in the specific tariﬀ always raises welfare.

Proof. In the Appendix.

5.2     Specific Tariﬀs, Quotas, and Equivalence
So far we have used the free trade equilibrium with N F traders as our starting
point for analyzing the eﬀects of “equivalent” policies. But in practice, the
starting point for policy analysis need not be the free trade equilibrium: if
there are trade policies already in place, the number of traders in the market
could be greater or less than the free trade number. To see how the diﬀerent
notions of equivalence aﬀect our results, it is useful to look at Figure 5. This
has the tariﬀ z on the vertical axis and the mass of traders N on the horizontal



                                                        20
axis. The line F F depicts combinations of z and N that are consistent with
the free trade level of imports, QF :
                                ¡        ¢
                            QD P D (N, z) = QF .                       (17)

    Since P D (N, z) is decreasing in N and increasing in z, the F F line has
to be upward sloping as depicted: an increase in z (for a given N) raises
the price paid by consumers and reduces imports while an increase in N (for
a given z) lowers the price paid by consumers and increases imports, so an
increase in z must be accompanied by an increase in N in order to keep
imports constant ¡along F ¢ F . By¡definition,
                                       ¢       F F intersects the horizontal axis
at N F , since P D N F , 0 = P F N F .

   Similarly, the upward sloping line QQ depicts combinations of z and N
that are consistent with the quota, Q̄:
                               ¡         ¢
                            QD P D (N, z) = Q̄.                      (18)

   As the quota is set below the free trade level of imports, the QQ line
must lie above and to the left
                            ¡ ¢of F F . Moreover, its intersection with the
horizontal axis occurs at N0 Q̄ , the level of entry in the absence of tariﬀs
that makes the quota just binding.
   Likewise, the upward sloping line ZZ depicts combinations of z and N
that are consistent with the free entry equilibrium output level under the
specific tariﬀ, z̄:
                              ¡            ¢
                          QD P D (N, z) = Qz (z̄)                            (19)
                    ¡                 ¢
where Qz (z̄) = QD P D (N z (z̄) , z̄) . Since we know that Qz (z̄) is less than
Q̄, the ZZ line must lie above and to the left of QQ.
    The fourth component of the diagram is the free entry line, EE. The
line EE depicts combinations of z and N such that the quasi rent per trader
exactly oﬀsets the cost of entry:

                                 rz (N, z) = fe .                           (20)

   As noted earlier, rz (N, z) is decreasing in both arguments. Hence the
EE line must slope downwards as depicted in Figure 5. Also, the EE line
must cut the horizontal axis at N = N F since that point represents the free
trade equilibrium.

                                       21
        Figure 5: Quotas Versus Specific Tariﬀs



                               Z



                                      Wz
    6
                                                  Q
z
        E
                                         A
             C                                        F


                          B
                           @
                            @
    Z                         @
                               @
                                @
                                 @
                                  @        -
            N zN0         N Q       F
                                   N@        N
0                                     @
                                       @
                                        @
                                         @
                                          @E
    Q



              F

                          22
   The intersection of the QQ line and the EE line gives the free entry
equilibrium with a quota of Q̄ (when the quota licenses are sold). This
occurs at point B on the line EE, where z and N are such that the free
entry condition is met and imports
                             ¡   ¡ are
                                    ¢ equal
                                        ¢ to Q̄ . At point B, z is exactly
equal to the license price L N Q Q̄ , Q̄ due¡ ¢to tariﬀQ ¡quota
                                                            ¢ equivalence.
Since the EE line is downward sloping, N0 Q̄ < N Q̄ < N F as was
shown earlier.

Proposition 5 Equilibrium entry under the quota (when licenses are sold)
is higher than under
                   ¡ a¢ specific tariﬀ that is initially import equivalent
                                                                   ¡ ¢     to the
                 Q                                               Q
quota at N > N Q̄ . If equivalence is defined at N < N Q̄ , then the
opposite holds.

Proof. We can use Figure 5 to depict the import equivalent specific tariﬀ at
any initial N. For example, suppose we start at N = N F . From N F on the
horizontal axis, go up to the QQ curve to point A: the vertical distance gives
the level of z needed to get imports of Q̄. This is what we had denoted by
z̄ in the previous subsection. Set the specific tariﬀ at this level and find the
number of traders that enter using the EE line: point C on the EE line will
give the equilibrium ¡ entry,
                        ¢     N z (z̄) , with this tariﬀ. It is clear from Figure 5
that N (z̄) < N Q̄ < N F .17
        z         Q

     To generalize, suppose that we start at some arbitrary N = Ñ. Following
the same procedure as above, we can determine the specific tariﬀ equivalent
to the quota
        ³      ´ by going up to the QQ line in Figure 5: the vertical distance
              Q̄
gives z Ñ , Q̄ . The free entry level of traders at this tariﬀ–call it Ñ z –is
                                                        ³       ´             ¡ ¢
obtained by going across to the EE line at z = z Ñ, Q̄ . If Ñ > N Q Q̄ ,
                 ¡ ¢
then Ñ z < N Q Q̄ and equilibrium welfare under the tariﬀ¡ is higher     ¡ ¢ than
                                                                               ¢
when equivalence is defined at N = N , but lower than W N Q̄ , Q̄ .18
                                           F                      Q     Q
             ¡ ¢                   ¡ ¢
If Ñ < N Q Q̄ , then Ñ z > N Q Q̄ and equilibrium welfare under the tariﬀ
                      ¡   ¡ ¢ ¢
is higher than W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ .19 Basically, the smaller is Ñ, the smaller
will be the import equivalent specific tariﬀ and the closer the equilibrium
  17
               ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢
     Since N q Q̄ > N Q Q̄ , we can say that entry under the specific tariﬀ is lower
than entry under the (initially) import-equivalent quota, no matter how the licenses are
distributed.                                             ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢
  18
     Equilibrium ¡welfare
                    ¢     under the quota
                                       ¡  remains at W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ as¡ before.
                                          ¢                                ¢
  19
     If Ñ = N Q Q̄ , then Ñ z = N Q Q̄ , i.e. if we start start at N Q Q̄ and impose
                                                                              ¡ ¢
an import equivalent specific tariﬀ, there wil be no change in N . If Ñ = N0 Q̄ , then

                                          23
level of entry will be to the free trade equilibrium, N F , so that there is less of
a distortion under the specific tariﬀ than under the quota when the licenses
are sold.
    This result argues for caution when tariﬀying quotas as a means to lib-
eralize trade. A common strategy to convert quotas to tariﬀs is for the
government to auction the quota rights and use the realized license prices
as guides to setting tariﬀs. Proposition 5 shows that in computing the tar-
iﬀ¡equivalent
        ¡ ¢ ¢of a quota, one has to make sure that z is exactly equal to
      Q
L N Q̄ , Q̄ ; a tariﬀ equivalent calculated at any other level of N will not
be equivalent and hence may not have the desired result. In addition, the al-
location of quota licenses needs to be considered in defining the “equivalent”
specific tariﬀ. Recall that both entry and the implicit license price are higher
when the quota licenses are given to the traders than when they are sold. In
Figure 5, the “free” quota equilibrium is on the QQ line, northeast of point
B (and possibly
              ¡ ¢ northeast of point ¡A).¢ It is easy to see that tariﬀying the
quota at N q Q̄ rather than at N Q Q̄ would lead to a net exit of traders.

Proposition 6 Equilibrium welfare under the quota (when licenses are sold)
is higher than under
                   ¡ a¢ specific tariﬀ that is initially import equivalent
                                                                   ¡ ¢     to the
                 Q                                               Q
quota at N > N Q̄ . If equivalence is defined at N < N Q̄ , then the
opposite holds.

Proof.
   Q
      ¡ ¢ Since welfare is maximized with respect to N for a given Q̄ at N =
N ¡Q̄ (Lemma
           ¡ ¢ ¢ 2), we know that the iso-welfare contour corresponding to
    Q    Q
W N Q̄ , Q̄ must be tangent to the QQ¡ line ¡at point  ¢ ¢ B. This¡ is depicted
                                                                          ¢
in Figure 5. Additionally, we know that W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ < W F N F (since
welfare is increasing in¡Q̄, from
                               ¡ ¢Lemma
                                     ¢    3). Therefore, the iso-welfare contour
corresponding to W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ must lie outside that corresponding to
free trade, where welfare
                        ¡   is maximized at point N F on the horizontal axis.
                            ¢
     If we start at N Q Q̄ and impose an import equivalent   ¡     specific
                                                                   ¡ ¢ ¢tariﬀ,
there will be no change in N, and welfare will stay at W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ . But
if equivalence is defined at N = N F , then equilibrium welfare with the specific
tariﬀ (at point C) is equal to W z (N z (z̄) , z̄). Note that z̄ (represented by
the height¡ of point
                ¡ ¢ C)¢ is greater than the equilibrium license price underZthe
              Q
quota, L N Q̄¡ ,¢Q̄ (represented by the height of point B). Since N (z̄)
is less than N Q Q̄ , it follows that the quota that is import-equivalent to
                                    ¡ ¢
Ñ z = N F : if we start start at N0 Q̄ , the import equivalent specific tariﬀ will be zero. If
         ¡ ¢
Ñ < N0 Q̄ , then the import equivalent specific tariﬀ becomes a subsidy, and Ñ z > N F .

                                              24
z̄ at N = N z (z̄) has to be smaller than Q̄. From Lemma 3, we know
that¡welfare
          ¡  ¢ is lower
                   ¢    the¡ smaller
                               ¢     the quota. Therefore: W z (N z (z̄) , z̄) <
W Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄ < W F N F .
    By an analogous argument, it can be shown that equilibrium welfare
under the specific tariﬀ is higher than under the equivalent¡ ¢ quota    (when
                                                          Q       20
licenses are sold) when equivalence is defined at N < N Q̄ .
    How does equilibrium welfare under the “free” quota compare with wel-
fare under the specific tariﬀ? In general we cannot say, since in Figure 5, the
iso-welfare contour that goes through the “free” quota equilibrium which lies
to the right of B along QQ, can be above or below W z (N z (z̄) , z̄) .


6       Restricted Trade: Ad Valorem Tariﬀs
Now let us once again return to the free trade equilibrium and impose an ad
valorem
 ¡        ¢tariﬀ that is import equivalent to the quota Q̄. The tariﬀ is set at
t N F , Q̄ so that imports are equal to Q̄ with N = N F , hence:

                                         F  P D (Q̄)
                          1 + t(N , Q̄) = S F         .                    (21)
                                          P (N , Q̄)
                                     ¡      ¢
For notational simplicity, denote t N F , Q̄ by t̄.
    Since we assume a single price for the good in the domestic market, and
the ad valorem tariﬀ is levied on the domestic market price, all traders will
pay the same tariﬀ amount in dollar terms (as with the specific tariﬀ earlier).
Thus, the ad valorem tariﬀ equals the import equivalent specific tariﬀ at
N = N F in nominal terms. However, as the ad valorem rate is fixed, the
total payment depends on the supply price in the market, which of course,
depends on the mass of traders entering the market–as more traders enter,
the supply price drops and as a result, the dollar amount of the tariﬀ also
drops. Thus, an ad valorem tariﬀ is like a specific tariﬀ that declines with N.
More formally, for any N, given t̄, pre-tariﬀ supply is NF (P ) and post-tariﬀ
supply is NF (P/ (1 + t̄)). Hence, the equilibrium demand price is given by
P D (N, t̄) which solves:
                          µ D         ¶
                            P (N, t̄)         ¡          ¢
                     NF                 = QD P D (N, t̄) .                 (22)
                              1 + t̄
 20
      But free trade welfare is still the highest.


                                               25
    Note that P D (N, t̄) is decreasing in N and increasing in t̄. The supply
price of the marginal trader is P S (N, t̄) = P D (N, t̄) / (1 + t̄) ; P S (N, t̄) is de-
creasing in both arguments.21 Each trader pays a tariﬀ amount of t̄P S (N, t̄).
Denote this by T (N, t̄) . As N rises, P S (N, t̄) falls, so T (N, t̄) falls. In this
way, the ad valorem tariﬀ is like a specific tariﬀ that falls as N rises.
    Quasi rent per trader under the ad valorem tariﬀ is equal to:
                                             PS
                                              Z(N,t̄)
                              rt (N, t̄) =          F (c) dc.                             (23)
                                               0

       Since P S (N, t̄) is decreasing in both arguments, so is rt (N, t̄).

Lemma 8 rt (N, t̄) lies below rz (N, z̄) for N < N F and above rz (N, z̄) for
N > NF .

Proof. At N = N F , the ad   ¡ valorem
                                     ¢     tariﬀ is equivalent,
                                                              ¡ inF nominal
                                                                      ¢      terms,
                                                                               ¡ F to¢
                                  F                         S                S
the specific tariﬀ, i.e., T N , t̄ = z̄. Therefore, P N , t̄ = P N , z̄
and as a result, rt (N F , t̄) = rz (N F , z̄). When N increases beyond N F ,
T (N, t̄) falls but z̄ remains fixed, so T (N, t̄) < z̄, hence P S (N, t̄) > P S (N, z̄)
and rt (N F , t̄) > rz (N F , z̄). Similarly, when N < N F , T (N, t̄) > z̄ so
P S (N, t̄) < P S (N, z̄) and rt (N, t̄) < rz (N, z̄).
    The quasi rent function under the ad valorem tariﬀ, rt (N, t̄), is depicted
in Figure 4 by the dashed curve. Equilibrium entry under the ad valorem
tariﬀ, which we will denote by N t (t̄) , is determined by the intersection of
rt (N, t̄) and fe . Note that N t (t̄) is decreasing in t̄. Furthermore, it follows
from the same argument as Lemma 1 that the equilibrium       ¡ F ¢ supply price is
                                         S     t           F
the same as the free trade price: P (N (t̄) , t̄) = P N .

Proposition 7 If we start at the free trade equilibrium and impose an ad
valorem tariﬀ that is initially import equivalent to the quota Q̄ and the specific
tariﬀ z̄, there will be a net exit of traders over time and the new equilibrium
will be characterized by a lower level of entry compared with the specific tariﬀ.
Average cost will first fall and then rise (average productivity will first rise
and then fall) as traders change their import and entry decisions in response
to the tariﬀ. Imports will fall over time as the number of traders shrinks. In
  21
                                                                           ¡          ¢
  ¡This can be ¢seen by writing Equation (22) as:                      N F P S (N, t̄)      =
QD (1 + t̄) P S (N, t̄) and partially diﬀerentiating it with respect to N and t̄.


                                             26
the new equilibrium, average cost (productivity) will return to its free trade
level, but the nominal tariﬀ will be higher than z̄ and imports will be less than
what they were under the specific tariﬀ.

Proof. If we start at the free trade equilibrium and impose an ad valorem
tariﬀ t̄, the impact eﬀect will be to¡make ¢it unprofitable
                                                      ¡ ¢for incumbent traders
who have cost draws between P S N F , t̄ and P F N F¡ to import.¢      As in the
                                                         S   F
case of¡the specific
                ¢    tariﬀ, the supply price drops to P N , t̄ ,which is equal
to P S N F , z̄ . Hence average cost falls (average productivity rises).
    Over time, there will be a net exit of traders from the market, exactly
with the specific tariﬀ. However, as N falls, the supply price rises and the
nominal tariﬀ, T (N, t̄), rises.
    In the new equilibrium, the mass of traders is smaller than that under
the specific tariﬀ: Lemma 8 implies that the intersection of fe with rt (N, t̄),
which determines the equilibrium mass of traders, N t (t̄), must ¡ ¢occur qbelow
                                                                            ¡ ¢
  z                                          t         z       Q
N (z̄) as depicted in Figure 4. Hence, N (t̄) < N (z̄) < N Q̄ < N Q̄ .
As in the case of the specific tariﬀ, entry could even drop to zero if t̄ is
high enough (reflecting a very¡ Frestrictive
                                   ¢         quota). In the new equilibrium, the
                            F
supply price returns to P N , so average cost and productivity return to
their free trade levels. However, the nominal tariﬀ is greater than z̄ so the
demand price (which is the supply price plus the nominal tariﬀ) is higher
than it was under the specific tariﬀ, and consequently, equilibrium imports
are lower than they were under the specific tariﬀ.
    For any N and t̄, welfare is the sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus,
and tariﬀ revenue, less entry costs:

                                 Z   P̄                    PS
                                                            Z(N,t̄)
              W t (N, t̄) =                QD (P )dP + N          F (c) dc   (24)
                              P D (N,t̄)                     0
                                           ¡           ¢
                              +T (N, t̄) QD P D (N, t̄) − Nfe .

Lemma 9 ∂W t (N, t̄) /∂t > 0 at N = N t (t̄) . In other words, the ad valorem
tariﬀ results in a level of entry that is sub-optimally low, given the tariﬀ rate.

Proof. In the Appendix.
   In equilibrium (when N = N t (t̄)), all quasi rents are competed away so
welfare consists of consumer surplus plus tariﬀ revenue only:


                                             27
                                 Z   P̄
       ¡             ¢                                     ¡             ¢  ¡   ¡             ¢¢
    W t N t (t̄) , t̄ =                       QD (P )dP + T N t (t̄) , t̄ QD P D N t (t̄) , t̄
                          P D (N t (t̄),t̄)
                                                                                              (25)

Proposition 8 Equilibrium welfare under the ad valorem tariﬀ is lower than
under a specific tariﬀ that is initially import equivalent at N = N F .

Proof. From Lemma 6, welfare under a specific tariﬀ is decreasing in z̄ and
increasing in N at N ≤ N z (z̄). Since the equilibrium ad valorem tariﬀ has
the same eﬀect as a specific tariﬀ that is larger than z̄ with a smaller mass of
traders (N < N z (z̄)), it follows that free entry welfare under the ad valorem
tariﬀ must be smaller than free entry welfare under the specific tariﬀ. Hence:
W t (N t (t̄) , t̄) < W z (N z (z̄) , z̄). This can be seen in Figure 5 where points
to the northwest of point C (representing combinations of z and N where
z > z̄ and N < N z (z̄)) lie outside the iso-welfare contour corresponding to
the equilibrium under the specific tariﬀ, z̄.


7      Conclusion
The eﬀects of trade policy can be very sensitive to the choice of instruments
once we allow for the role of traders. This is true even in the absence of imper-
fect competition and product diﬀerentiation. When imports are facilitated
by competitive traders who are identical ex ante but heterogeneous ex post,
the entry and welfare eﬀects of tariﬀs and quotas diﬀer considerably: specific
tariﬀs tend to reduce entry and welfare more than import equivalent quotas,
and ad valorem tariﬀs reduce entry and welfare even further. The intuition
behind our results is simple. Although tariﬀs and quotas are equivalent given
entry, their eﬀects on entry are profoundly diﬀerent. Trade restrictions by
and large discourage entry and thereby reduce the supply of imports. But
quotas tend to discourage entry less than tariﬀs do. The reason is that as
traders leave the market in response to the quota, import supply shrinks–
this reduces the value of a quota license and hence the restrictiveness of the
quota. By contrast, the exit of traders does not change the restrictiveness of
a given specific tariﬀ.


                                                       28
    Our results fly in the face of the conventional preference for tariﬀs over
quotas. However, the comparison is more nuanced when we consider how
the quota is implemented. In most cases, quota licenses are not sold by the
government–auction quotas are relatively rare–but given to the traders
free of charge on the basis of certain criteria, such as historical import per-
formance, or the level of investment, or even first-come-first-served. Welfare
under such a “free” quota may well be lower than welfare under an initially
import equivalent tariﬀ, even though entry is greater. In fact, the most
common criticism of quotas is their potential for encouraging rent-seeking
behavior. “Free” quota allocation schemes give traders the incentive to ex-
pend real resources on things like opening an oﬃce in the capital city in order
to be close to the license administrator–such expenditures provide no utility
to either party and thus represent pure waste. If these expenditures are large,
then welfare under a “free” quota will be even lower than our model suggests,
and more likely to fall below that associated with an initially import equiv-
alent tariﬀ. In sum, it is the method of quota allocation that matters–an
auction quota is preferable to an (initially) import equivalent tariﬀ, but a
“free” quota, which tends to promote wasteful rent-seeking behavior, need
not be preferable to a tariﬀ.
    A widely promoted tenet of trade policy reform is to replace quotas with
“equivalent” tariﬀs which can then be lowered in a transparent manner. (See,
for example, Thomas, Nash, and associates (1991) and WTO (2005).) But
finding the correct “equivalent” tariﬀ (whether specific or ad valorem) for
a given quota depends crucially on the details of the quota arrangement in
place. If the quota licenses are given rather than sold to traders, as is often
the case, then a large number of traders will enter the market and the value
of a quota license will be high in equilibrium. Tariﬀying such a “free” quota
will result in an excessively high tariﬀ that will shrink the import market
excessively and could lead to a reduction in welfare. The results are worse if
the conversion is to an ad valorem tariﬀ instead of a specific tariﬀ.22
    Our model also provides an alternative insight into the implications of
corruption. After all, trade policy in the form of a tariﬀ or quota is only one
way in which traders can be “penalized” by giving up part of what their ef-
forts obtain. Corruption in the domestic economy could transfer quasi rents
and/or raise traders’ costs in a very similar manner. In our model, welfare
under a quota is actually higher, and entry lower, when quota rents are not
 22
      Moschini (1991) discusses other pitfalls in tariﬃcation.


                                              29
appropriated by the traders but by some other domestic agent, including,
possibly, corrupt government agents (assuming, of course, that the welfare
of this group is also counted as part of social welfare). A quota lowers so-
cial welfare relative to free trade due to the output distortion it introduces.
When the quota licenses are sold, entry will adjust to its welfare-maximizing
level under the quota but when quota licenses are given to the traders, there
is an entry distortion on top of the output distortion. For this reason, cor-
ruption that transfers license rents from the traders to other domestic agents
may improve social welfare. On the other hand, if we interpret corruption
as allowing those with power to extract a fixed fee from all traders, then
corruption is equivalent to a specific tax, with similar eﬀects.




                                      30
                                Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1.
                ¯                                  F (N)
                                                  PZ
            F   ¯
         dW (N) ¯             ¡        ¢
                ¯      = −QD P F (N) P F 0 (N) +       F (c) dc
           dN    N=N F
                                                   0
                               ¡ F      ¢ F0
                         +NF P (N) P (N) − fe
                         £    ¡        ¢        ¡     ¢¤
                       = NF P F (N) − QD P F (N) P F 0 (N)
                           ⎡ F                  ⎤
                             PZ (N)
                           ⎢                    ⎥
                         +⎣       F (c) dc − fe ⎦
                                      0

                           = 0.
The first equality above comes diﬀerentiating; the second from rearranging
terms; and the third from (i) market clearing–demand equals supply at price
P F (N F ) so that the first square bracketed term is zero, and (ii) the free entry
condition–at N = N F , the expected level of profits exactly covers fixed cost
so that the second square bracketed term is zero.
Proof of Lemma 2. Diﬀerentiating Equation (8) with respect to N for a
given Q̄:
                               P s (N,Q̄)                             ¡     ¢
             ¯                    Z
 ∂W (N, Q̄) ¯¯
     Q                                                 ¡ s¡    ¢¢ ∂P s N, Q̄
             ¯              =          F (c) dc + NF P N, Q̄
   ∂N            N=N Q (Q̄)                                           ∂N
                                0
                                        ¡      ¢
                                  ∂P s N, Q̄
                              −Q̄                − fe
                                   ¡   ∂N¢
                              ∂P s N, Q̄ £         ¡ ¡      ¢¢   ¤
                            =                 NF P s N, Q̄ − Q̄
                               ⎡ ∂N                       ⎤
                                  P s (N,Q̄)
                                     Z
                               ⎢                          ⎥
                               ⎢
                              +⎣            F (c) dc − fe ⎥
                                                          ⎦
                                       0

                           = 0.
The first equality comes from diﬀerentiation; the second from¡ rearranging
                                                                  ¡ ¢ ¢
terms; and the third from (i) market clearing–supply at P s N Q Q̄ , Q̄

                                            31
equals the quota level, so that the first square-bracketed
                                              ¡ ¢             term is zero, and
                                            Q
(ii) the free entry condition–at N = N Q̄ , the expected level of profits
exactly covers fixed cost so that the second square bracketed term is zero.
Proof of Lemma 3. Diﬀerentiating Equation (9) with respect to Q̄ :
               ¡     ¡ ¢ ¢
          dW Q N Q Q̄ , Q̄
                               = −QD (P D (Q̄))P D0 (Q̄)
                  dQ̄
                                     £     ¡ ¢        ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢¤
                                   + P D Q̄ − P S N Q Q̄ , Q̄
                                                          ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢
                                       D0
                                          ¡ ¢         dP S N Q Q̄ , Q̄
                                   +P      Q̄ Q̄ − Q̄
                                                             dQ̄
                                   £ D¡ ¢         S
                                                    ¡ Q ¡ ¢ ¢¤
                               = P Q̄ − P N Q̄ , Q̄
                                              £                 ¤
                                   +P D0 (Q̄) Q̄ − QD (P D (Q̄))
                                             ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢
                                       dP S N Q Q̄ , Q̄
                                   −Q̄
                                                dQ̄
                                       ¡ ¢         ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢
                               = P Q̄ − P S N Q Q̄ , Q̄
                                    D

                               > 0
where the first equality comes from total diﬀerentiation; the second from
rearranging terms; and the third from (i) market clearing–demand at P D (Q̄)
equals the quota level, so that the second square-bracketed term is zero, and
(ii) Lemma 1. The inequality follows from the result that the license price is
positive in equilibrium (Proposition 2).
Proof of Lemma 4. The first result in the lemma follows from diﬀerenti-
ating Equation (10) with respect to N for a given Q̄:
          ¡     ¢                          ¡     ¢ µ ¶          ¡     ¢
      ∂rq N, Q̄          ¡ S¡       ¢¢ ∂P S N, Q̄       Q̄ ∂P S N, Q̄
                    = F P N, Q̄                    −
          ∂N                               ∂N           N       ∂N
                                                µ ¶
                         £    ¡ ¢        ¡    ¢¤ Q̄
                       − P D Q̄ − P S N, Q̄
                                                   N2
                            ¡     ¢ ∙                     ¸
                       ∂P S N, Q̄       ¡ S¡      ¢¢ Q̄
                    =                 F P N, Q̄ −
                            ∂N                         N
                                                µ ¶
                         £    ¡ ¢        ¡    ¢¤ Q̄
                       − P D Q̄ − P S N, Q̄
                                                   N2
                                                µ ¶
                         £    ¡ ¢        ¡    ¢¤ Q̄
                    = − P D Q̄ − P S N, Q̄
                                                   N2
                    < 0

                                      32
where the first equality comes from total diﬀerentiation; the second          ¡ from¢
                                                                            S
rearranging terms; and the third from market clearing–supply at P N, Q̄
equals the quota level, so that the first square-bracketed term is zero.
   The second result in the lemma follows from diﬀerentiating Equation (10)
with respect to Q̄ for a given N:
         ¡     ¢                            ¡       ¢
     ∂rq N, Q̄           ¡ S¡        ¢¢ ∂P S N, Q̄
                   = F P N, Q̄
         ∂ Q̄                               ∂ Q̄
                         µ ¶"                       ¡      ¢#
                            Q̄         ¡  ¢   ∂P  S
                                                      N, Q̄
                       +          P D0 Q̄ −
                            N                       ∂ Q̄
                                                    µ ¶
                         £      ¡ ¢       ¡      ¢¤ 1
                       + P D Q̄ − P S N, Q̄
                                                       N
                             ¡      ¢∙                        ¸
                           S
                       ∂P N, Q̄          ¡ S¡        ¢¢ Q̄
                   =                  F P N, Q̄ −
                             ∂ Q̄                          N
                                                    µ ¶ µ ¶
                         £ D¡ ¢           ¡      ¢¤    1         Q̄       ¡ ¢
                       + P Q̄ − P S N, Q̄                   +         P D0 Q̄
                                                       N         N
                                                 µ ¶ µ ¶
                       £     ¡ ¢        ¡    ¢¤ 1             Q̄        ¡ ¢
                   = P D Q̄ − P S N, Q̄                  +          P D0 Q̄
                                                    N         N

where the first equality comes from total diﬀerentiation; the second   ¡ from¢
                                                                     S
rearranging terms; and the third from market clearing–supply at P N, Q̄
equals the quota¡ ¢level, so that
                              £ Dthe
                                  ¡ ¢first square-bracketed
                                             ¡    ¢¤        term is zero. We
             D0                            S
know that P      Q̄ < 0 and P Q̄ − P N, Q̄ ≥ 0. When Q̄ is at (close
to) the free
        ¡ trade
              ¢ level of imports, the license price will be (close to) zero,
and ∂rq N, Q̄ /∂ Q̄ < 0.
Proof of Lemma 6. The first result in the lemma follows from diﬀerenti-




                                         33
ating Equation (15) with respect to z̄ for a given N:

 ∂W z (N, z̄)                     ∂P D (N, z̄)            ¡         ¢ ∂P S (N, z̄)
              = −QD (P D (N, z̄))                   + NF P S (N, z̄)
    ∂ z̄                               ∂ z̄                               ∂ z̄
                       ¡           ¢      D
                                     ∂P (N, z̄)
                +z̄QD0 P D (N, z̄)                    + QD (P D (N, z̄))
                µ D                ¶        ∂ z̄
                  ∂P (N, z̄)         £       ¡           ¢                    ¤
              =              − 1 NF P S (N, z̄) − QD (P D (N, z̄))
                      ∂ z̄
                       ¡           ¢ ∂P D (N, z̄)
                +z̄QD0 P D (N, z̄)
                                            ∂ z̄
                     ¡           ¢ ∂P  D
                                          (N,    z̄)
              = z̄QD0 P D (N, z̄)
                                        ∂ z̄
              < 0

where the first equality comes from diﬀerentiation; the second from rearrang-
¡ing terms, using ¢the fact that P S (N, z̄) = P D (N, z̄) − z̄ so ∂P S (N, z̄) /∂ z̄ =
  ∂P D (N, z̄) /∂ z̄ − 1; and the third from market clearing (Equation (13)
so that
     ¡ the square-bracketed
                  ¢               term is zero. The inequality follows from
QD0 P D (N, z̄) < 0 and ∂P D (N, z̄) /∂ z̄ > 0.
     The second result in the lemma follows from diﬀerentiating Equation (15)




                                          34
with respect to N for a given z̄:
                                                            P SZ(N,z̄)
   ∂W z (N, z̄)                     ∂P D (N, z̄)
                = −QD (P D (N, z̄))              +                   F (c) dc
      ∂N                               ∂N
                                                                0
                           ¡            ¢ ∂P (N, z̄)
                                                S
                    +NF P S (N, z̄)
                                             ∂N
                             ¡            ¢ ∂P D (N, z̄)
                    +z̄QD0 P D (N, z̄)                   − fe
                                                ∂N
                    ∂P D (N, z̄) £       ¡         ¢                  ¤
                  =                 N F P S (N, z̄) − QD (P D (N, z̄))
                      ⎡ ∂N                     ⎤
                        P SZ(N,z̄)
                      ⎢                        ⎥
                    +⎣           F (c) dc − fe ⎦
                               0

                             ¡          ¢ ∂P D (N, z̄)
                    +z̄QD0 P D (N, z̄)
                    ⎡ S                     ⎤ ∂N
                      P Z(N,z̄)
                    ⎢                       ⎥        ¡           ¢ ∂P D (N, z̄)
                  = ⎣         F (c) dc − fe ⎦ + z̄QD0 P D (N, z̄)               .
                                                                      ∂N
                           0

The first equality comes from diﬀerentiation; the second from rearranging
terms, using the fact that ∂P S (N, z̄) /∂N = ∂P D (N, z̄) /∂N; and the third
from market clearing (Equation (13).
    At N = N z (z̄) , the free entry condition ensures that the expected level
                                              P S (N z
                                                   Z (z̄),z̄)
of profits exactly covers fixed cost so that                F (c) dc − fe = 0. Thus
                                                       0
we are left with:
                        ¯
          ∂W z (N, z̄) ¯¯                D0
                                            ¡ D            ¢ ∂P D (N, z̄)
                        ¯           = z̄Q P (N, z̄)                         >0
              ∂N         N=N z (z̄)                                ∂N
         ¡            ¢
since QD0 P D (N, z̄) < 0 and ∂P D (N, z̄) /∂N < 0.
                                                            P SZ(N,z̄)

    At N < N z (z̄) , P S (N, z̄) > P S (N z (z̄) , z̄) so           F (c) dc − fe > 0 and
                                                            0
∂W z (N, z̄)/∂N > 0.

                                           35
Proof of Lemma 7. Diﬀerentiating Equation (16) with respect to z̄ :

         dW z (N z (z̄) , z̄)                              dP D (N z (z̄) , z̄)
                              = −QD (P D (N z (z̄) , z̄))
               dz̄                   ¡ D z                ¢       dz̄
                                   D
                                +Q P (N (z̄) , z̄)
                                       ¡                    ¢ dP D (N z (z̄) , z̄)
                                +z̄QD0 P D (N z (z̄) , z̄)
                                                                      dz̄
                                     ¡                   ¢     D    z
                                                            dP (N (z̄) , z̄)
                              = z̄QD0 P D (N z (z̄) , z̄)
                                                                   dz̄
                              < 0

where the first equality comes from total diﬀerentiation and the second from
the fact that P D (N z (z̄) , z̄) = P S (N z (z̄) , z̄) + z̄ and dP S (N
                                                                       ¡
                                                                         z
                                                                           (z̄) , z̄)/dz̄ =¢0,
so dP D (N z (z̄) , z̄)/dz̄ = 1. The inequality follows from QD0 P D (N z (z̄) , z̄) <
0.
Proof of Lemma 9. Diﬀerentiating Equation (24) with respect to N for
a given t̄ :

                  ¯                                                   PS
                                                                       Z(N,t̄)
    ∂W t (N, t̄) ¯¯               D    D          ∂P D (N, t̄)
                  ¯           = −Q  (P   (N, t̄))              +             F (c) dc
      ∂N           N=N t (t̄)                        ∂N
                                                                        0
                                       ¡          ¢ ∂P S (N, t̄)
                               +NF P S (N, t̄)
                                                       ∂N
                                       ¡           ¢ ∂P S
                                                          (N, t̄)
                               +t̄QD P D (N, t̄)
                                                        ∂N
                                                  ¡         ¢ ∂P D (N, t̄)
                               +t̄P S (N, t̄)QD0 P D (N, t̄)               − fe
                                                                  ∂N
                               ∂P S (N, t̄) £      ¡         ¢                  ¤
                             =                NF P S (N, t̄) − QD (P D (N, t̄))
                                 ⎡∂NS                     ⎤
                                    P Z(N,t̄)
                                 ⎢                        ⎥
                               +⎣           F (c) dc − fe ⎦
                                         0

                                                 ¡           ¢ ∂P D (N, t̄)
                               +t̄P S (N, t̄)QD0 P D (N, t̄)
                                                                  ∂N
                                               ¡           ¢    D
                                                             ∂P (N, t̄)
                             = t̄P S (N, t̄)QD0 P D (N, t̄)
                                                                ∂N
                             > 0

                                             36
where the first equality comes from total diﬀerentiation, using the fact that
T (N, t̄) = t̄P S (N, t̄); the second from rearranging terms, using the fact that
P D (N, t̄) = (1 + t̄) P S (N, t̄); and the third from (i) market clearing (Equation
(22) so that the first square-bracketed term is zero, and (ii) the free entry
condition (Equation (23) so that¡ the second      ¢ square-bracketed    term is zero.
                                     D0   D                     D
The inequality follows from Q P (N, t̄) < 0 and ∂P (N, t̄)/∂N < 0.



References
 [1] Baldwin, Richard E. and Rikard Forslid, 2006, “Trade Liberalization
     with Heterogenous Traders,” NBER Working Paper 12192.

 [2] Bhagwati, Jagdish N., 1965, “On the Equivalence of Tariﬀs and Quotas,”
     in R.E. Baldwin (ed), Trade, Growth and the Balance of Payments:
     Essays in Honor of Gottfried Haberler, Chicago: 53-67.

 [3] Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1977, “Monopolistic Compe-
     tition and Optimum Product Diversity,” American Economic Review,
     Vol. 67(3): 297—308.

 [4] Jørgensen, Jan Guldager and Philipp J. H. Schröder, 2005, “Welfare-
     Ranking Ad Valorem and Specific Tariﬀs under Monopolistic Competi-
     tion,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 38(1): 228—241.

 [5] Krishna, Kala, 1990, “Export Restraints With Imperfect Competition:
     A Selective Survey” NBER Working Paper 3244.

 [6] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Michael D. Whinston, 1986, “Free Entry and
     Social Eﬃciency,” The Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 17(1): 48—58.

 [7] McCulloch, Rachel, 1973, “When Are a Tariﬀ and a Quota Equivalent?”
     Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 6(4): 503—11.

 [8] Melitz, Marc J., 2003, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Realloca-
     tions and Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, Vol. 71(6):
     1695—1725.

 [9] Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, 2005, “Market Size,
     Trade, and Productivity,” NBER Working Paper No. 11393.

                                         37
[10] Moschini, Giancarlo, 1991, “Economic Issues in Tariﬃcation,” Agricul-
     tural Economics, Vol. 5(2): 101—120.

[11] Timberg, Craig, 2006, “From Competitors to Trading Partners,” The
     Washington Post, December 3.

[12] Thomas, Vinod, John Nash, and associates, 1991, Best Practices in
     Trade Policy Reform, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

[13] World Trade Organization, 2005, Understanding the WTO, Geneva: The
     World Trade Organization.




                                   38
