                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PRODUCT CREATION AND DESTRUCTION:
                            EVIDENCE AND PRICE IMPLICATIONS

                                           Christian Broda
                                          David E. Weinstein

                                         Working Paper 13041
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13041


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




The authors wish to thank the NSF (grant #0214378) and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for
providing critical financial support for this project. We would like to thank the Director of Research
at the FRBNY, Joseph Tracy, for his early support of this project. We would also like to thank ACNielsen's
vice-president of Pricing Research Frank Piotrowski, Ivan Rocabado, and Maura Elhbretch for their
careful explanation of the data, and Olivier Blanchard, Jeff Campbell and Steve Davis for very useful
comments. Nonetheless, the views expressed here, do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve System,
and all errors remain our own. Alexis Antoniades provided us with outstanding research assistance.
In addition, we would like to thank the Global Financial Markets Initiative at the University of Chicago
GSB for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price Implications
Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13041
April 2007
JEL No. E21,E31,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper describes the extent and cyclicality of product creation and destruction in a large sector
of the U.S. economy and quantifies its implications for the measurement of consumer prices. We find
four times more entry and exit in product markets than is typically found in labor markets because
most product turnover happens within the boundaries of the firm. Net product creation is strongly
pro-cyclical, but contrary to the behavior of labor flows, it is primarily driven by creation rather than
destruction. High rates of innovation are also accompanied by substantial price volatility of products.
These facts suggest that the CPI deviates from a true cost-of-living index in three important dimensions.
The quality bias that arises as new goods replace outdated ones causes the CPI to overstate inflation
by 0.8 percent per year; the cyclicality of the bias implies that business cycles are more volatile than
indicated by official statistics; and finally, sampling error is sufficiently large that over the last 10
years policymakers could not statistically distinguish whether quarterly inflation was accelerating
or decelerating 65 percent of the time.

Christian Broda
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
cbroda@chicagogsb.edu

David E. Weinstein
Columbia University, Department of Economics
420 W. 118th Street
MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dew35@columbia.edu
                                                  I. Introduction
         Over the last twenty years, economists have dramatically improved our theoretical
understanding of how product innovation influences major aspects of macroeconomic
performance. Not only has research explored the potential role that product creation and
destruction has for explaining business cycle fluctuations (e.g., Shleifer (1986), Caballero and
Hammour (1994) and Ghironi and Melitz (2005) among others) but economists have also
examined the key role played by new and better products for long-run growth (e.g., Romer
(1987), Grossman and Helpman (1991), Aghion and Howitt (1992) and Klette and Kortum
(2004) among others). Despite the vast theoretical implications of product creation and
destruction, the empirical analysis on the aggregate behavior of product turnover lags far behind
its theoretical counterpart.1 In this paper, we document the nature, extent and cyclicality of
product entry and exit in the U.S. with special attention to the implications that it has for the
measurement of prices. In particular, we quantify the biases that arise in “fixed-good” price
indexes like the CPI because they largely ignore the changes in overall product quality available
to consumers that occur as new products replace outdated ones.
         We introduce a unique dataset that contains the universe of products with barcodes in
sectors that cover around 40 percent of all expenditures on goods in the CPI. We first explore the
vast amount of information about product creation and destruction that is lost if researchers only
have access to firm-level data. By matching barcodes with firms, we document the multi-product
nature of the firm and show that the vast majority of product creation and destruction happens
within the boundaries of the firm. In particular, we find four times more entry and exit in product
markets than that found in establishment and labor market data (e.g., Dunne, Roberts and
Samuelson (1988, 1989) and Davis and Haltiwanger (1992)). In a typical year, 40 percent of
household’s expenditures are in goods that were created in the last 4 years, and 20 percent of
expenditures are in goods that disappear in the next 4 years.
         We also document the cyclical patterns of product creation and destruction. We find that
net creation is strongly pro-cyclical, with more products being introduced in expansions and in
product categories that are booming. Destruction of goods is counter-cycle, although its
magnitude is quantitatively less important. This is suggestive of models where firms have an

1
 This gap has emerged largely because of data availability. The lack of empirical evidence was not resolved even
with the appearance of scanner databases specific to particular stores, as store-specific data are not appropriate to
analyze the extent of creation and destruction of products for the consumer.


                                                                                                                        1
incentive to defer implementation of the product until aggregate demand is relatively high (as in
Schmookler (1962) and Shleifer (1986)).2 While labor market data suggest that job destruction
responds more to cyclical movements than job creation (c.f. Blanchard and Diamond (1990),
Campbell (1998), Davis and Haltiwanger (1996)), we find the opposite to be true in product
markets. Product creation moves more than product destruction with business cycle fluctuations.3
The high degree of product churning is also associated with substantial price volatility as
products move through their life cycle.
          These new facts have important implications for the measurement of prices. They
suggest that the CPI may deviate from a true cost-of-living index in three important dimensions.
First, the creation and destruction of products can hide quality upgrades that are not captured by
indexes that are based on the prices of a fixed set of goods over time.4 Second, if the quality bias
has a pro-cyclical component it can augment the volatility of real variables over the cycle.
Finally, since the CPI is based on the prices of a sample of goods available in the market it is
subject to sampling error. Given the high degree of price volatility of individual goods that we
observe in the data, the potential for sampling error is large. The core of the paper is about
quantifying these three implications of product churning for the measurement of the true cost-of-
living.
          We show that since most product creation and destruction is unobserved by the BLS,
there remains a substantial bias arising from new and higher quality goods in the CPI. This
upward bias averages 0.6 – 0.9 percent per year depending on the aggregation methodology. This
implies that inflation was around 7 percentage points lower than suggested by the CPI over the
period studied (1994 – 2003). The fact that the quality available for consumers rises as a result of



2
  As noted by Shleifer, Schumpeter (1939) thought the innovation process to be essentially autonomous and
independent of market demand. By contrast, Schmookler (1962, 1966) believed that high demand periods were
conducive to large profits from innovation. Thus, innovation would be concentrated in booms. Judd (1985) also
finds cyclical patterns of innovation that are driven by a different mechanism. In periods where variety per capita is
low, profits to innovators are high and innovation thrives. However, as the patents from new products expire, prices
of recently introduced products drop and profits for innovators fall. Only after an extended period of growth does
innovation restart the process. In this paper we present evidence of Schmookler’s view of innovation. In future
work, we will systematically compare the cyclical predictions of different models of product innovation.
3
  In terms of Caballero and Hammour (1994), we find a strong “insulating” effect of creation that dampens the
response of destruction to the business cycles.
4
  We discuss the role played by “forced” substitutions later in the paper. The BLS performs regular product
substitutions every 4 to 5 years, so except for forced substitutions the CPI is based on a fixed set of goods within
each product group over this period.


                                                                                                                     2
the creative destruction process is a salient feature of Schumpeter’s work.5 The bias is also
strongly pro-cyclical, which suggests that business cycles are more pronounced than is typically
reported in official statistics. For example, during the 2001 recession real consumption in the
products in our sample fluctuated by 0.4 percentage points more than suggested by national
statistics. This cyclicality arises because 30 cents of each additional dollar of consumption is
spent on new higher-quality goods which are ignored by conventional (“fixed-goods”) price
indexes. Lastly, we calculate the standard deviation of inflation rates at different frequencies
based on sampling error. We find the sampling error in 1-quarter seasonally adjusted inflation
rates to be 0.5 percent (annualized rates). This suggests that over the last 10 years policymakers
could not statistically distinguish whether quarterly inflation was accelerating or decelerating 65
percent of the time.
        Our work is related to several different literatures. It complements the seminal work by
Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1988) and Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) by directly exploring a
major element of the Schumpeterian creative destruction process: product entry and exit. This is
the key mechanism through which the creative process has an impact on the welfare of
consumers. We also document the basic cyclical properties of product creation and destruction in
ways similar to the literature on job turnover (e.g., Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996),
Campbell (1998), Caballero and Hammour (1994)). This is closely related to the literature on
innovation cycles and in particular to the work of Shleifer (1986). In his model, although
inventions arrive evenly over time, they are implemented in waves. The waves arise because
firms have an incentive to defer implementation until aggregate demand is relatively high.
While our evidence is consistent with the work of Shleifer (1986) we leave a systematic
examination of models of the innovation cycles to future work.
        Second, our work is related to the papers that study the implications of quality change.
We can directly examine the quality growth inherent in the process through which new products
replace outdated ones. This is a key aspect of Schumpeter’s process of innovation. Moreover,
most of the studies examine the welfare impact of the introduction of specific products and fall

5
  Throughout Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1942), Schumpeter refers to new goods as increasing the
quality available to consumers. Page 84 provides a clear reference: “in capitalist reality (the type of competition)
which counts (is) the competition from the new consumer goods, the new technology, the new source of supply, the
new type of organization–competition which commands a (..) decisive quality advantage.” This aspect of the
creative destruction process is also an important part of endogenous growth models like Grossman and Helpman
(1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992).


                                                                                                                  3
short of computing price biases.6 The Advisory Commission to the CPI (1996) used a few studies
that estimate these biases for specific sectors to extrapolate to the entire CPI and argue that the
quality bias was around 0.6 percent per year. Lebow and Rudd (2004) survey the recent
improvements on price measurement and conclude that the estimates of the quality bias for less
than 10 percent of the CPI were based on “at least a moderate degree of hard evidence”. The rest
comes from either inadequate evidence or is entirely subjective. A contribution of our paper is to
use detailed price and quantity data at the bar-code level to estimate changes in quality and all
the parameters necessary to compute an exact aggregate price index for almost half of the goods
in the CPI.




                                            II. Data Description
II. A. Overview
        An important contribution of this paper is to bring a new dataset to bear on price
measurement. Since the ACNielsen Homescan database has not been used extensively in other
studies, it is worth spending some time describing its features. ACNielsen provides handheld
scanners to approximately 55,000 households who then scan in the purchases of every good with
a barcode.7 These households represent a demographically balanced sample of households in 23
cities in the US.8 Barcodes are concentrated in grocery, drugstore and mass-merchandise sectors.
Overall, the database covers around 40 percent of all expenditure on goods in the CPI.
        The dataset is ideal for understanding how prices evolve for a large share of consumption
expenditures for a number of reasons that we explain in this section. First, instead of relying on a
small sample of goods we observe virtually the entire universe of goods purchased by
households in the sectors we examine. We observe vastly more information about goods in these
sectors than is observed by the BLS and other statistical agencies. Our database covers

6
  An important paper that quantifies the extent of quality growth is Bils (2004). He examines the impact of product
substitution in durable goods inflation by matching sales data on cars and 18 other consumer durables with the
BLS’s price data. The paper suggests that quality growth for durables has averaged about 5 percent per year in
recent periods. In earlier work, Bils and Klenow (2001) used the US Consumer Expenditure Survey to quantify the
quality growth in 66 consumer durable goods.
7
  The 1994 data is based on a sample of 40,000 households; the data for 1999-2001 encompasses 55,000 households,
and the data for 2002 and 2003 represents 61,000 households.
8
  The cities are Atlanta, Baltimore, Boston, Buffalo, Charlotte, Chicago, Columbus, Dallas, Denver, Detroit,
Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Sacramento, San Antonio, San
Francisco, Seattle, St. Louis, and Tampa.


                                                                                                                 4
approximately 700,000 different goods purchased at some point by our household sample, while
the BLS sample for the entire CPI only covers approximately 85,000 goods.9 This actually
overstates the relative size of the BLS sample because our data covers only a subset of all
consumption expenditure categories. In particular, the goods that underlie the CPI are spread
over 305 expenditure categories called “entry-level items” or ELIs. Our sample covers roughly
104 of the 305 ELIs, which suggests that for the same set of expenditure categories that we
examine, the BLS is only working with a sample that is less than 5 percent as large.10
         A second distinctive feature of our database is that the data collection point is the
household and not the store. This is an advantage relative to more easily available store-specific
scanner databases, where the researcher cannot distinguish whether a product that is new to the
store is truly new to the consumer or whether the price or products at that store are
representative. Our data circumvents these limitations by using data directly collected by a
representative set of households. In particular, since the product information comes from actual
purchases and are not restricted to particular outlets, our basket of goods is more in line with
those of the representative household in the U.S. than that of other studies or even the BLS
survey of prices.11 Moreover, by treating each product that enters or exits the basket of goods
consumed by our sample of 55,000 households as a new or disappearing product in U.S.
consumption we can capture even the smallest of product innovations in a large number of
sectors. 12 As long as one household out of the 55,000 that are surveyed weekly consumes a
product, it becomes part of the “universe” of products for which we have information.13



9
  As a benchmark, the USDA estimates the total number of food UPCs to be 320,000, and the total number of UPCs
in an average store in the US to be 30,000 (see Gallo, 1997).
10
   A sample list of 400 general categories included in the database appears in Appendix A.
11
   Fenwick et al. (2003) provides an interesting measure of how the lack of quantity data at the product level can
make the products sampled by statistical offices not representative of consumer purchases. They compare the sales
weights of top selling consumer durable goods (e.g., top 10 models of TVs) with the percentage of price quotes of
these goods used to calculate UK’s retail price index (RPI). They find large differences between these two measures
suggesting that the products used in the calculation of UK’s RPI may not be representative of basket of goods
consumed.
12
   This information is especially valuable for a number of reasons. From the “experimentation” literature we know
that the most active segments of the market are typically small in size. Studies based on product surveys or data
based on publicly traded firms typically ignore or cannot fully capture the information in these segments.
13
   As we will show in the next section, it is very infrequent for a product that drops from the sample to reappear in a
later quarter, suggesting that the product has truly disappeared from the market place. The few cases in which this
happens only affects 1-quarter comparisons, as they are driven by seasonal factors. Even at this high frequency, if
we drop products that re-enter after a period of being out of our sample from our calculation, the creation and
destruction measures are effectively unchanged.


                                                                                                                      5
         A third crucial characteristic of this database is that along with prices of each of the
products, quantities of the same products are also collected at the same frequency. One must
collect quantity data in order to correctly account for quality changes in the measurement of
prices. However, when BLS field agents survey outlets, they only observe the prices of the
products they sample. Thus we have a unique opportunity to measure the extent of the quality
bias in the CPI for a large number of categories included in the consumption basket. Moreover,
the use of barcode data means that our empirical construct of a good is extremely close to the
theoretical concept, in contrast to studies that use more aggregated industry information. This
allows us to explore the multi-product nature of firms more precisely.
         The data we use is collected in the following manner. With the scanners provided by
ACNielsen, households scan the items they purchased at the conclusion of every shopping trip. If
the purchase was made at a store with Scantrack technology, the price is automatically
downloaded from the store’s database. Otherwise the household enters the price paid and records
any deals used that might affect the price. The matched price and quantity data means that we do
not have to estimate the weights for prices we use; we know exactly how many units were
purchased.
         The data we obtained includes the average price paid and total quantities of all products
with Universal Product Codes (UPCs, what we will refer to as “barcodes”) purchased by the
representative household at the quarterly level for 6 years: 1994 and 1999-2003. The data was
weighted by ACNielsen to correct for sampling error. For example, if the response rate for a
particular demographic category is low relative to the census, ACNielsen re-weights the averages
so that price paid and the quantity purchased is representative of the U.S. as a whole.14, 15
         Before proceeding further, it is worth taking a moment to review precisely what this data
measures. Firms have strong incentives to label their products with UPCs because these machine
readable identifiers dramatically reduce the costs for the store to stock and sell items. In order to
obtain a barcode, a company must register with the Universal Code Council, which costs around


14
   We also ran all of our tables and regressions with the raw (unadjusted) data and the main results of the paper are
unaffected.
15
   One concern about the database is that results might be driven by the growth in the number of barcodes per se. In
Appendix B, we show two facts that suggest that this is not the case. First, the share of goods purchased with a
barcode as a share of total expenditures has remained constant at around 0.85 throughout this period. Second, we
observe the average real expenditure per UPC to be constant over time. This suggests that over our sample period
the growth in total sales has been approximately proportional to the number of UPCs.


                                                                                                                    6
$750 dollars plus an annual maintenance fee of $150 per UPC.16 This means that the financial
costs of registering new products are not likely to present an important obstacle for products
entering and remaining in our database.
        Although it is difficult to enforce how a company uses a barcode, most industry experts
strongly caution firms not to use the same barcode on more than one product. Doing so could
cause confusion among retailers who would have trouble knowing what they were selling and for
consumers whose receipts would not match their actual purchases. Similarly, firms typically do
not use multiple UPCs for the same product because that makes it very difficult for retailers to
reorder out of stock items. As a result, manufacturers tend to use other barcode systems for
internal use and reserve the UPC for tracking products that are identical to the consumer.
Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that all goods with different UPCs differ in some way that
might cause consumers to pay a different price for them and that it is rare for a meaningful
quality change to occur that does not result in a change of UPC. Changing the slogan on a Heinz
ketchup bottle does not require a new barcode, but changing the size of the bottle does. In other
words, it is safe to assume that product quality (insofar as it might change the price paid by
consumers) will change if and only if the barcode changes.
        As we proceed with our data analysis, it will be necessary to keep track of three levels of
aggregation. It is easiest to understand these levels of aggregation by means of an example drawn
from our data. At the lowest level we have a product which we identify using the UPC. For
example, a box of “100-count Centrum Multi-Vitamins From A-to-Zinc in tablets” has a UPC of
030005-423936. Each UPC in turn belongs to a “brand-module”, i.e. the brand “Centrum” within
the module “Multi-Vitamins”. In the first quarter of 2001, there were 16 different goods (UPCs)
marketed under this brand-module. A manufacturer, in this case Wyeth, may have several brands
within a module – e.g. “Centrum”, “Centrum Silver” and “Centrum Performance” – and each of
these would constitute a different brand-module. At the highest level, we have a “product
group”, which in this case would be “Nutritional Supplements;” which contains not just Multi-
Vitamins but also other modules like “Kids Vitamins”.17
        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the number of UPCs at the different levels of
aggregation just defined. The table shows that there are roughly 650,000 different UPCs sold in

16
 Prices quoted from http://www.cummingsdesign.com/bar_codes101_UCC_App.htm
17
 In Appendix C we provide a second example of the levels of aggregation in our database that helps explain how
we identify the elasticities we estimate in section V.B.


                                                                                                                 7
each year in around 51,000 different brand-modules which can be aggregated into 1,094 modules
or 122 product categories. In other words, the average product category contains about 9
modules, the average module contains 46 brands, and the average brand-module contains about
34 products.


II. B. Stylized Facts
       In this section we describe the extent, nature and cyclicality of product creation and
destruction in a large sector of the U.S. economy. We present four stylized facts that document
the main characteristics of product creation and destruction.


Stylized Fact 1: The Importance of Multi-Product Firms
       The first fact concerns the vast loss of information about creation and destruction that
occurs when the unit of analysis is the firm rather than the product. This is important if one
wants to compare our results with those of firm level studies of entry and exit. The first six digits
of the UPC is the manufacturer identifier number, which can be matched to the parent company.
For example, the manufacturer of Centrum (“030005”), Wyeth, also produces in other product
groups, e.g. “Snack Bars” and “Medications, Remedies, Health Aids” and using other 6-digit
brand identifiers (e.g. Advil and Robitussin).
       By matching the UPC identifier with firm code, we can quantify the extent to which the
world at the level of the UPC differs from viewing the world at the level of the firm. In our data,
the typical firm sells 8 different UPCs in 2 different brand-modules. The distribution of UPCs
per firm is highly skewed, however, with a large number of firms having a small number of
products. As a result, the average firm sells 40 UPCs under 4 different brands in 3 modules,
which, in turn, are contained in 2 product groups.
       Table 2 highlights the multi-product nature of firms in these markets. It describes firm
characteristics by sales size. Only the smallest of firms sell in a single brand and product group.
Over 60 percent of the sales in the 4th quarter of 2003 come from firms that sell over 700 UPCs
in over 35 different brands and 19 different product groups. The bottom line is that the bulk of
output in these sectors is produced by firms marketing hundreds of different products under
dozens of brands in a variety of markets. While this is consistent with previous work that has
documented the extent of industry diversification in U.S. firms or plants (e.g., Streitweiser



                                                                                                      8
(1991), Jovanovic (1993) and Bernard, et al (2006)), aggregation up to the firm level results in a
substantial loss of information about the process of creative destruction.18 As we will see below,
most of the product entry and exit happen within existing firms.


Stylized Fact 2: The Significance of Product Entry and Exit
         Price indexes in all countries are essentially based on prices of individual goods that are
common over long periods of time (at least over 4 or 5 years).19 As a result, only the set of goods
that exist in the base period and the current period are included in the index. This is a potential
problem for price measurement since goods whose prices move to and from their reservation
price are excluded from the analysis but are part of the choice set available to consumers at some
point.
         We can understand the severity of the problem by employing the methodology developed
by Davis and Haltiwanger (1992). We need to keep track of two types of price movements: price
changes of common goods and the price movements of goods that are created or destroyed. For
common goods, we observe prices for both periods and therefore have no problem computing the
price change. For new and disappearing goods, we assume that the reservation price is infinite.
This assumption only affects where in the graph we describe below we locate the bars associated
with the birth and death of products.
         In order to keep track of both of these forces, it is useful to express movements in prices
in terms of mean growth rates. If we denote the price of UPC u, in period t by put, then the mean
growth rate is defined as
                                                             put − put −1
(1)                                             gut =                        .
                                                        1
                                                        2   ( put + put −1 )
The mean growth rate is a monotonic transformation of the conventional growth rate.20 Given
that new and disappearing goods have infinite reservation prices, mean growth rates are confined
to the range of -2 to 2. In the remainder of this section, we will use the term “growth rate” to
refer to the rate computed according to equation (1).

18
   Though marginal to this paper, it is interesting to note that a 1 percent increase in the overall market share of a
firm is associated with 0.6 percent more UPCs per firm. This elasticity results from a cross-sectional regression of
the log of the number of UPCs per firm on the log of the market share of the firm in a module.
19
   In the case of the U.S. CPI regular substitutions are currently scheduled every 4 years. We will comment on the
role that “forced” substitutions play in the U.S. CPI below.
20
   The conventional growth rate can be written as 2g/(2-g).


                                                                                                                         9
         In Figure 1A, we plot the distribution of one-quarter price changes for all goods in our
sample over the period 1999-2003. One of the features of the data that immediately jumps out
from this plot is the large number of products that die and are born during a typical quarter. The
bar at “-2” indicate that 19 percent of all goods available in both quarters are new (i.e., did not
exist the previous quarter) and the bar at “+2” implies that 18 percent of goods disappear (i.e., do
not exist the following quarter).21 The fact that close to 40 percent of goods in a quarter are
moving to and from their reservation price and are not being measured in conventional indexes
means that strong assumptions are needed in order to provide confidence that the moments of the
trimmed distribution of products match those of the full distribution.
         An obvious critique of the previous plot is that we weight all goods equally regardless of
their importance in consumption and, most likely, utility. A simple correction for this is to
weight the data so that the height of the bars represents the share of total consumption rather than
the share of total products. We do this in Figure 1B using a simple average of consumption at
time t and t-1. Three results are immediately apparent. First, the distribution of price changes of
common goods is far more compressed when we weight by value. About 80 percent of all price
changes now fall in the range of plus or minus 10 percent. Second, the relative importance of
birth and death is diminished substantially. Extreme values are about 5 percent of total
consumption.
         The third point is more subtle but has very important implications. If we look at the
inflation rates of common goods, we see that there is a large amount of variance in individual
price changes across goods. If we take the sales weighted average of absolute changes in the
prices of common goods, we find that the average percentage change in prices is 8.8 percent in
any quarter. This number is very much in line with price changes in the set of goods used in the
CPI. Klenow and Kryvtsov (2005), for example, find that the comparable monthly number in the
CPI is 13.3 percent. This suggests that the high level of price volatility is not a unique feature of
the ACNielsen dataset, but rather a more general feature of all samples. Indeed, our dataset
seems to exhibit one-third less price volatility than the BLS’s Commodities and Services Survey.
A more conventional way of expressing this volatility is in terms of confidence intervals and


21
  If we had assumed a different value for the reservation price, it would only affect the location of the bars denoting
birth and death but not their height. For example, if the reservation price were 3 times higher than the observed
price, the bars would have been located at -1 and 1. The graph would imply a qualitatively similar picture of the
data.


                                                                                                                    10
standard deviations. Ninety percent of all price changes in our dataset lie between -19 percent
and 20 percent in a quarter. However, due to the existence of fat tails in the price distribution, the
standard deviation of price changes is 20 percent per quarter. This large variance in quarterly
inflation rates will be an important ingredient in our explanation of how sampling error affects
the CPI methodology.
         Another way of looking at the data is to take long differences (i.e. 1999-2003). Figures
2A and 2B present these results. Over this five year period, products whose prices moved to or
from their reservation price account for over 60 percent of the sample. In the figure weighted by
sales, the entry and exit of products is an unmistakably feature of the distribution. Clearly any
price index based on a common set of goods is likely to be problematic because it ignores a
sizable share of the sample whose prices are having large changes. Over 25 percent of the goods
(in average sales-weighted terms) either were born or disappeared during the 4-year period.
Since the weight used to scale this figure is an average taken over both t and t-1, new and exiting
goods always have a weight equal to zero in one period. Thus, their importance in any one time
period is roughly twice as large. In other words, this same data implies that 37 percent of the
expenditures in 2003 were on goods that did not exist in 1999, and 18 percent of expenditures in
1999 were on goods that did not survive until 2003. Moreover, to the extent that the value of
goods created exceeds the value of goods that disappeared, a greater share of goods experience
unobserved price declines than unobserved price increases. This fact is important because it
establishes that the mean of the full distribution lies to the left of the mean of the distribution of
price changes of common goods. In other words, a price index that does not take birth and death
into account is likely to be biased upwards.
         Table 3 summarizes the extent of product creation and destruction using weighted and
un-weighted measures at different frequencies. The first column presents data on entry and exit
between 1994 and 2003, the second column reports the same numbers between 1999 and 2003,
and the third column presents the median numbers for each year between 1999 and 2003. In each
case, we report the following measures of product creation and destruction: 22
                         # New UPCs (t)                                        # Disappearing UPCs (t-1)
(2) Entry Rate ( t ) =                             ;      Exit Rate ( t-1) =
                         # All UPCs (t)                                             # All UPCs (t-1)

22
  Notice that if the value of overall UPCs does not change over time, the bar for “birth” (“death”) in figures 1A and
2A equals half the values for entry rate (exit rate), while the bars for “birth” (“death”) in figures 1B and 2B equals
half the values for the creation share (destruction share).


                                                                                                                   11
                   Value of New UPCs (t)                                      Value of Disappearing UPCs (t-1)
Creation ( t ) =                                  ;    Destruction ( t-1) =
                       Total Value (t)                                                  Total Value (t-1)

Table 3 reveals that almost 80 percent of the products that existed in 2003 were not around in
1994. These new products comprised 64 percent of expenditures in 2003. The value of
disappearing UPCs, that is those that existed in 1994 but did not exist in 2003, was much
smaller: 37 percent of expenditure in 1994.23 This suggests that the new UPCs systematically
displaced market share from the UPCs that were common throughout this period. This can also
be summarized in terms of the ratio of the shares of common UPCs. The last row in this table
shows that this ratio is below unity, i.e., the share of common UPCs in 1994 was larger than in
2003. As we will emphasize in the next section, this is an important indication that new products
are of a higher quality than the products that exited.
         The table also reports the average size of the entering and exiting UPCs relative to the
average size of common UPCs. If we look at the third column of the table, we can see the
relative sizes of UPCs that did not exist the year before. Here we see that the market share of the
average new UPC is 30 percent as large as the share of common UPCs. For the average exiting
UPC, this share is 9 percent. This suggests that new UPCs tend to be larger than exiting ones but
both are smaller than common UPCs by a large margin. Over longer time periods the differences
diminish somewhat but do not disappear – the share of entering products rises to 56 percent of
that of existing products. Interestingly, the share declines at 9-year differences, which is
suggestive of a life-cycle pattern for the products in our sample. We will return to this feature of
the data when describing the fourth stylized fact.
         It is useful to compare our results with that of studies of firm and establishment turnover
as Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1988) and Davis and Haltiwanger (1992). Table 2 in Dunne
et al. is directly comparable to our Table 3. Using the census of manufacturing firms collected
every 5 years, they find that on average 10 percent of all manufacturing output in a particular
census year came from plants that were not present in the previous census, while plants that were

23
   It is typical for firm-level studies to drop the smallest firms in their samples as this is the group of firms with the
largest measurement error. Similarly, we can drop the UPCs that were purchased by the smallest number of
individual households to understand the impact of measurement error. In Appendix D we replicate table 3 dropping
the UPCs that were purchased by less than 20 households. The measures of product creation and destruction are only
marginally unaffected. Contrary to firm-level studies, the un-weighted measures of entry and exit are only slightly
smaller than the ones including the full sample of UPCs.


                                                                                                                      12
present in one census but disappeared in the following census accounted for 14 percent of
output.24 While the total amount of output linked to entry and exit of plants in all manufacturing
is 24 percent, Dunne et al. (1988) find that in the “Food Processing” sector the extent of plant
turnover is roughly 15 percent, or 30 percent smaller than in the average manufacturing sector.
This is less than a quarter of the market share of new and exiting products over a 5-year period in
Table 3 (i.e., 56 percent). In other words, there is four times more product creation and
destruction than firm creation and destruction. Davis and Haltiwanger present similar numbers
for the importance of entry and exit of establishments but weighted by employment rather than
output. They find that over a 1-year period, roughly 3 percent of current employment came from
the entry of new establishments, while 2.5 percent of past employment was in establishments that
disappeared in the following year. Altogether this amounts to 5.5 percent of employment, which
is 2.5 times smaller than the market share due to new and disappearing products at the same
frequency.


Stylized Fact 3: Product Turnover is Concentrated Within Firms and Sectors
        In this section we focus on the characteristics of the creation and destruction of products.
We describe how much of product creation and destruction occurs within firms, within brands
and across different types of products. We also report the correlations of entry and exit across
modules and across time within modules.
        Interestingly, we observe most of the product entry and exit occurring within the
boundaries of the firm. Table 4 reports the extent of firm entry and exit. At 1-year frequencies, 1
percent of all consumption expenditures come from new firms. Comparing the extent of firm
creation to that of product creation (Table 3) suggests that 92 percent of product creation
happens within an existing firm, and 97 percent of product destruction happens within existing
firms. At 4-year frequencies the comparable numbers are 82 and 87 percent, respectively. This
implies that over a 4-year period, 18 percent of the value of overall consumption is coming from
products of completely new firms, and 13 percent of product exit is happening because firms
disappear. In our data, product entry and exit is 5 times as important as firm entry and exit. Table


24
  Because we are interested in comparing plant turnover to product turnover, we report only the magnitudes
presented by Dunne et al (1988) that correspond to “new firms, new plants” and “diversifying firms, new plants”.
We exclude from this comparison the category “diversifying firm, product mix” as this represents existing plants
that simply change the industry in which they sell.


                                                                                                                   13
4 also shows the summary statistics for both entry and exit of brands. Not surprisingly, most
product entry and exit happens within existing brands.25
          One obvious question is whether the product categories that exhibit a lot of market
turnover correspond to our priors about which products are knowledge intensive. To explore this
question we focus on the one hundred modules with the largest sales values, since there are many
modules that have trivial market shares and very few varieties (e.g. “retort pouch bags”). In
Table 5, we report the ranks of the top ten and lowest ten modules in terms of turnover, where
we define turnover as the sum of creation and destruction in the module. To the extent that one
believes that it is easier to be innovative when developing pre-recorded video recordings,
cameras, and computer software than when developing new forms of sugar, frankfurters and
butter, one can have some confidence that these measures are capturing true innovations rather
than simple re-labeling of existing products.
          An aspect of product creation and destruction that we explore is how entry and exit co-
varies across modules and time. The left panel of Table 6 examines the correlation between entry
and exit rates across product modules. For expositional ease, we only use 1-year entry and exit
variables. The correlation between entry and exit variables across modules is positive and high.
The average contemporaneous correlation between entry and exit rates is 0.70. In terms of
creation and destruction, the contemporaneous correlation is slightly higher at 0.83. This
suggests that modules tend to be characterized by either high entry and exit or low entry and
exit.26
          The right panel of Table 6 examines the correlation between entry and exit rates within
product modules over time (i.e., after subtracting the average entry and exit rate from each
module over the four-year period). Here we exploit the panel nature of the dataset to examine
whether periods in which entry is high are also periods of relatively high exit. We construct
correlations using entry and exit variables that have been purged by module averages over time.


25
   In Appendix E, we further document the characteristics of product turnover. One dimension that is interesting to
describe is how much of product creation is the result of new sizes or new flavors of existing products. For roughly
20 percent of the products that were purchased in Q4 2003 we have detailed information about the characteristics of
the UPC, including the package size and the flavor of the product. This allows us to proxy the extent of product
creation that is driven primarily from changes in sizes and flavors of existing products. We find that creation from
new sizes is 1.9 percent or roughly 5 percent of overall creation. New flavors add 0.4 percentage points to creation
or less than 1 percent.
26
   The simple correlations we find for product entry and exit are similar to those found in terms of firm entry and
exit by Dunne et al (1988).


                                                                                                                  14
We find that in 2000 and 2003 modules that had creation above their module average were also
modules that had destruction above their module averages. This suggests that these are periods
where both creation and destruction co-vary positively. By contrast, 2001 and 2002 were years
where modules with creation higher than their module average had low destruction relative to
their own average destruction. In these years, creation and destruction co-varied negatively.
Interestingly, the correlation between creation in period t and the destruction in period t+1 is
positive, which indicates that higher than average creation in one period is followed by higher
than average destruction in the next period. However, overall, there is not a strong intertemporal
pattern in creation and destruction rates.
       Up until this point, we have been describing the magnitude and overall trends in prices
and product creation and destruction. However, these aggregate patterns mask important
relationships which exist at the level of the product. We begin by examining the behavior of
destruction by UPC characteristic in Table 7. Here we divide up the goods that existed in 2002
into age bins. One-year old goods are goods that existed four quarters earlier but not eight
quarters earlier; two-year old goods are goods that existed eight quarters earlier, but not twelve
quarters earlier; and so on. The first panel shows that among younger UPCs, the share of exiting
UPCs is larger than among older UPCs. The lower panels show that destruction is also
systematically related to size. For bins of small UPCs (in terms of share in overall expenditure),
destruction rates are higher than for bins of large UPCs. Thus, destruction rates are higher for
smaller and younger UPCs. The lower panel shows that destruction does not monotonically fall
with the size of the brand. Small and large brands have higher rates of destruction than middle
sized brands.
       We now focus our attention in the behavior of UPCs over their life cycle. Table 8
presents information on two sets of products over time, those UPCs that existed in 1994 and
those that existed in 1999. We report means and standard deviations across all modules of
several statistics. The first row of the first panel shows the average market shares across modules
of the set of UPCs available in 1999. By 2000, the set of UPCs available in 1999 comprised 92
percent of the expenditure in the average module. This share falls steadily as one moves closer to
the end of our sample. By 2003, the set of UPCs in 1999 were 70 percent of all expenditure in
UPCs. The second panel shows the cumulative exit rates of the same sets of goods. For instance,
the exit rate of 1999 goods in 2000 was 20 percent. As time passes the cumulative exit rates rise



                                                                                                     15
but at a decreasing rate. As can be inferred from following the 1994 set of UPCs over time, the
increments in the exit rates remain relatively constant after a few years. Finally, the bottom of
Table 8 shows the average size of surviving products relative to all products in the module.
UPCs that survive 4 years are typically 23 percent larger than the average existing UPC. Over a 9
year period, those UPCs that survive have market shares that are 50 percent larger than the
average UPC in the module.


Stylized Fact 4: Creation is Strongly Pro-Cyclical and Destruction is Weakly Counter-
cyclical
           In this section we address how product creation and destruction co-varies with aggregate
measures of consumption. For expositional ease (and slightly abusing notation), we will re-
define creation in terms of the total value in period t – 1 rather than the total value in t (as in (2)).
This transformation is useful as we can divide total sales growth into the sales of UPCs that are
common over time and those that are new or disappearing:
                                      Vt − Vt −1 Ct − Ct −1   D      N
(3)                                             ≡           − t −1 + t
                                        Vt −1      V          Vt −1 Vt −1
                                                   t −1     N      N
                                                     Growth in   Destruction   Creation
                                                   Common UPCs      (t-1)        (t-1)


where Vt −1 = Ct −1 + Dt −1 is the total value of UPC sales in t – 1, and is the sum of the value of

UPCs that are common between period t-1 and t, Ct −1 , and those that are discontinued between t

and t – 1, Dt −1 ; and Vt = Ct + N t is the value of all UPCs in t – 1, and N t is the value of all those

UPCs that are created between t and t – 1. We call Dt product “Destruction” and Ct product

“Creation”. Vt , Ct , and N t are adjusted for inflation so that real dollar values are compared over

time.27
           In order to quantify the cyclicality of product creation and destruction, we present the
patterns of net creation (creation – destruction), creation and destruction as defined in (3). While
we have only 20 consecutive quarters of data, the period studied includes the 2001 recession.
Panel (a) of Figure 3 plots net creation (creation minus destruction) and the growth in overall
sales of the ACNielsen sample. The pattern that emerges is strongly pro-cyclical. ACNielsen
sales are weakest during the recession of 2001, and this is also the period during which net

27
     We use the CPI Food index to deflate these series.


                                                                                                        16
creation of goods reaches its trough. In the later years (2002 and 2003) sales and net creation
pick up. Panel (b) shows that the cyclicality of net creation is driven mainly by the pro-
cyclicality of creation. That is, product creation is largest in periods where sales growth is
strongest. Panel (c) shows a clear counter-cyclical pattern of destruction. While the correlation of
destruction is strongly negative with overall sales, the magnitude of the fluctuations is small, and
hence it explains a small fraction of the cyclicality of net creation.
         We should be cautious when interpreting the results of Figure 3 because there are only 24
quarters over which the data is collected.28 However, the cyclicality of creation and destruction
can be examined at the product group level. For each product group we examine how creation
and destruction co-varies with the overall consumption in that product group. Exploiting the
advantages of the accounting identity in equation (3) we can separately run regressions for net
creation, creation and destruction on the overall growth (the left hand side of (3)) for each
product group in a particular period. Following Caballero and Hammour (1994), we also present
results for periods where consumption growth is above and below average separately.29 We
restrict the impact of consumption on creation and destruction to be the same across all groups
but we allow for a different constant across groups.
         Table 9 shows the results from regressing net creation, creation and destruction on total
sales growth. Obviously because there is an accounting identity linking these variables, we are
not looking for a structural relationship but simply to describe the co-movement of each of these
variables with overall growth across sectors. The first column shows that net creation rises
significantly in periods where consumption growth is high. A one percentage point increase in
sales growth leads net creation to rise by 0.35 percentage points. This is suggestive evidence for
models where firms have an incentive to defer implementation of the product until aggregate
demand is relatively high (as in Schmookler (1962) and Shleifer (1986)). These models differ
from the traditional Schumpeterian creative process which is independent of market demand.
         It is also interesting to note that while net creation is strongly pro-cyclical, it is primarily
driven by the pro-cyclicality of creation rather than the counter-cyclicality of destruction. The
coefficient under the column “creation” can be interpreted as how much creation moves with


28
   We observe more creation and destruction in these plots than in Table 3. This is because goods created or
destroyed in the last three quarters also count towards creation and destruction at the four-quarter frequency while
they do not at an annual frequency.
29
   We do not include leads and lags of consumption growth as most of these coefficients are small and insignificant.


                                                                                                                  17
sectoral consumption growth. An additional 1 percentage point growth in consumption of a
particular product group is associated with 0.3 percentage point increase in the share of new
goods. Creation is strongly pro-cyclical and co-varies more with demand in expansions than
contractions. The opposite is true for destruction rates. Destruction is counter-cyclical, but
destruction responds more strongly in recessions than in booms. As suggested by Figure 3,
however, most of the pro-cyclicality of net creation comes from the pro-cyclicality of creation.30
         We can use Caballero and Hammour’s (1994) model to interpret the implications of the
cyclical patterns of product flows.31 The rapid response of product creation to the cycle is
suggestive of either a small cost of producing new products or that “product innovations” are
stored until market conditions are suitable for their implementation (like in Shleifer (1986)). In
both cases, product creation has a strong “insulating” effect over product destruction because
falls in demand are largely accommodated by a fall in the creation rate. This effect reduces the
impact of a recession on existing products and helps dampen the response of product exit to
cycles. This predicted response of product destruction is consistent with the patterns observed in
the data. Thus, the cyclical characteristics of product turnover suggest that the large insulating
effect of product creation implies that recessions may play only a small role in terms of
“cleansing” outdated or relatively unprofitable products. Not surprisingly, this is the opposite
conclusion from that found when examining the implications of job flows.




                                            III. Price Measurement
         Our exploration of the data yielded several important stylized facts that will help us
understand problems in price indexes and the measurement of productivity. First, the extent of
product turnover within firms means that the bulk of the creative destruction process is driven by
within-firm product creation and destruction. Second, the large number of products facing
consumers and the price volatility observed in the data means that small sample problems can

30
   In particular, the insulating role of product creation seems larger than that of job creation. They find the
coefficient on job destruction rates to be almost double that of job creation while Table 9 suggests the opposite is
true when looking at product turnover. The larger response of destruction in recessions than in booms is similar to
the pattern observed for job destruction.
31
   Caballero and Hammour (1994) use their model to understand the implications of job flows, They interpret the
process of creative destruction as one where new production units are being created, and outdated ones are being
destroyed. However, they acknowledge that the creation process could also be interpreted as one of product
innovation. We use their model to interpret the new facts on product turnover discussed in this section.


                                                                                                                   18
result in substantial error in price measurement. Third, the fact that new products seem to
systematically displace market share from existing products means that common goods price
indexes are likely to have substantial biases because they ignore the effects of quality upgrading.
Finally, the cyclicality of creation means that our ability to measure the severity of business
cycles is likely hampered by the fact that our price indexes do not systematically adjust to
product creation and destruction. We now turn to quantifying these forces.
         There are two approaches to quantifying the implications that these facts have for price
measurement. The first is to examine the implications that these stylized facts have for an index
that is commonly used – in this case the Consumer Price Index. The second is to start with a
utility based or axiomatic approach and assess what impact this has on an exact index. The
reason to take all these different approaches is that the CPI is an ad hoc index. Thus, while we
can discuss how sampling error can affect the standard error of the index, we cannot discuss
“biases” without having a notion of what the “true” inflation rate is. Exact and Superlative
indexes are useful in this respect because they answer the question of what the price level is, or
approximately is, for a given utility function or class of utility functions. Superlative indexes in
particular have often been used as an unbiased “benchmark” in discussions of CPI bias. The
downside of simply focusing on exact or superlative indexes is that they are not the formulas
actually used by government statistical agencies, and so we feel it is useful to understand how
much the facts we discuss matter in theoretically-grounded indexes as well as the ad hoc one that
is actually used.


III. A. Common Goods Indexes: Sampling Error in the CPI
         Although the CPI originated as close to a pure Laspeyres index, the current CPI contains
many modifications. In this section, we provide a brief overview of how the CPI is computed,
focusing on the areas that our data allow us to address.32 We describe the methodology used by
the BLS to sample the products whose prices enter the CPI. This is a small subset of the goods’
prices collected by ACNielsen’s Homescan database. Thus this database provides an invaluable
resource to calculate the extent of sampling error in the CPI methodology.33


32
  Readers interested in many of the details that are not included in this brief description, please refer to BLS [2007]
33
  Richardson (2003) suggests that scanner data can have the potential of reducing the CPI’s sampling error
considerably. Leaver and Larson (2001) provide estimates of the variance of a “scanner-based” CPI for cereals.
More generally, the BLS provides a measure of the sampling error based on combining the price quotes of the


                                                                                                                     19
         The CPI contains two levels of aggregation. At the upper level, 305 Entry-Level Item
(ELI) price indexes in each of 38 urban areas are combined either using a Laspeyres formula in
the case of the standard CPI or a Tornqvist formula when using the chained CPI.34 Weights from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey are used for this upper level. Each of these indexes is in turn
based on a lower level sample of individual products. The BLS uses on average 7 price
quotations per item-area (85,000 price quotes all) for the non-shelter component of the CPI. Thus
the average ELI is based on 280 price quotes obtained from 38 different urban areas. This lower
level price quotation is critical for the BLS’s approach to price measurement.35
         Price quotes are selected into the CPI by first conducting a survey of households and
asking them where they purchase items in each ELI or expenditure category (e.g. audio
equipment). Once a store is selected through this “Point of Purchase Survey” or POPS, a BLS
field representative will visit the store and try to determine the market share of each individual
product in the store. This is done by asking the store personnel, measuring shelf space, or
assigning equal probability to all items. The market shares for each individual product, when
available, are used to perform a “weighted” sampling of products within the store. The products
selected using this procedure enter the lower level index.
         After the first visit of the BLS agent to the store, monthly or bi-monthly telephone calls
are performed to the store to assess the price of the products that were originally picked.36 Since
January 1999, the price quotations from various stores in an elementary item-area have been
geometrically averaged to form an item-area (ia) sub-index:
                                                                     1
                                                          ⎛ p iajt ⎞ N ia
                                                       N ia
(1)                                            π t ≡ ∏ ⎜ ia ⎟ ,
                                                 ia
                                                          ⎜         ⎟
                                                     j =1 ⎝ p jt −1 ⎠


where j are individual goods that belong to the item-area ia, and Nia is the total number of prices
quotes in item-area area ia.37 As mentioned above, on average Nia = 7, and the average number


products sampled in different ways. However, none of these ways include increasing the number of goods being
sampled.
34
   The 305 ELIs are aggregated into to 211 “strata” or elementary indexes in the CPI. An elementary index can
contain several ELIs.
35
   Almost all of the deviations from the standard Laspeyres index in the US case – hedonics, geometric averaging of
prices, sample rotations, etc. – occur at this lower level.
36
   If products are discontinued the BLS has to perform a “forced substitution” of the product. Bils (2005) focuses on
these episodes in the case of consumer durable goods that are surveyed by the BLS.
37
   Since the introduction of the lower-level geometric average, the BLS publishes the extent of the correction of the
lower-substitution bias driven by the implementation of this new formula. On average the annual lower-level


                                                                                                                  20
of price quotes over all areas for an item equals 280, i.e.                     ∑   a
                                                                                        N ia = 280 . Prior to 1999, the BLS

used a Laspeyres index to capture item-area averages. This modification allowed the BLS to
reduce the lower-level substitution bias. Note that no weights specific to the individual good j
appear explicitly in equation (1). This masks the fact that the BLS selects the products in each
lower level index using a “weighted” sampling as explained above. If field agents actually could
select goods with probabilities equal to their market share, then the lower level aggregator would
approximate a sales-weighted geometric average of individual products.
        The overall CPI inflation is then defined by aggregating item-area indices as follows:
                                                                                           Eria
(2)                               ΔCPI t ,r ≡ ∑ sriaπ tia , where sria =
                                               i ,a                                       ∑ Eria
                                                                                              i ,a


and Eria is the expenditure at the item-area level in the base year r obtained from the consumer
expenditure survey.38 A key feature of equation (2) is that the item-area price indexes are
weighted by the expenditure shares of the reference period r. This creates an “upper-level
substitution bias” because although consumers can switch away from high priced items, the
fixed-weight index does not allow this. Since August 2002, the BLS has added a chained CPI
index that is defined using a Tornqvist formula at the upper level to address this problem. The
chained CPI (CCPI) uses a geometric average formula to aggregate all ELI price changes using
weights equal to the ELIs past and current expenditure shares. The chained inflation formula is
given by the following expression:
                                                                            (
                                                                           1 ia ia
                                                                             st + st −1   )
                                         ΔCCPI t ≡ ∏ (π                )
                                                                           2
                                                             ia
(3)                                                          t ,t −1                          ,
                                                      i ,a


where weights are expenditure shares from periods t and t-1. Because current expenditure shares
are not available at the time the index is published, the BLS provides interim chained CPI
measures contemporaneously to the release of the CPI, which is updated once the new
expenditure shares are measured.
        The methodology just described gives rise to sampling error. This error arises as only a
sample of retail prices is used to compute the CPI, instead of using the complete universe of

substitution bias has been around 0.3 percentage points. For a detailed survey of different measures see Lebow and
Judd (2004).
38
   The expenditure reference period used by the CPI until December 2001 was 1993-1995 data. Throughout 2002-
2003 the reference period was 1999-2000.


                                                                                                                          21
retail prices. The fact that ACNielsen records every product and price consumed by their sample
of households provides an ideal scenario to quantify the extent of the sampling error. Each BLS
ELI encompasses approximately the same amount of expenditure as an ACNielsen product
group, but the BLS only samples approximately 280 prices per ELI out of the around 5,300
prices per product group we observe. Thus even if the index were unbiased, there is certain
amount of measurement error that makes both the observed level of inflation and changes from
that level stochastic. This is something that we quantify in the results section.


III.B. Creative Destruction and Quality Upgrading: An Exact Price Index
       The price indexes that we have been discussing thus far are legitimate for cases in which
the quality of goods does not change or the set of good is fixed over time. In this section, we
work through the theory of how creative destruction affects price measurement using a price
index that is exact for a CES utility function in the presence of quality upgrading.
       To better measure the impact of creation and destruction, we allow for a different impact
of within-brand-module product creation and destruction (i.e., new UPCs of an existing brand-
module) from that of across-brand creation and destruction (i.e., new brands). In principle, we
could allow different elasticities within and across all brand-modules, but this would be
impossible in practice because many brand-modules have just a few UPCs in them and many
product groups are comprised of just a few brand-modules. As a result, we decided to assume the
same structure of substitutability within and across brand-modules for each product group but
allow it to vary across product groups. In particular, we model the impact of varieties on utility
using a three-tiered CES aggregator. The first level describes how UPCs within a brand-module
in a particular product group enter the sub-utility function describing the representative consumer
utility. The second describes how brands within a product group sub-utility function, and the last
aggregates product groups.
       This imposes a number of restrictions on the data. First, we constrain the within-brand-
module elasticity of substitution to be the same within any product group. This is, perhaps,
easiest to understand in the context of an example. Consider the product group of “Crackers”,
which contains brand-modules like “Nabisco-Premium-Flaked Soda Crackers” and “Pepperidge
Farm Goldfish-Cheese Crackers.” Our first restriction forces the elasticity of substitution across
different brand-modules within the same product group to have the same elasticity of



                                                                                                     22
substitution, but we allow the across-brand-module elasticity to vary across product groups.
Thus, two brand-modules in a different product group (e.g., “Halls-Cough Drops” and “Herbon
Glacial-Cough Drops”) will have a different elasticity than that of “Nabisco-Premium-Flaked
Soda Crackers” and “Pepperidge Farm Goldfish-Cheese Crackers.” Our second restriction is that
within brand-module elasticities are also constrained to be the same as within brand-module
elasticities for other brand-modules in the same product group. For example, all UPCs within the
brand-module “Nabisco-Premium-Flaked Soda Crackers” are equally substitutable within each
other, and the elasticity is the same as the one for UPCs contained in the brand-module
“Pepperidge Farm Goldfish-Cheese Crackers.”
        We now write down these restrictions formally. For expositional purposes, we begin by
specifying the upper level utility function as:


                                               (∑                    )
                                                                         1

                                                          (C )
                                                                 ρ       ρ
(4)                                       U=        g∈G     gt


where product groups are indexed by g, ρ is the elasticity of substitution across product groups
and G is the set of all product groups. The set G is fixed over time ( Gt = G ∀t ), and so ρ plays

no role in the analysis that follows.
        We model the two lower tiers as follows:
                                                                             1

                                        Cgt = ⎛⎜ ∑ b∈Ψ ( cbgt ) ⎞⎟ g
                                                                     a
                                                               ρg ρ a
(5)
                                               ⎝      g
                                                                 ⎠
where cbgt is the total quantity consumed of brand-module b in product group g at time t, ρ ga is

the elasticity of substitution across brand-modules within product group g, and Ψ g is the set of all

possible brand-modules within a product group g. The set of existing brand-modules in period t
is a subset of this set, i.e., Bgt ⊂ Ψ g and can vary in each period. For future reference, it is useful

to define the set of brands within group g that exist throughout all the time period (i.e., the
“common brands”) as Bg where Bg ⊆ Bgt ⊂ Ψ g .

        Sales of a brand-module, say, “Nabisco Premium-Flaked Soda Crackers” are aggregates
of the different UPCs that make up the brand-module:
                                                                                  1

                                    cbg = ⎛⎜ ∑ u∈Ω ( dubg cubgt ) ⎞⎟
                                                                         ρ gw    ρ gw
(6)
                                           ⎝      bg
                                                                   ⎠



                                                                                                     23
where cubgt is the consumption of UPC u of brand b of product group g in period t, ρ gw is the

elasticity of substitution within brands of brand b and product group g, and Ωbg is the set of all

possible UPCs that can exist in a particular brand-module in product group g. The parameters
dubg play a crucial role in the analysis as they capture the different quality of UPCs that can exist

in the market of a particular brand-module in product group g. For example, “Nabisco Premium-
Flaked Soda Crackers” is one particular brand-module, b, of the product group “Crackers,” and
“Nabisco Premium Unsalted Crackers” and “Nabisco Premium Multi-Grain Crackers” are two
different UPCs of the brand-module “Nabisco Premium-Flaked Soda Crackers”. Each of these
UPCs have their unique quality parameter, dubg . We define U bgt ⊆ Ωbg as the set of all UPCs that

have non-zero sales. It is also useful to define the set of UPCs in a brand-module that are
common over time as U bg where U bg ⊆ U bgt ⊂ Ωbg . As we show below, this 3-tier specification

allows for the introduction of a UPC to have a different impact on the price index for two
reasons. First, as noted above, each individual UPC has its own quality level. Second, if the UPC
belongs to a new brand, the elasticity of substitution used to value its introduction, ρ ga , is

different than the introduction of a new UPC within an existing brand, ρ gw . In the data we expect

that ρ ga < ρ gw as within brand-group UPCs are more substitutable than new brands.

        The intuition for how we will measure the impact of quality changes can most easily be
garnered from the unit cost functions. The minimum unit-cost function of sub-utility function in
(5) is given by the following expression:
                                                                           1
                                              ⎛         ⎛p       ⎞
                                                                  σ gw   ⎞σ gw
(7)                                    Pbgt = ⎜ ∑ ⎜ ubgt         ⎟⎟      ⎟ ,
                                              ⎜⎜ u∈Ubgt ⎜ dubg           ⎟⎟
                                               ⎝        ⎝         ⎠       ⎠
where pvbgt is the price of UPC u of brand b in product group g in period t and σ ij = ρ ij / ( ρ ij − 1) .

For simplicity, define p ubgt = pubgt dubg as the quality-adjusted price. Here, it is important to

remember that equation (7) only contains those UPCs with positive sales in time t and that the
exact price index of a brand-module depends on the quality-adjusted prices of the UPCs
contained within it. These properties are common to a number of different models, including the
translog case.



                                                                                                        24
       Analogously, the minimum unit-cost function of (5) can be denoted by
                                                                        1
                                              ⎛           σ ga ⎞ σ g
                                                                   a


(8)                                     Pgt = ⎜ ∑ ( Pbgt ) ⎟ .
                                              ⎜ b∈B            ⎟
                                              ⎝ g              ⎠
And the overall price index is given by,
                                                                   1

                                          Pt = ⎡ ∑ g∈G Pgt ⎤ σ .
                                                          σ
(9)
                                               ⎣            ⎦
Equations (7) - (9) constitute the main building blocks for the calculation of exact aggregate
price indices that follows.
       We can now understand how a change in quality will be measured by our index. Suppose
that UPC u with positive sales in time t – 1 is replaced in time t with a higher quality UPC, u′ ,
i.e. dubg < du′bg . If the higher quality UPC has a lower quality-adjusted price, an index that

ignores the quality upgrade will generally result in higher measured price change relative to the
true quality-adjusted inflation. The difficulty in correcting for changes in quality stems from the
fact that quality-adjusted prices are unobserved. However, by observing quantities purchased
together with prices, we can use the information in the demand system to uncover the quality
parameters. In particular, the CES demand system provides a simple way of recovering quality
adjusted prices from observed consumer purchases. For UPCs of equal price, those with a higher
quality will result in a lower quality-adjusted price and a higher market share. That is, the share
of consumption of UPC u will depend directly on the quality-adjusted price:
                                                                       1−σ gw
                                                 ⎛ pubgt / dubgt   ⎞
(10)                                    subgt   =⎜                 ⎟⎟           Ebgt
                                                 ⎜     Pbgt
                                                 ⎝                  ⎠

The seminal insight of Feenstra [1994] was that one can use this fact to eliminate the quality
parameters from the price index in (7) and write it only in terms of prices and market shares even
when goods are constantly being replaced.
       We turn next to the derivation of the exact price index that allows for the creation and
destruction of products with different qualities over time. Let U bgt ⊂ Ωbg be the subset of all

UPCs of brand b of group g consumed in period t. The nested CES structure embedded in (4)-(6)
implies that the exact price index that allows for product creation with different quality levels




                                                                                                     25
can be estimated using price and share data from individual UPCs purchases. The main
proposition in this paper is an extension of Feenstra (1994) and Broda and Weinstein (2006):


PROPOSITION 1: For g ∈ G , if there exists a b ∈ Bg = Bgt ∩ Bgt −1 , Bg ≠ ∅, then the exact price
        index for product group g with new and disappearing brands and UPCs is given by,
                                                                                                                wg
                                                      ⎡                  1                        wbg
                                                                                                      ⎤
                                                      ⎢     ⎛ S gt ⎞
                                                                c      σ a
                                                                           −1         ⎛ Sbgt ⎞ gw −1 ⎥
                                                                                           c     σ
         EPI ( pt , pt −1 , xt , xt −1 , B, U ) = ∏ ⎢CEPI g ⎜ c ⎟             ∏ b∈Bg ⎜⎜ S c ⎟⎟ ⎥ ,
                                                                         g


                                                            ⎜S ⎟
                                                  g∈G
                                                      ⎢     ⎝  gt −1 ⎠                ⎝ bgt −1 ⎠      ⎥
                                                      ⎣                                               ⎦
                             ∑ pubgt xubgt
                         u∈U bg
                                                           ∑ ∑ pubgt xubgt
                                                                 b∈Bg u∈U bgt
               c
        where Sbgt =                             , and S gtc =                                 , U bg = U bgt ∩ U bgt −1 , and CEPI g
                          ∑
                         u∈U bgt
                                   pubgt xubgt                   ∑ ∑
                                                                 b∈Bgt u∈U bgt
                                                                                 pubgt xubgt

        is the standard conventional exact price index defined over the common goods and
        weights wbgt , and wgt are defined in Sato (1976) and Vartia (1976).


This result states that the exact price index with quality change (EPI) is equal to the
“conventional” exact price index, CEPI g ( Bb ,U bg ) , i.e. the exact price index of the UPCs

without quality change over time, multiplied by two functions of the share of common goods
over time, i.e., the Sc ratios.
        The first Sc ratio captures the impact that new brand-modules have on the EPI relative to
the CEPI. It can be easily interpreted as the ratio over time of the expenditure shares of the
common brands in product group g. That is, when the share of new brands in period t is larger
than the share of disappearing brands in period t –1, this Sc ratio is smaller than 1. In this case, as
new brands have a lower price per quality than the disappearing goods (see (10)) the EPI will fall
relative to CEPI, since the conventional “fixed-good” index will miss the increase in quality that
occurred through the entry and exit of brands. In a similar way, the second Sc ratio captures the
role played by new and disappearing UPCs within brand-modules that were common in both
time periods.39 Sbgt
                 c
                     equals the expenditure share in period t of UPCs that are available in both

periods in a brand-module (i.e., u ∈ U bg = (U bgt ∩ U bgt −1 ) ). Thus, the Sc ratio is just the ratio of the

share of common goods in t relative to share of common goods in t-1. In this case, if one UPC is

39
  All of the index numbers used in this paper suffer from the classic “index number problem”. In particular, results
are dependent on the base year or years used. Since we are examining long-run changes, we use two base years 1972
and 1990.


                                                                                                                                   26
introduced and one is discontinued within a particular brand, then the EPI will fall relative to
CEPI only if the incoming UPC has a lower quality-adjusted price than the outgoing UPC. The
lower quality-adjusted price will imply that the new goods have a higher market share than the
disappearing good used to have. This implies that the Sc ratio will be smaller than unity because
the share of the common goods will have fallen. A Sc ratio smaller than one means that the exact
price index will be lower than the conventional price index and hence the conventional price
index is biased upwards.
       It is also important to recognize the importance of the exponent in this formula. The term
wbg simply captures the fact that one cares more about quality upgrading in brand-modules that
have larger market shares than ones with smaller shares. However, σ gw and σ ga play more subtle

roles. As the elasticity of substitution rises, then a given movement in the share of common
goods over time (i.e., Sc ratio) will have a smaller effect on the inflation bias. The intuition is
simple. If goods are highly substitutable, then the introduction of a new high quality good will
have a big impact on the prices and quantities of existing goods. This means that the
conventional price index will not be very biased since most of the welfare gain from the
introduction of the new good can be elicited from examining what happens to common goods. In
the limit as the elasticity of substitution approaches infinity the inflation bias goes to zero
because all quality changes are captured in price and quantity changes of existing goods.




                                        IV. Estimating the Elasticities
       In order to compute the bias we need to obtain estimates of the “within” and “across”
brand-module demand elasticities which can then be used to estimate the relationship implied by
(6) and (7). We rely closely on the methodology derived by Feenstra (1994) as extended by
Broda and Weinstein (2006).
       Formally, we do this by first modeling the supply and demand conditions for each good
within a brand-module cell. We estimate the demand elasticities, using the following system of
demand and supply equations:
                                        ln subgt = − (σ gw − 1) Δ
                                  kbg                               kbg                  k
       (11)                   Δ                                           ln pubgt + ε bgtbg




                                                                                                      27
                                                 kbg                 ω gw k              k
          (12)                               Δ         ln pbgt   =         Δ ln sbgt + δ bgt
                                                                             bg           bg

                                                                   1 + ωgw



Equation (11) represents the optimal demand for a given UPC u in brand-module b and product
group g, and equation (12) represents the supply of that UPC. Both are expressed in terms of
shares, where subgt is the share of variety u in brand-module b within product group g.

          The equation for each UPC u is differenced with respect to time and a benchmark UPC of
the same module, brand and product group. More specifically the difference operator we use for
                                                                    k
the shares and domestic prices is defined as Δ bg xubgt = Δxubgt − Δxkbg bgt . In this setup, the kth good

always corresponds to the largest selling UPC marketed in a particular brand-module. The
parameter ε ubgt represents demand shocks to a particular UPC that might cause demand for that

UPC to move relative to other UPCs marketed under the same brand-module. Obvious examples
of such shocks are seasonal shifts in demand such as holidays, weather changes or diet changes
that cause consumers to favor particular goods within a brand over others. Supply shocks are
represented by δ bgt , and can be thought to include assembly line shocks that affect some UPCs

within a firm’s product mix but not others. Both enter the expressions above in differenced form:
ε ubgt = ε ubgt − ε k        and δ ubgt = δ ubgt − δ kbg bgt .
  kbg                                k
                                    bg
                    bg bgt



          The k-differencing is critical to understanding our identification strategy. Any brand-
module level shocks – e.g. advertising, firm-level supply shocks, or general demand shocks – are
purged from the data and cannot affect our estimates. We are left with pure within-brand-module

variation that is likely to render ε ubgt and δ bgt uncorrelated, i.e. Et ε ubgt
                                                                             bg
                                                                                 δ ubgt
                                                                                    bg
                                                                                               (   k   k
                                                                                        = 0 . The second   )
identifying assumption is that σ gw is restricted to be the same over time and for all UPCs of a

given brand-module-product group (but varies over product groups).
          The derivation of the key moment conditions for identification has been explained in
detail in Broda and Weinstein (2006a,b) so here we just provide an intuition for the main
identification strategy. As in Feenstra (1994), it can be shown that using the panel nature of the
dataset and the assumption that demand and supply elasticities are constant over UPCs of the
same product group we can obtain identification of the “within” demand elasticities. In
particular, we can define a set of moment conditions for each brand-module and product group,



                                                                                                               28
by using the independence of the unobserved demand and supply disturbances for each UPC
over time, i.e.

(13)                                             (          )
                                   G (β g ) = Et υubg ( β g ) = 0 ∀u, b, and g.

                                  ⎛σ w ⎞
where υubg = ε ubgδ ubg and β g = ⎜ gw ⎟ . For each product group, g, all the moment conditions that
                                  ⎜ω ⎟
                                  ⎝ g⎠
enter the GMM objective function can be stacked and combined to obtain Hansen’s (1982)
estimator:

(14)                                  βˆg = arg min G* ( β g )′ WG* ( β g ) ∀g.
                                                β g ∈B


where G * ( β g ) is the sample analog of G ( β g ) stacked over all varieties u of a good g, W is a

positive definite weighting matrix to be defined below, and B is the set of economically feasible
β g which is common across importers and goods (i.e., σ gw > 1 and ω gw > 0 ∀g ). Note that this

implies that there are as many moment conditions as the number of UPCs in a particular product
group g. We follow Broda and Weinstein (2006) in the way we implement this optimization.40
Standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping.
         The problem of measurement error in average purchase prices motivates our weighting
scheme. In particular, there is good reason to believe that average prices calculated based on
large numbers of purchases are better measured than those based on small numbers of
purchases.41 The use of the between estimate coupled with our need to estimate σ gw , ωgw and a


40
  We first use Feenstra’s approximate (14) to solve for βg. In around 85 percent of the product groups this produces
estimates in the feasible set. If this procedure renders imaginary estimates or estimates of the wrong sign we use a
grid search of β ’s over the space defined by B. In particular, we evaluate the GMM objective function for values of
σ gw > 1 and ω gw > 0 at intervals that are approximately 5 percent apartFor computational easiness, we performed
the grid search over values of σ g and γ g where γ g is related to ωig in the following way:               γg            . The
                                                                                             ωg =
                                                                                                    σ g (1 − γ g ) − 1
objective function was evaluated at values for σ g ∈ [1.05,131.5] at intervals that are 5 percent apart, and
for γ g ∈ [ 0.01,1] at intervals 0.01 apart. Only combinations of σ g and γ g that imply σ g > 1 and ω g > 0 are used.
To ensure we used a sufficiently tight grid, we cross-checked these grid-searched parameters with estimates
obtained by non-linear least squares as well as those obtained through Feenstra’s original methodology. Using our
grid spacing, the difference between the parameters estimated using Feenstra’s methodology and ours differed only
by a few percent for those σig and ωig for which we could apply Feenstra’s “between” approach.
41
   In the appendix of Broda and Weinstein (2006), they show that this requires us to add one additional term
inversely related to the quantity consumed and weight the data so that the variances are more sensitive to price
movements based on large value UPCs than small ones.


                                                                                                                                 29
constant means that we need data from at least four different UPCs in each product group and at
least two time differences to identify β.
       Estimates of demand elasticities across brand-modules are obtained using a similar
procedure as the one just described. Instead of using UPC level data, we use market shares and
unit prices at the brand level across modules and assume that the across-brand elasticities in all
modules within a product group are the same. We aggregate prices to form brand level prices by
using the exact brand price index implied by the CES. Thus, we can obtain estimates for the two
set of elasticities per product group that are key to estimating the impact of product churning. In
the next section we describe this two set of elasticities separately.


                                             V. Results
       Our empirical and theoretical section has suggested two main implications of creative-
destruction for aggregate price measurement. The first concerns the inherent stochastic element
of the CPI due to the small sample of prices that are used in the index. The second concerns the
magnitude of bias arising from an index that not only deviates from an exact or superlative index
but also does not take into account the fact that many prices are moving to and from their
reservation levels. We will address each in turn.


V. A. Sampling Error in the CPI
       Since the CPI is based on a random sample of prices, it can deviate from the true price
index because of sampling error. The current literature on index numbers devotes a great deal of
their attention to matters such as choice of formula, weighting schemes, etc., but seem to have
made only passing reference to the fact that most price indexes are derived from samples and are
thereby subject to sampling error.
       A simple way to understand the importance of sampling error in the CPI is to bootstrap
the standard errors of the CPI by repeatedly drawing random samples of comparable size and
examining how sensitive the price index is to these different samples. In order not to confuse
issues of sampling with those of new goods we will only focus on the set of goods that survive
over the full period in question. Given that a product group is approximately the size of an ELI,
then the BLS is sampling 280 prices per product group. If one conservatively assumes that a




                                                                                                     30
product group is more like a stratum, the BLS samples approximately 400 products per sub-
index. In either case, this is a small share of the total number of prices.
         Unfortunately, we do not know precisely how BLS field agents decide how to weight
each good when deciding which goods to include. We therefore will make two extreme
assumptions. The first is that the BLS field agents know the true sales shares of all goods in an
ELI when they establish the base year (1999); and the second is that they randomly select goods
without knowing anything about the sales weights. Obviously the truth lies somewhere between
these two extreme assumptions, but this implies that the true degree of measurement error will
also lie between these bounds.
         Table 10 presents the results from bootstrapping the standard errors for a price index that
covers our sample of goods that is constructed using the CPI methodology.42 We perform the
bootstrapping at a quarterly frequency and annual frequency and report the annualized inflation
rates and standard errors. In all cases, we bootstrap the distribution using 250 iterations. Since
any seasonal factor should affect each sample identically, we should interpret the distribution of
inflation measures at the quarterly frequency to be standard errors on seasonally adjusted data.
         At a quarterly frequency with 250 iterations and using a “weighted” sampling, the typical
inflation rate is 0.75. The standard error is 0.49 indicating when we observe quarterly inflation
rates of around 1 percent, the 95th percentile confidence interval for the true inflation is between
0 and 2 percent. If we assume that field agents do not observe sales weights, the 95 percent
confidence bands expand to just over 1.1 percentage point. This implies that we can only be sure
that the economy is away from deflationary terrain in cases where measured inflation is above 1
percent. Sampling 400 products slightly reduces the sampling variation as expected, but does not
qualitatively change the results.43 This sampling error does not vary much by quarter.44
         Not surprisingly, moving to a four-quarter frequency reduces the sampling error
presumably because the impact of short-term price fluctuations arising from sales and other high

42
   The price index we compute tracks the changes in CPI food and beverage index quite closely over the sample
period. See Appendix F for details
43
   At first glance this number seems too large, however, it follows immediately from the volatility of price changes
that we described earlier. In the data preview section we highlighted the fact that our data, as well as the data for the
CPI, exhibit very high levels of price volatility at the individual good level. More to the point, we documented that
the standard deviation of a price change for a common good at a quarterly frequency is 20 percent. Given this level
of volatility of individual prices, even with 29,000 price quotes, we would expect the standard deviation of the
average inflation rate to be 0.16 at a quarterly frequency or 0.62 annualized. This number is quite close to the
numbers we obtain from the bootstrapping procedure and gives the intuition behind the numbers we report.
44
   See Appendix F for details.


                                                                                                                      31
frequency events is reduced. Indeed, one-quarter inflation rates (annualized rates) are roughly 3
times more volatile that four-quarter inflation rates. The standard error for four-quarter inflation
rates is 0.1 indicating that sampling error means that the index is precise to plus or minus 0.2
percent per year at the annual frequency.
       Another important number to compute is the sampling error for changes in inflation rates.
This lets us examine how much confidence we have in a movement in inflation. At the quarterly
frequency, the standard errors range from 0.76 and 0.88 depending on how well one assumes that
BLS field agents sample. This means that unless a seasonally adjusted quarterly inflation rate
moves by 1.5 to 2 percentage points in either direction (annualized), one cannot be confident that
the fluctuation isn’t being driven by measurement error. Once again, at the annual frequency the
standard errors fall but they remain around 0.2 indicating that inflation movements of less than
plus or minus 0.4 percent could easily be driven by sampling error. Overall, this implies that at
quarterly frequencies inflation rates have large standard errors, and policymakers and market
participants should be cautious in interpreting changes in inflation trends.
       Another way of understanding these numbers is to compare them to the actual inflation
rates we observe. In order to make our numbers comparable, we should make two adjustments.
First, the BLS uses approximately 29,000 price quotes for the ELIs covered in our sample, but
85,000 quotes for the CPI as a whole. Since the entire CPI averages 2.5 times more prices than
we use in our simulation, one would expect the standard error of the CPI to be smaller than that
of our simulation. If we assume that the standard error of the CPI falls with the square root of the
number of price quotes, this suggests we should divide our estimate of the standard error by 1.58.
On the other hand, the work of Klenow and Kryvtsov [2005] suggests that our sample of prices
exhibits less price volatility than those in the CPI as a whole. If we think of the Klenow and
Kryvtsov find the (weighted) absolute price change in the CPI to be 13.3 percent, whereas the
comparable price fluctuations in our data are 8.8 percent, then the standard error of the typical
price quote in the CPI would be 1.51 times larger that of a price in our sample. This comparison
suggests that the large sample size in the CPI implies that average volatility is 1.58 times lower
in the CPI, but the higher price volatility in the sectors not covered in our sample implies that
one should expect the CPI to have 1.51 times more volatility than our sample. The similarity of
the implied downward and upward adjustments suggests that the variance of the CPI is, to a first




                                                                                                    32
approximation, close to the variance of the sample we are using, so we will compare the implied
volatility in our sample with that of the CPI directly.
         Figure 4 summarizes our results of the impact of sampling error on innovations in the
inflation rate. Here we plot the kernel density of seasonally-adjusted quarterly inflation rate
changes between 1994 and 2003. Inflation innovations whose absolute value are greater than 1.5
percent denote those changes that we can be 95 percent confident were not generated by
measurement error. As one can see from the graph, about 50 percent of all inflation changes fall
within the interval [-1.5, 1.5], which means that we cannot reject the hypothesis that half of all
observed quarterly inflation innovations were due to measurement error. Obviously, the smaller
standard errors for four-quarter inflation rate innovations means that we can be far more certain
about annual inflation rates. However, the large standard errors at the quarterly frequency imply
that the measurement error is sufficiently large to make it difficult to determine the direction of
inflation changes about half of the time.


V. B. Quality – New Goods Bias
         A separate issue concerns the magnitude of the bias in the CPI. We already know from
Figures 1 and 2 that the mean of the full distribution of price changes will be smaller than the
mean of the price changes of a common goods index. The key question is by how much. In order
to examine the quality bias, we need to leave behind the ad hoc structure of the CPI and turn to
the magnitude of the bias relative to an exact index. We compute the bias relative to a CES price
index computed over a set of common goods over time (i.e, the CEPI in Proposition 1). We think
this is a reasonable benchmark because for common goods, the CES price index yields an almost
identical rate of inflation at the Tornqvist index and the chained CPI.45 The role of forced
substitutions is discussed below. Explicit quality corrections (like hedonics) are not standard in
any of the categories of goods included in our data.46
         Proposition 1 indicates that the magnitude of the bias depends on two factors: Sc ratios
and elasticities. The former indicates the relative importance of quality shifts in the data and the

45
   In Appendix G we present the biases of the Laspeyres, Paasche, CPI, chained CPI, and CES price indexes over
four-year periods relative to the Tornqvist. As one can see from the table the Chained CPI, CES, and Tornqvist
indexes yield inflation rates that differ by less than 1/100th of a percentage point.
46
   The only exception is computer software where the CPI started using hedonics since January 1998. The
contribution of computer software to the overall quality bias we find is tiny (less than 1 percent) so we ignore this
adjustment when presenting the main results.


                                                                                                                        33
second tells us about how much of these shifts are being picked up in the conventional index.
Table 11 presents the distribution of the per-year ratio of the share of common goods within and
across brand-modules.47 The median within per-year ratio is 0.93. Over a five-year period this
implies a ratio of 0.69. This number is easiest to understand in terms of a simple example.
Imagine a firm produced two goods with equal market shares within a brand-module. If they
replace one of these goods with a new product that has twice the market share of the common
good, that would generate a ratio of 0.66. Thus, a ratio of 0.69 is consistent with substantial
quality upgrading by firms. The across ratio is 0.98 per year, or 0.87 over 4-years, which is
significantly smaller than the within Sc ratio, but still less than one. This suggests that while the
typical product group experienced new brand-modules that were of higher quality than previous
brand-modules, much of the quality improvement appears to have been happening within the
product mix of particular firms.
         The third and fourth columns of Table 11 show the distribution of estimated elasticities of
substitution. The typical within-brand-module elasticity is 11.5. The implication is that a one
percent price decline of a UPC within a brand-module causes its sales to rise by 12 percent. This
would be the case if the various versions of, say, Nabisco Ritz Crackers are fairly close
substitutes with one another – a fairly plausible conjecture. This estimate is slightly higher than
the typical demand elasticity found between different products of the same brand in marketing
studies that range from 4 to 7 (see Dube et al. (2005) and Rossi (1999)). We believe this makes
our estimated quality biases conservative estimates.
         A second way to assess whether this number seems reasonable is to consider other
estimates of the elasticity of substitution. Broda and Weinstein [2006] estimate the elasticity of
substitution for US imports at various levels of aggregation. They find a typical elasticity of
between 3 and 4 for the most disaggregated trade data (10-digit Harmonized System categories).
Clearly, products produced within the same brand-module should be a lot more substitutable than
imports from different countries within the same 10-digit sector, so it is comforting to see that
our estimated elasticity is larger than their 10-digit elasticity.
         A final reasonability check is to see if the within-brand-module elasticities are larger than
the across-brand-module elasticities. This would be true if we believe that products marketed

47
  Per-year ratios are derived from 5-year calculations. The reason for doing this is that in the computation of the
quality bias we want to exclude the impact that high frequency churning (e.g., like that coming from fashion
products) can have on the quality bias.


                                                                                                                      34
under a particular brand in a module are more substitutable than different brands. For example, it
is likely that different types of Nabisco Ritz crackers are more similar to each other than they are
to Graham Crackers. When we estimate the across brand-module elasticity of substitution, we
see that the median elasticity of substitution across brand-modules is 7.5, which is smaller than
the median within brand-module elasticity. While we can reject at all conventional levels of
significance the hypothesis that the median across and within elasticities are the same, this might
not be convincing because we would like to see that within-brand-module elasticities are smaller
than the across ones in the same module. In order to assess this, for each product group we take
the difference between the estimated within- and across-brand-module elasticity. The median
difference is 2.4 and this is statistically different from 0 at the 5 percent level (t-statistic equals
2.04). Thus, not only is the typical within elasticity higher than the typical across elasticity, this
is also true within product groups.
          The results thus far indicate that while there is significant product upgrading, the high
levels of substitutability mean that a large share of this upgrading is likely to be captured in the
movements of existing prices. However, Proposition 1 enables us to compute the actual bias
since we know all of the ratios of common shares and elasticities. When we do this, we find the
conventional exact price index overstates inflation by 2.80 percentage points over the period
1999-2003 relative to the quality-adjusted index or 0.69 percentage points per year. Over the
period 1994-2003 the estimated bias is 8.5 percentage points or 0.91 percentage points per
year.48
          We can now contrast our approach with that of the BLS. There are two ways in which
new and disappearing products affect the CPI. First, the BLS regularly schedules product
substitutions in 25 percent of the categories every year. This means that with the exception of
“forced” substitutions (when the product that is being sampled ceases to be sold at the point of
purchase), the same good is priced over a 4-year period. Thus, in general, over any four year
period, we can think of the CPI as a fixed-goods price index.49
          As we just noted, however, the BLS is sometimes forced to substitute a product when it
disappears from the particular store being sampled. There are two important reasons why forced
substitutions will miss the type of product creation and destruction we observe in the overall

48
  In Appendix H, we present the twenty product groups that contribute the most to the quality bias.
49
  We saw in previous sections how a common-goods CES price index is almost identical to a superlative common-
goods price index. At the product category level, we know that the CPI is an superlative index.


                                                                                                           35
population of goods First, a good that drops out of the sample is likely to be replaced with a good
of comparable vintage rather than a new good. This is because the BLS agent has instructions to
find a good whose characteristics match as closely as possible that of the exiting good. For
example, if Nikon decides to replace a particular 3-megapixel camera with a 4-megapixel one,
the BLS agent will attempt to find another 3-megapixel camera with which to replace the
discontinued camera. This implies that the new 4-megapixed camera is likely not to be used in
the updated CPI. Second, when substituting the new 3-megapixel camera into the sample, the
BLS typically uses a direct comparison method to compare the prices of the two different goods.
This method treats any difference in prices between the two different 3-megapixel cameras as a
price change, which implies that any quality change between products is ignored (see BLS
(2005) and Bils (2004)).50 For these two reasons we believe that the vast majority of product
creation and destruction and its price implications are ignored by the CPI.
         In Stylized Fact 4 we highlighted the cyclical patterns of creation and destruction. We
now turn to assessing whether the bias to the common-goods price index has a cyclical
component. Figure 5 shows the four-quarter biases computed on a rolling basis against the sales
growth of whole ACNielsen sample of products. The pattern observed supports the conjecture
that the bias is cyclical. The bias moves between 0.32 and 0.71 percentage points over four
quarters depending on the extent of sales. In particular, the lowest bias was recorded in the
trough of the recession of 2001 and the peak was recorded in the 4th quarter of 2002. Despite the
clear cyclical pattern, the figure plots only 16 observations in a period with only a mild
recession. Table 12 shows that the aggregate pattern is confirmed at the product group level.
Here we regress the four-quarter bias against the growth rate of sales in the product group over
the same four quarters. We present different specifications (with and without sales weights, with
and without year and quarter dummies). The coefficient on sales growth can be interpreted as the
elasticity between sales growth at the product group level and the product group four-quarter
bias. The last column shows that for every 10 percent growth in sales in a particular group, the
bias in the conventional price index for that group increases by 1 percentage point.
         We can now put together all of our results. The average quality bias we find is around 0.8
percent per year. Given this upward bias and the estimates for sampling error computed in the

50
   This is true for the vast majority of CPI product categories in our sample. For other products (airline fares, cable
television, personal computers, motor vehicles, telephone services, etc), BLS uses hedonics or other methods to infer
quality.


                                                                                                                    36
previous section, one cannot be 95 percent certain that the U.S. is not in deflation unless
measured quarterly C-CPI inflation rates is higher than 1.8 percent per year.51 Sampling error at
the quarterly frequency is sufficiently high that quarterly rates of chained inflation of 1.8 percent
at an annualized rate could still be consistent with deflation (adding the bias and the sampling
error together). Roughly 30 percent of the actual quarterly CPI inflation rates reported by the
BLS over the period 1994-2003 were below 1.8 percent. This suggests that sampling error
coupled with the estimated bias means that approximately one third of all quarterly inflation rates
cannot be statistically distinguished from zero 52




                                                 VI. Conclusion
         Since Schumpeter completed his classic work, economists have known that economic
welfare depends heavily on the creation and destruction of products. However, statistical
agencies charged with measuring the cost of consumption have used methodologies that largely
ignore the creative-destruction process. Our standard inflation indexes are computed using price
surveys of existing goods with little or no information about the quantitative importance of these
goods. The fact that these surveys only comprise a small fraction of all goods in the market gives
rise to substantial sampling error in aggregate indexes. Moreover, the inability of statistical
agencies to systematically adjust for the destruction of obsolete goods and the creation of new
and improved ones means that there are likely to be substantial biases in price measurement.
         This paper is the first large-scale examination of product creation and destruction and its
implications for price measurement. Using a new dataset that covers around 40 percent of all
expenditures on goods in the CPI we conclude that there is an upward bias of around 0.8 percent
in this fraction of the CPI. Moreover, we find that sampling error for the set of goods we
examine means that one would need to observe a conventionally measured quarterly inflation
rate of close to 2 percent to be 95 percent confident that true inflation is not negative. The bias is



51
   When the comparison is made with the regular CPI, then we have to add the upper level substitution bias to the
confidence interval. We estimated the difference between a C-CPI or Tornqvist index and CPI (lower level
geometric, and upper level Laspayres) to be 0.2 percent in our data. This implies that the CPI has to be higher than 2
percent for policymakers to be certain that the U.S. is not in deflation.
52
   For space considerations we present the kernel density of seasonally-adjusted quarterly inflation rates between
1994 and 2003 in Appendix I.


                                                                                                                   37
also strongly pro-cyclical, which suggests that business cycles are more pronounced than is
typically reported in official statistics.
        The paper also fills an important gap in the existing literature on creative destruction. An
extensive theoretical literature focuses on how the process through which new products replace
old ones influences major aspects of macroeconomic performance. Product creation and
destruction is at the core of many models of long-run growth and business cycle fluctuations.
Despite its theoretical prominence, the empirical analysis on the aggregate implications of
product turnover still lags far behind its theoretical counterpart. Our work complements the
papers by Dunne et al. (1988) and Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) on firm turnover by
documenting a key component of the creative destruction process that remained unmeasured,
that of product entry and exit.
        Considerable more work needs to be done before we can definitively measure the
magnitude of the overall quality bias of the CPI. First, we need to have more and better data
about sections of the CPI that are not covered in our sample. In particular, we need to have
information on both prices and quantities in these sectors. Second, we need find ways of testing
the implications of functional form assumptions on our estimates of quality bias. In particular, in
this paper our choice of the CES aggregator was based on the fact that it is a good approximation
of a superlative index for common goods, it is useful in comparing our results with existing
theory, and that we have methodological limitations on applying more flexible structures.
However, the prominence and cyclicality of quality upgrading indicates that the biases and
measurement issues we have documented are likely to be robust features of the data.




                                                                                                  38
                                  References (Incomplete)



Anderson, Simon P., A. de Palma, and J. Thisse (1992), Discrete Choice Theory of Product
      Differentiation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Barlevy, G., “On the Cyclicality of Research and Development” mimeo Federal Reserve Bank of
       Chicago, 2006.

Bernard, A., S. Redding and P. Schott (2006) “ Multi-product Firms and Product Switching,”
       NBER working paper 12293.

Bilbiie, F., F. Ghironi and M. Melitz, “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and Business
        Cycles,” mimeo Harvard University, June 2006.

Bilbiie, F., F. Ghironi and M. Melitz, “Monopoly Power and Endogenous Variety in Dynamic
        Stochastic General Equilibrium models,” mimeo Harvard University, June 2006.

Bils, Mark, 2004. “Measuring Growth from Better and Better Goods.”NBER Working Paper
       10606, June.

Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow, 2001. “Quantifying Quality Growth.” American Economic
       Review, 91, 1006-1030.

Blanchard, O. and P. Diamond, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of U.S. Workers.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990, (2), pp. 85-143.

Bresnahan T. and R. J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.

Broda, C. and D. Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Volume 121, Issue 2 - May 2006

Broda, C. and D. Weinstein, “Variety Growth and World Welfare”, American Economic Review,
       Vol. 94, No. 2, May 2004

Boskin Commission Report (1996), "Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,"
       final report to the Senate Finance Committee from the Advisory Commission to Study
       the Consumer Price Index, http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/boskinrpt.html.

Caballero, R., and M. Hammour. “On the Timing and Efficiency of Creative Destruction”,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics,Vol. 111, No. 3. (Aug 1996)

Caballero, R., and M. Hammour. “The Cleansing Effects of Recessions”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 111, No. 3. (Aug 1996)



                                                                                               39
Campbell, J. “Entry, Exit, Embodied Technology, and Business Cycles” Review of Economic
     Dynamics, 1(2), 371-408. April 1998.

Chatterjee, S. and R. Cooper. “Entry and Exit, Product Variety and the Business Cycle” NBER
       working paper no. 4562, December 1993.

Davis, S. and J. Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
       Reallocation” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 3 (Aug., 1992), pp.
       819-863

Dunne, T., M. Roberts and L. Samuelson, “Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in U.S.
      Manufacturing Industries” The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 19, No. 4 (Winter,
      1988), pp. 495-515

Dunne, T., M. Roberts and L. Samuelson, “The Growth and Failure of U. S. Manufacturing
      Plants” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 4 (Nov., 1989), pp. 671-698

Feenstra, R. “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models, Without
       Constant Price Elasticity” Economic Letters, 78, 2003, 79-86.

Feenstra, R. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,” American
       Economic Review, 84(1), March 1994, 157-177.

Feenstra, R. and M. Shapiro, Scanner Data and Price Indexes, 2003, Studies of Income and
       Wealth, Volume 64, The University of Chicago Press.

Fenwick, D., A. Ball, P. Morgan, and M. Silver, “Price Collection and Quality Assurance of Item
      Sampling in the Retail Price Index” in Scanner Data and Price Indexes (2003), The
      University of Chicago Press.

Gallo, A. “First Major Drop in Food Product Introduction in the last 20 years” Food Marketing,
       December 1997, US Department of Agriculture.

Geroski, P. and C. Walters, “Innovative Activity over the Business Cycle,” The Economic
      Journal, July 1995, 105, pp. 916-928.

Ghironi, F. and M. Melitz, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
       Heterogenous Firms”, Quarterly Journal of Economics CXX (August 2005): 865-915

Gollop, F. and J. Monahan, 1991, "A generalized Index of Diversification: Trends in U.S.
       Manufacturing" Review of Economics and Statistics 43 no.2: 318:230

Hall, Robert E. “The Labor Market Is Key To Understanding the Business Cycle.” Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University, September 23, 2004.




                                                                                             40
Hausman, J. (2003), "Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI," Journal of Economic
     Perspectives.

Jovanovic, B. and R. Gilbert, “The Diversification of Production”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity. Microeconomics, Vol. 1993, No. 1. (1993), pp. 197-247.

Jovanovic, B. and S. Lach, “Product Innovation and the Business Cycle” International Economic
Review, Vol. 38, No. 1. (Feb., 1997), pp. 3-22.

Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov, 2005. “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:
      Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?” Stanford University mimeo.

Leaver, S. and W. Larson, 2001, “Estimating variances for a scanner-based consumer price
       index,” Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Governmnet Statistics
       Section.

Lebow, David E., and Jeremy B. Rudd, 2003. “Measurement error in the Consumer Price Index:
      Where do we stand?” Journal of Economic Literature, 41, 159-201.

Moulton, Brent R. and Karin E. Moses (1997), "Addressing the Quality Change Issue in the
      Consumer Price Index," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 305-366.

Nordhaus, William D., 1998. “Quality change in price indexes”. Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, Winter, 59-68.

Richardson, D. “Scanner Indexes for the Consumer Price Index,” chapter 2 in Scanner Data and
       Price Indexes, edited by Feenstra, R. and M. Shapiro, The University of Chicago Press.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and David W. Wilcox (1996) “Mismeasurement in the Consumer Price
       Index: An Evaluation.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 11, 93-142.

Shimer, Robert. “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment.” Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, 2005.

Streitweiser, M., 1991, "The extent and Nature of Establishment Level Diversification in Sixteen
       US Industries" Journal of Law and Economics 34 no.2, pt.2: 503-34

Stokey, N. "Learning-by-Doing and the Introduction of New Goods," Journal of Political
Economy, 96 (August 1988), pp. 701-717.

U.S. Department of Labor (1997), BLS Handbook of Methods, U.S. Government Printing Office.




                                                                                              41
                                                             Table 1
                                                       Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                                        Number of     Number of
     Year                       Number of UPCs                            Number of Brand-Modules        Modules    Product Groups
                           By Brand-Module         By Firm                               By Firm
                   Total   Median   Average    Median   Average        Total        Median    Average     Total         Total
     1994         532789     8       46.1        8        36.0         31884           1         2.9      1097          118
     1999         651343     5       33.6        8        39.6         51881           2         3.9      1096          122
     2000         666445     5       32.5        8        40.4         53579           2         4.0      1095          122
     2001         658055     4       31.4        8        39.9         54213           2         4.1      1093          122
     2002         690036     4       31.7        8        41.7         57146           2         4.2      1092          122
     2003         697312     4       31.5        8        42.0         58135           2         4.2      1093          123

    Average       649330     5        34         8        40           51140          2         4         1094           122
Per-year Growth
  2003/1994        1.03     0.93     0.96       1.00     1.02           1.07         1.08      1.04       1.00           1.04
  2003/1999        1.02     0.95     0.98       1.00     1.01           1.03         1.00      1.02       1.00           1.01
                                           TABLE 2
                        Average Firm Characteristic by Firm Size (2003Q4)

          Value Bins (in $)                   UPCs           Brands       Modules Product Groups           Share

          1-       100,000                       3               1            1              1             0.00
    100,000 -     1,000,000                     10              2             3              2             0.02
  1,000,000 -     5,000,000                     33              5             6              3             0.05
  5,000,000 - 10,000,000                        69              7            10              4             0.04
 10,000,000 -    50,000,000                    139              11           20              7             0.17
 50,000,000 - 100,000,000                      386              22           50             14             0.10
100,000,000 - 500,000,000                      713              37           71             18             0.33
500,000,000 - 1,000,000,000                    1191            68            110            28             0.12
           > 1,000,000,000                     3431            182           246            54             0.16

Note: The share is based on total value of UPCs for firms within a bin compared to total value in 2003Q4
Ignore entry and exit of firms, only consider firms that exists in both periods t and t-1
                                      TABLE 3
                          Product Entry and Exit in the U.S.

Period                                  9-year              4-year             1-year
                                      1994 - 2003         1999 - 2003          Median

Entry Rate                                0.78                0.50               0.25
Creation                                  0.64                0.37               0.09
Entrant Relative Size                     0.49                0.56               0.30

Exit Rate                                 0.72                0.46               0.24
Destruction                               0.37                0.18               0.03
Exiter Relative Size                      0.23                0.23               0.09

Ratio Share Common (t/t-1)                0.57                0.77               0.93

Notes: Entry Rate = number of new products (t ) / total number of products (t )
        Exit Rate = number of disappearing products (t-1) / total number of products ( t -1)
        Creation = Value(new products, t ) / Total value (t )
        Destruction = Value(disapp. products, t -1) / Total value (t -1)
                                         TABLE 4
         Share of Product Entry and Exit within Brands and within Manufacturer ID

                        Brand Entry and Exit                 Firm ID Entry and Exit
Period            9-year       4-year       1-year      9-year        4-year        1-year
                1994 - 2003 1999 - 2003 Median        1994 - 2003 1999 - 2003 Median

Entry Rate         0.73         0.35        0.16          0.51          0.26        0.11
Creation           0.30         0.12        0.01          0.18          0.07        0.01

Exit Rate          0.50         0.27        0.15          0.29          0.15        0.09
Destruction        0.18         0.03        0.00          0.06          0.02        0.00
                                                    Table 5
               Net and Gross Rates by Module, Size-Weighted Averages Ranked by SUM (over 1-year)

          MODULE DESCRIPTION                        RANKING CREATION DESTRUCTION NET ENTRY       TURNOVER
                                                      (1)      (2)       (3)       (2) - (3)       (2) + (3)

VIDEO PRODUCTS PRERECORDED                               1           0.56          0.09   0.47      0.65
CAMERAS                                                  2           0.44          0.18   0.26      0.62
COMPUTER SOFTWARE                                        3           0.32          0.19   0.13      0.51
TELEPHONE AND ACCESSORY                                  4           0.25          0.11   0.14      0.36
VACUUM AND CARPET CLEANER APPL                           5           0.25          0.14   0.11      0.39
CANDLE AND CANDLE IN HOLDER                              6           0.30          0.15   0.14      0.45
DISPOSABLE DIAPERS                                       7           0.17          0.06   0.12      0.23
STORAGE AND SPACE MANAGEMENT                             8           0.19          0.10   0.09      0.29
KITCHEN UTENSIL AND GADGET                               9           0.18          0.10   0.08      0.28
NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS                                 10           0.14          0.06   0.08      0.20

SUGAR-GRANULATED                                       100           0.01          0.01   0.01      0.02
FRANKFURTERS-REFRIGERATED                              99            0.01          0.01   0.00      0.02
BUTTER AND SPREADS                                     98            0.02          0.00   0.01      0.02
CHEESE - COTTAGE                                       97            0.01          0.01   0.00      0.02
SAUSAGE-BREAKFAST                                      96            0.02          0.01   0.01      0.03
SEAFOOD-TUNA-SHELF STABLE                              95            0.02          0.01   0.02      0.03
EGGS-FRESH                                             94            0.03          0.01   0.02      0.04
DINNERS-FROZEN                                         93            0.04          0.00   0.03      0.04
MARINARA SAUCE                                         92            0.03          0.01   0.02      0.04
PIZZA-FROZEN                                           91            0.04          0.01   0.03      0.04

Note: Select top 100 MODs by average value and then rank top 10/bottom 10 by SUM
                                                         TABLE 6
                                    Correlations between Module Entry and Exit Variables

           No Correction for Fixed Module Effects                            Correction for Fixed Module Effects
    Correlations between 1-year Entry and Exit Rates                 Correlations between 1-year Entry and Exit Rates

                                    Exit                                                                Exit
 Entry            2003       2002          2001     2000           Entry             2003       2002           2001    2000

 2003             0.73       0.74          0.69     0.71           2003              0.24       0.23           -0.02   -0.07
 2002             0.72       0.70          0.74     0.73           2002              0.16       0.07           0.20    0.05
 2001             0.65       0.69          0.68     0.75           2001              -0.38      -0.29          -0.23   -0.10
 2000             0.64       0.65          0.67     0.69           2000              -0.04      -0.04          0.06    0.11

                               Destruction                                                        Destruction
Creation          2003       2002       2001        2000          Creation           2003       2002      2001         2000

 2003             0.84       0.76          0.77     0.73           2003              0.55       -0.29          0.04    -0.44
 2002             0.86       0.80          0.78     0.76           2002              0.45       -0.05          -0.22   -0.24
 2001             0.89       0.85          0.83     0.81           2001              -0.45      0.33           -0.12   0.37
 2000             0.83       0.86          0.87     0.83           2000              -0.56      0.12           0.17    0.37
                           TABLE 7
   Destruction Rates (Over 4-Quarters) by UPC Characteristic
                                           Age
                              Destruction           Share
    Age in years                                   (in t -1)
          1                      0.141              0.115
          2                      0.119              0.094
        3-7                      0.059              0.342
         8+                      0.026              0.449

                                UPC Share (in its module)
                              Destruction            Share
     Share (t-1)                                    (in t -1)
       0 - 0.00001              0.209                0.014
0.00001 - 0.0001                0.096                0.110
 0.0001 - 0.001                 0.024                0.336
   0.001 - 0.01                 0.008                0.469
    0.01 - 0.1                  0.006                0.071
           0.1+                 0.004                0.000

                                        Brand Size
                              Destruction              Share
# of UPCs per Brand                                   (in t -1)
        1-9                      0.119                 0.150
       10 - 99                   0.062                 0.550
      100 - 999                  0.068                 0.271
     1000 - 9999                 0.332                 0.030
                            TABLE 8
              Market Share and Average Product Size
        (Mean and Standard Deviations across 1090 Modules)

                                  Market Share
             1994     1999       2000     2001         2002     2003

1999 UPCs              1.00      0.92       0.83        0.76     0.70
                                (0.11)     (0.18)      (0.21)   (0.23)

1994 UPCs    1.00      0.58      0.54       0.50        0.47     0.44
                      (0.32)    (0.31)     (0.31)      (0.30)   (0.29)

                               Cumulative Exit Rates
             1994     1999       2000      2001        2002     2003

1999 UPCs                        0.20       0.30        0.36     0.41
                                (0.09)     (0.12)      (0.14)   (0.15)

1994 UPCs              0.47      0.50       0.54        0.57     0.59
                      (0.14)    (0.14)     (0.15)      (0.15)   (0.15)

                       Average Size of Surviving Products
                       Relative to All Products in the Module
             1994     1999        2000       2001       2002    2003

1999 UPCs              1.00      1.17       1.18        1.21     1.23
                                (0.14)     (0.21)      (0.26)   (0.32)

1994 UPCs    1.00      1.46      1.46       1.46        1.48     1.49
                      (0.60)    (0.63)     (0.68)      (0.74)   (0.79)
                                                                           TABLE 9
                                                           Cyclicality at the Product Group Level

                                          Full Sample                     Above Average Consumption Growth      Below Average Consumption Growth
                           Net Creation     Creation    Destruction      Net Creation Creation   Destruction   Net Creation Creation   Destruction
Consumption Growth              0.351         0.299        -0.053            0.384       0.375      -0.009        0.362        0.241      -0.121
(Product Group Level)         [0.018]**     [0.020]**     [0.013]**        [0.040]**   [0.048]**    [0.029]     [0.044]**    [0.043]**   [0.031]**

Observations                       1815           1815      1815              875        875         875          940          940         940
Number of rpg                       122           122        122              119        119         119          119          119         119
R-squared                          0.18           0.12      0.01              0.11       0.07         0           0.08         0.04        0.02
All regressions include product group fixed effects. Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level
                                                                        TABLE 10
        Inflation under different Sampling Methodologies                        Inflation Changes under different Sampling Methodologies
                             2003 - 1994                                       Annualized Inflation Change (percentage points) 2003 - 1994
Sample Size              280         280          400           400          Sample Size             280       280       400                   400
Random Draw           Unweighted   Weighted    Unweighted     Weighted       Random Draw          Unweighted Weighted Unweighted             Weighted
Iterations               250         250          250           250          Iterations              250       250       250                   250
Base                     99          99           99            99           Base                    99        99        99                    99

                            1-Quarter Differences (Annualized rate)                                         1-Quarter Differences (Annualized rate)
       Mean              0.73         0.75          0.76         0.75              Mean             -0.16         -0.37        -0.16           -0.37
     St.Dev.             0.56         0.49          0.44         0.37            St.Dev.            0.88           0.76         0.70            0.49
 Coef. of Variation      0.8           0.7          0.6           0.5        Coef. of Variation      -5.5          -2.1         -4.4            -1.3

                                    4-quarter Differences                                                            4-quarter Differences
       Mean              1.04        0.95           1.10        0.95               Mean             -0.52         -0.54        -0.53           -0.54
     St.Dev.             0.12        0.11           0.10        0.07             St.Dev.            0.18           0.17         0.14           0.11
 Coef. of Variation      0.1          0.1           0.1         0.1          Coef. of Variation      -0.3          -0.3         -0.3            -0.2
                            TABLE 11
                   Per-Year Ratio
                 of Common Shares      Elasticities of Substitution
  Percentile     Within       Across      Within          Across
     1           0.82          0.96        3.3              1.8
     5           0.84          0.96        4.0              3.0
     10          0.87          0.97        4.7              3.3
     25          0.90          0.98        6.5              4.5

   Median        0.93          0.98        11.5             7.5

     75          0.96          0.99       29.9              22.8
     90          1.22          1.05       50.5              48.6
     95          1.47          1.10       65.3              50.5
     99          2.19          1.22       265.6             63.4
  Number of
Product Groups    122          122         122              122
                             TABLE 12
Cyclicality of the Quality Bias at the Product Group Level
                      Over 4-Quarter Periods
                                           LHS variable : Q4 Bias
Weights                               no           yes          yes
Year & Quarter Dummies                no           no           yes

Product Group Sales Growth         -0.057***    -0.106***   -0.097***
                                    [0.010]      [0.011]     [0.011]

Constant                           -0.019***    -0.017***   -0.012***
                                    [0.001]      [0.001]     [0.002]

Observations                           1236        1236       1236
R-squared                              0.02        0.07       0.11
Standard errors in brackets; *** significant at 1%
                                      FIGURE 1 A and B                                                                      FIGURE 2 A and B

                          Unweighted Price Growth Distribution                                                  Unweighted Price Growth Distribution
                                      (1-quarter Differences)                                                                (4-year Differences)
          25                                                                                    40



          20
                                                                                                30


          15
Percent




                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                                20

          10


                                                                                                10
           5




           0                                                                                     0
               Birth   -1.5      -1     -.5        0           .5   1   1.5   Death                  Birth   -1.5      -1     -.5        0           .5   1   1.5   Death
                                          Growth Rates Intervals                                                                Growth Rates Intervals



                              Weighted Price Growth Distribution                                                    Weighted Price Growth Distribution
                                      (1-quarter Differences)                                                                (4-year Differences)
                                                                                                30
          40




          30
                                                                                                20
Percent




                                                                                      Percent


          20


                                                                                                10

          10




           0                                                                                     0
               Birth   -1.5      -1     -.5        0           .5   1   1.5   Death                  Birth   -1.5      -1     -.5        0           .5   1   1.5   Death
                                          Growth Rates Intervals                                                                Growth Rates Intervals
                               Figure 3A: Sales Growth and Net Creation (Q4/Q4 growth rates)
                                    Net Creation(%)              ACNielsen Growth (right scale)
             12                                                                                                14

                                                                                                               12
             11
                                                                                                               10
             10                                                                                                8

                                                                                                               6
Percentage




              9
                                                                                                               4
              8
                                                                                                               2

              7                                                                                                0

                                                                                                               -2
              6
                                                                                                               -4

              5                                                                                                -6
             2000Q1   2000Q3          2001Q1          2001Q3          2002Q1         2002Q3       2003Q1   2003Q3



                                  Figure 3B: Sales Growth and Creation (Q4/Q4 growth rates)
                                          Creation(%)          ACNielsen Growth (right scale)
             17                                                                                                12

                                                                                                               10
             16
                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                               6
             15
Percentage




                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                               2
             14
                                                                                                               0

             13                                                                                                -2

                                                                                                               -4

             12                                                                                                -6
             2000Q1   2000Q3          2001Q1          2001Q3          2002Q1         2002Q3       2003Q1   2003Q3




                                Figure 3C: Sales Growth and Destruction (Q4/Q4 growth rates)
                                        Destruction(%)         ACNielsen Growth (right scale)
             8.5                                                                                               12

                                                                                                               10

              8
                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                               6
Percentage




             7.5
                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                               2
              7
                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                               -2
             6.5

                                                                                                               -4

              6                                                                                                -6
             2000Q1   2000Q3          2001Q1          2001Q3          2002Q1         2002Q3       2003Q1   2003Q3
                         FIGURE 4
Kernel Density of Changes in Seasonally Adjusted 1-Quarter
            Inflation Rates during (1994 - 2003)
                                          Figure 5




                   Figure 5: The Cyclical Nature of the Quality Bias

                              Q4 Bias with 94 weights (LHS scale)
0.75

 0.7

0.65

 0.6

0.55

 0.5

0.45

 0.4

0.35

 0.3
       2000   Q2   Q3   Q4   2001   Q2   Q3    Q4    2002   Q2   Q3   Q4   2003   Q2   Q3   Q4
        Q1                    Q1                      Q1                    Q1



                                          Page 16
Appendix to “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price Implications”
                         Broda and Weinstein (2007)

           Appendix A: Sample List of 400 Modules (out of over 1000)
                                     Appendix B
                         Value per UPC and non-barcode goods

         One concern about the database is that results might be driven by the growth in
the number of barcodes per se. Fortunately, ACNielsen has provided us with data on the
overall purchases of products with and without barcodes in the same expenditure
categories for each quarter. If it has become easier for firms to obtain a barcode over the
period we investigate, we would expect the share of goods with a barcode over total sales
to rise over time. In Figure 1, we plot (solid line, right hand side scale) the share of sales
of goods with barcodes relative to total shopping expenditures over time. Unfortunately,
we cannot do this in 1994 due to an error in the sampling of total purchases. However,
the share of goods purchased with a barcode relative to total shopping purchases stood at
an almost constant value of 0.85 between the first quarter of 1999 and the fourth quarter
of 2003 which indicates that there was no movement in the share of goods with barcodes
over this time period.
         Another way of checking that the ratio of goods with barcodes relative to those
without barcode has remained relatively unchanged over the sample period is to check
the average expenditure per UPC over time. Observing a declining expenditure per UPC
would be suggestive of a fall in the cost of obtaining a UPC over the sample period. In
Figure 1, we plot (dashed line, right hand scale) movements in the average expenditure
per UPC deflated by the food and beverages component of the CPI at the quarterly
frequency. As one can see, while there are some small fluctuations in the average amount
of expenditure per UPC, overall the series is remarkably flat. This indicates that over the
four years for which we have data growth in total sales moved approximately
proportionally with the number of UPCs.
                           Share of UPC products over Total Purchases and
                                    Value per UPC (1994 – 2003)
                                     Appendix C
                   Levels of Aggregation in the ACNielsen Database

Below is an example of UPCs, Modules and Product Groups in our database. UPC
numbers are illustrative and not the actual codes.




                                    Appendix D
                  Product Creation and Destruction excluding UPCs
                          with low number of “raw buyers”

        Some of the UPCs in our data are purchased by only a small fraction of the
overall number of households. In order to show that the main effects in the paper are not
driven by these UPCs we replicate Table 3 in the paper but exclude those UPCs with less
than 20 households purchasing them. The levels of entry and exit are marginally smaller
than those in table 3 suggesting that this correction has only a minor effect on the level of
product churning.
                                  Appendix E
            Product Creation and Destruction due to size and flavor only

        For roughly 20 percent of the products that were purchased in Q4 2003 we have
detailed information about the characteristics of the UPC, including the package size and
the flavor of the product. This allows us to proxy the extent of product creation that is
driven primarily from changes in sizes and flavors of existing products. For instance, a
new UPC can be a “200-count Centrum Multi-Vitamins From A-to-Zinc in tablets”
which differs from the UPC described in section 2 only in the amount of vitamins
included in the bottle. Thus we can calculate how much of overall creation is due to
innovations in size and how much is due to innovations in flavor. We find that for this
sample of goods the overall creation is 35.3 percent, which is very similar to that in the
overall sample. Creation from new sizes is 1.9 percent or roughly 5 percent of overall
creation. Adding new flavors raises creation to 2.3 percent, which still is a small
proportion of overall creation.
                                 Appendix F
       Bootrapped Standard Errors by quarter and Food and Beverage CPI

The figure below shows the 90th confidence interval for inflation using ACNielsen
common set of goods and the actual inflation rate from the BLS for the Food and
Beverage component of the CPI. As discussed in the paper, the ACNielsen includes a
larger set of goods than that included in the CPI’s Food and Beverage component.
                                   Appendix G
            Per year Substitution Bias relative to Tornqvist (in percent)

                                       Sample and Weights 1994
Avg Lower          Laspayres         Paasche     Geometric   Geometric      Ideal CES
Avg Upper          Laspayres         Paasche    Laspayres* Tornqvist**      Ideal CES

03Q4-94Q4             0.36            -0.37         0.14        0.00          0.00
03Q4-99Q4             0.31            -0.14         0.17        0.00          0.00
99Q4-94Q4             0.36            -0.52         0.10        0.00          0.00

                                       Sample and Weights 1999
Avg Lower          Laspeyres         Paasche     Geometric   Geometric      Ideal CES
Avg Upper          Laspeyres         Paasche     Laspeyres    Tornqvist     Ideal CES

03Q4-99Q4             0.25            -0.25         0.07        0.00          0.00

* Closest to the CPI methodology.
** Closest to the C-CPI methodolgy




                                  Appendix H
   Product Group with the largest contribution to the Quality/New Goods Bias
                                     Appendix I
                               CPI Inflation (1996-2006)

Extrapolating the quality bias and the sampling error to the entire CPI suggests that over
the last 10 years, we cannot sign inflation precisely almost 30 percent of the time. The
density below the red density function between the dotted lines (+/- 0.98 percent) is equal
to 28 percent.
