                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SUBSIDIZED CONTRACEPTION, FERTILITY, AND SEXUAL BEHAVIOR

                                           Melissa S. Kearney
                                            Phillip B. Levine

                                         Working Paper 13045
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13045


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2007




The authors thank Adam Sonfield, Ted Joyce, and seminar participants at the University of Maryland,
the University of Connecticut, the University of Virginia, the University of Chicago, Suffolk University,
George Washington University, the Rand Corporation, The Brookings Institution, and the 2006 APPAM
meetings in Madison, WI for helpful comments. We also thank Stanley Henshaw, Kosali Simon, Adam
Sonfield, and Christopher Rogers for their assistance in obtaining some of the data used in our analysis.
Rebecca Vichniac and Daniel Theisen provided outstanding research assistance. Any views expressed
are those of the authors alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual Behavior
Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 13045
April 2007
JEL No. I18,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of recent state-level Medicaid policy changes that expanded eligibility
for family planning services to higher income women and to Medicaid clients whose benefits would
expire otherwise. We begin by establishing that the income-based policy change led to a substantial
increase in the number of program recipients. We then examine Vital Statistics birth data from 1990
to 2003 and determine that it also reduced overall births to non-teens by about two percent and to teens
by over four percent. Our estimates suggest a nearly nine percent reduction in births to women age
20-44 made eligible by the policy change. We supplement our state-level analysis with an investigation
of individual-level data from the 1988, 1995, and 2002 National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG)
to examine the impact of these policies on sexual behavior and contraceptive use. Evidence from this
analysis suggests that the reduction in fertility associated with raising income thresholds for eligibility
was accomplished via greater use of contraception. Our calculations indicate that allowing higher income
women to receive federally-funded family planning cost on the order of $6,800 for each averted birth.

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        Roughly one-third of all births between 1997 and 2002 in the United States were

unintended by the mother based on data available from the National Center for Health Statistics

(2005).1 This rate skyrockets to almost three-quarters for births to teens. A popular response to

such jarring statistics is to increase access to family planning services that can help provide the

means necessary to reduce unintended childbearing. In fact, a 2006 public opinion poll found

that 89 percent of American adults believe that people “should have more access to information

about birth control options,” and 81 percent believe that “providing people with access to birth

control is a good way to prevent abortions” (Wall Street Journal Online, 2006).

        On its face it might seem obvious that providing contraception to women will reduce the

number of unwanted pregnancies and births. Of course, behavioral responses to policy changes

are rarely so straightforward. Women may choose not to take advantage of the services and

many who do would have obtained contraception privately otherwise. Women may also increase

their level of sexual activity, canceling out the effectiveness of any increased use of

contraception. Ultimately, the impact on behavior is an empirical question.

        In this paper, we provide evidence on this point by examining recent expansions of

eligibility for Medicaid family planning services to women who would not otherwise be covered.

Between December 1993 and March 2007, 25 states received waivers from the federal

government to extend this coverage (Guttmacher Institute, 2007a).                          We evaluate the

effectiveness of these waivers in reducing births, as well as their impact on abortions, sexual

activity, and contraceptive use. Because these policies were introduced in different states at

different times, we are able to employ quasi-experimental methods to identify a causal


1
  The concept and measurement of an unintended pregnancy are somewhat controversial (cf. Santelli, 2003), so this
statistic should be interpreted with some caution.


                                                       1
connection. We implement these methods using a wide array of data sources, including Vital

Statistics birth data, abortion data from the Guttmacher Institute and microdata from the 1988,

1995, and 2002 National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG) regarding sexual activity and

contraceptive use. We also confirm that these waivers increased the number of women receiving

Medicaid-funded family planning services using data from the Centers for Medicaid and

Medicare Services (CMS).

       The results of our analysis show that one type of these waivers, those that increase

income limits for eligibility, were particularly effective.       We show that these policies

dramatically increased the number of women receiving Medicaid-funded family planning

services. We go on to demonstrate that they reduced overall births to non-teens by about two

percent and to teens by over four percent. Scaling these estimates by the estimated proportion of

women in a state made eligible, we find that births to newly-eligible non-teens fell by almost

nine percent. Our analysis of individual-level data from the NSFG implies that the reduction in

fertility associated with income-based waivers is attributable to greater contraceptive use; we

find no evidence of an effect on sexual activity. Based on the cost per recipient of family

planning services, we find that each birth avoided cost on the order of $6,800.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Literature Review

       Though advocacy groups, politicians, and much of the public appears to be optimistic

about the potential to decrease rates of unwanted births and abortions by expanding access to

contraception, there is very little empirical evidence to date supporting this notion. Kirby (1997

and 2001) provides two extensive reviews of the literature on the effectiveness of teen pregnancy

prevention programs in the United States, focusing on experimental and quasi-experimental




                                                2
analyses.2     Although his 1997 review concludes that “there is remarkably little research

evidence” to support the conclusion that family planning services prevent teen pregnancies, his

2001 review is somewhat more optimistic. There he reports some evidence that programs

offering a large number of services, including family planning, may be effective. DiCenso, et al.

(2002) provides a similar review of programs like this in a larger set of developed countries.

They conclude that the types of programs “evaluated to date do not delay the initiation of sexual

intercourse, improve use of birth control among young men and women, or reduce the number of

pregnancies in young women.” Paton (2002) uses quasi-experimental methods to examine the

impact of a policy implemented in the United Kingdom in which parental consent was required

before family planning services could be provided to those under the age of 16. He finds no

evidence that this restriction on family planning access had any impact on pregnancies or

abortions.3

        The Medicaid expansion policy that we evaluate differs from previously reviewed

“pregnancy prevention” programs in that it was not limited to teenagers. It was broad-based,

affecting women in multiple states and varied locales, as opposed to a single community

initiative aimed at reducing pregnancy among a very specific teen population. Furthermore, the

policy change is specifically about expanded access to family planning services, as opposed to a

range of services including educational or job training. Finally, the waivers were directed at

women who were not at the very bottom of the income distribution. On the one hand, such

women may be more responsive to such interventions. On the other hand, they may be more

2
  There also have been previous studies examining the relationship between geographic measures of contraceptive
access and sexual outcomes (cf. Lundberg and Plotnick, 1990; Mellor, 1998; and Averett, et al., 2002). In general,
these studies differ from ours in emphasis and scope and, furthermore, the sources of identifying variation are
arguably not independent of the demand for contraception.
3
  There is a substantial literature on the relationship between contraceptive access and fertility in developing
countries (cf . Gertler and Molyneaux, 1994 and 2000, and Pritchett, 1994). The baseline fertility rates and previous
exposure to contraception in many of these countries is so different from that in the U.S. that it is unreasonable to
expect the results from this literature to generalize to the U.S. context.


                                                         3
likely to have been using contraception previously, paid for either through a private health

insurance employer or out-of-pocket. Therefore, past evidence does not adequately inform the

issue of the effectiveness of the Medicaid family planning expansions.

        Going back further in time provides an example of expanded contraceptive access that

has had a significant impact on women’s fertility.             Recent evidence has examined the

introduction of the birth control pill in 1960 and the laws which regulated teens’ access to it

through the 1960s and 1970s. Bailey (2006) reports that as states relaxed restrictions on teens’

ability to obtain the pill, the likelihood of experiencing a first birth by age 22 fell by 16 percent.

Although this intervention is considerably different than that which we explore, it does suggest

that it is possible for greater contraceptive access to reduce fertility.

        To date, only one study of which we are aware (Edwards, et al., 2003, which was

reported in Gold, 2004) has explored the impact of Medicaid family planning waivers directly.

This study examines the impact of family planning waivers granted to six states, but it has

serious methodological weaknesses. In particular, the authors estimate the number of births

averted based upon the deviation from pre-waiver birth levels within each state; no control group

is used to provide an idea of what would have happened to birth rates in the state had no waiver

been granted. Our study corrects this methodological flaw using quasi-experimental methods to

examine the impact on births, as well as examining all antecedent behavior.

B. Institutional Details

        Historically, the main source of public support for family planning services in the United

States has been Title X of the Public Health Service Act (commonly referred to as Title X),

introduced in 1970. This program is still an important source of public funds for family planning




                                                   4
services, but its budget has shrunk considerably in real terms over the past couple of decades.4

The Medicaid system has also provided access to family planning services to its clients since

1972, but the stringent eligibility requirements to receive Medicaid meant that historically only

the very low-income and only women with children had access to these services. A series of

expansions in the 1980s extended eligibility for pregnancy-related care, including family

planning services for 60 days post-partum.5

         Between 1994 and 2001, federal Medicaid spending on family planning more than

doubled, increasing from $332 million to $770 million. It rose from 46 percent of total federal

spending on family planning to 61 percent. During this time the federal government allowed

states to implement programs that offer family planning services to women whose incomes

would have been too high under the existing Medicaid program or to women who otherwise

would have lost Medicaid eligibility, typically post-partum.6 These waivers allow states to offer

the full range of family planning services it offers to its regular Medicaid recipients to additional

women. Family planning services provided include a full range of contraceptive methods as well

as associated examinations and laboratory tests. The federal government reimburses the state

Medicaid program for 90 percent of these services and supplies. States may include other related

care in their package of benefits, including treatment for STDs, but these services are reimbursed

by the federal government at the regular rate, which ranges from 50 percent to 76 percent of cost

4
  Other sources of public funding are the Federal Social Services Block Grant, the federal Maternal and Child Health
(MCH) Block Grant, the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) program, and state funds, including
funds from the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (S-CHIP). Title X and Medicaid represent the largest
share of total federal expenditures.
5
  In addition, adolescents have had access to family planning services through the State Children’s Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP), which was implemented in the late 1990s. Despite the coverage of family planning provided by
SCHIP, Gold and Sonfield (2001) report that the take-up rate of this provision among adolescents is quite low, in
part because of the lack of confidentiality in their provision.
6
  To obtain a Medicaid family planning waiver from the federal government, a state must demonstrate budget
neutrality. Waiver applications typically show this by estimating the number of women who will be served,
simulating the reduction in births that will result (i.e. multiplying the number served by estimates of the efficacy of
contraception), and then calculating savings in areas like Medicaid payments for births and welfare payments.


                                                          5
(Frost, Sonfield, and Gold 2006). Seventeen states cover abortion under their Medicaid program,

but federal funds may not be used for abortion and hence abortion services are not provided

under these waiver provisions.

       Beginning with South Carolina in 1993 and most recently with Texas at the end of 2006,

25 states have applied for and received waivers to extend eligibility for these family planning

services to women who would not otherwise be covered. Table 1 lists the provisions enacted in

each state along with the dates they were approved and implemented. Eight states currently have

waiver policies in place to extend coverage to women who would otherwise lose the 60-day

postpartum coverage of family planning services. Two other states extend coverage of family

planning services for up to two years and five years for women who would lose Medicaid

eligibility for any reason, not just post-partum. For the remainder of this analysis, we will

collectively refer to these two types as duration waivers. An additional 17 states have been

granted waivers to extend Medicaid family planning services based solely on income, regardless

of categorical eligibility requirements (e.g. having a dependent child); this income threshold is

set to 133 percent of the federal poverty line in one state, 185 percent of the federal poverty line

in eight states, and to 200 percent of the poverty line in the remaining seven states. We refer to

these 17 policies as income-based waivers. Both South Carolina’s and New York’s waivers

extend coverage to both women losing eligibility post partum as well as women under the

income threshold.

III. THE IMPACT OF WAIVERS ON THE NUMBER OF PUBLIC FAMILY PLANNING RECIPIENTS

       Before examining the impact of waivers on fertility outcomes, we undertake an analysis

to determine whether the policy change increased the number of women who received Medicaid




                                                 6
family planning services. If more people are not going through the front door of the Medicaid-

funded family planning provider, then it is unlikely that the program had any behavioral effects.

         Although this is a useful first step in our analysis, it is important to consider two

important limitations in interpreting its results: crowd out and spillover. Crowd-out refers to the

possibility that some women who receive family planning services through the Medicaid

program after the waiver would have used privately provided family planning services in the

absence of a waiver. This merely changes the form of payment, not the services provided, and

should have no behavioral impact. Spillover refers to the possibility that the introduction of a

waiver increases program awareness and increases visibility of family planning clinics, which

increases the take-up of services among women who were previously eligible for Medicaid

family planning services but not receiving them. In this instance we might see an increase in

contraceptive use and a corresponding fertility response that is greater than that due to newly-

eligible women alone. Identifying the impact of the policy on overall contraceptive use in light

of both crowd out and spillover issues would require data on all women’s use of family planning

services; unfortunately no such data are available.

         Instead we make use of publicly-available data from the Medicaid Statistical Information

System (MSIS) of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the basic source of

state-submitted eligibility and claims data on the Medicaid population. State-by-state tables are

available for fiscal years 1999 to 2002 that contain information on the number of Medicaid

beneficiaries with family planning claims. We obtained comparable data for the years 1992 and

1998 from the older national HFCA-2082 tables.7 Finding an effect on service receipt from these


7
  We are grateful to Kosali Simon for sharing these data with us. These aggregated statistics are not available
separately for teens. A visual inspection of these data indicated a handful of data points which clearly represent
errors. States with a steady state positive value of recipients suddenly equal zero or very near zero and then revert to
values comparable to the earlier values. We chose to recode as missing all states where the proportion of women


                                                           7
data is a necessary, but not sufficient condition in identifying any behavioral effects that may

have resulted from the introduction of the waivers.

         We use these data to estimate a simple Ordinary Least Squares regression of the

proportion of women 15-44 receiving Medicaid family planning services on indicator variables

for the implementation of income-based and duration-based waivers along with state and year

fixed effects. In its simplest form, this approach is equivalent to a difference-in-difference

estimator. We also add to these regressions a full set of control variables (described in more

detail subsequently), holding constant other state-level policy changes and changes in

demographic characteristics of state populations over time.                     Finally, we experiment with

alternative forms of trends within states over time, including no state-specific trends as well as

linear and quadratic state-specific trends.

         Table 2 reports the results of this analysis. Column 1 provides the 1992 (prior to any

waiver) values of the proportion of women 15-44 receiving Medicaid family planning services in

states that implemented income and duration waivers by 2002 (the last year of data availability).

The results indicate that 4.6 and 3.7 percent of women were receiving those services in the two

respective types of states.         These estimates provide a reference point to help interpret the

magnitude of the results from this regression analysis.

         The regression estimates reported in the remainder of the table provide clear evidence

that income-based waivers increased the number of women receiving family planning services

through the Medicaid program. The coefficient estimates from all three specifications indicate

that the number of recipients increased tremendously, on the order of 2 to 3 times depending



15-44 receiving Medicaid family planning services fell below .05 percent. We also tested the sensitivity to the
precise cut-off used, but found that it had negligible effects on the results. In total, we recoded 23 observations to
missing.



                                                          8
upon specification, in response to an income-based waiver. Later in the paper we describe a

procedure for estimating the percentage of the female population ages 20-44 that would be newly

eligible for Medicaid family planning services under these waivers and obtain an average figure

across states of 22.5 percent. Combining the results here of a 5 to 10 percentage point increase

in the share of the population receiving Medicaid family planning services, this implies an

average take-up rate was in the vicinity of 22 to 44 percent among those whose eligibility was

affected by the policy.

        Once state trends are added, duration based waivers also are estimated to have a modest

impact on benefit receipt, but these estimates are not statistically significant. Given the size of

the estimates, we interpret these results as ruling out large effects, but not ruling out something

less than that.

        We conclude from this analysis that we have at least established a basis to further

examine the impact of these policy changes, and particularly income-based waivers, on

behavioral outcomes. The potential for crowd-out of privately-funded contraceptive use means

that the increase in the number of Medicaid family planning recipients need not have led to any

change in contraceptive behavior or fertility outcomes. This is an empirical question that we

address subsequently.

IV. ESTIMATING THE IMPACT ON BIRTHS AND ABORTIONS

A. Econometric Methodology

        To investigate the impact of expanded eligibility for Medicaid family planning services

on births and abortions, we use quasi-experimental methods exploiting the variation across states

in the timing of program implementation, as detailed in Table 1. Specifically, we begin our

analysis by estimating Ordinary Least Squares regression models of the form:




                                                9
                 ln Yst = β 0 + β1 (inc. waiver ) st + β 2 (dur. waiver ) st + β 3 X st + γ s + γ t + ε st       (1)

        In this model, Yst is defined alternatively as the birth or abortion rate in state s at time t.

The regressors of interest, inc. waiverst and dur. waiverst, equal 1 if an income-based or duration-

based Medicaid family planning waiver is implemented in state s at time t and equals 0

otherwise.8 We modify this specification to include state-specific linear and quadratic time

trends to control for the possibility of a spurious correlation between the introduction of waivers

and trends in fertility outcomes across states.                  All regressions are weighted by the state

population for the relevant population subgroup.9

        It is also important that these regressions control for other observable state-specific

factors that might have changed over time, including other relevant policy changes. During the

period we focus on, these include important changes to abortion restrictions (parental

notification/consent, waiting periods, and Medicaid funding of abortion), the welfare system

(maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a family of three, a welfare reform indicator, and a “family

cap” indicator), and other Medicaid policies (an indicator for “S-CHIP” implementation).10 In

addition, a number of states introduced mandates requiring health insurance coverage of

contraception. We include indicator variables representing whether or not these policies were in

place in each state/year.11 In addition, we include the state unemployment rate to control for

differences in local labor market conditions that may affect women’s decisions/opportunity cost

8
  In the year in which the waiver was passed the regressors are equal to a fraction between (0,1) based on the number
of months the waiver was in effect.
9
  All models are estimated both with and without weighting; results are qualitatively similar across models.
10
   See Levine (2004) for a description of abortion law changes. Information on welfare reform policies were
obtained from three sources: (1) a technical report of the Council of Economic Advisers (1999); (2) an Urban
Institute report written by Gallagher, et al. (1998); and (3) a report by Crouse (1999), prepared for the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, which summarizes information contained in a report of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (1997). S-CHIP implementation dates were obtained from the CMS
website <http://www.cms.hhs.gov/schip/enrollment/fy2000.pdf>, accessed September 2005. Data on welfare benefit
levels were obtained from Council of Economic Advisers (1997) and Rowe, et al., (2004), Rowe and Russell (2004),
and Rowe and Versteeg (2005).
11
   We are grateful to Adam Sonfield at the Guttmacher Institute for providing us with data on these policies.


                                                           10
regarding having children. Finally these regressions include a set of the average demographic

characteristics, including the age and race composition, educational attainment, and marital

status of women in the state/year.12

         We estimate this equation separately for teens and for non-teens as well as for population

subgroups distinguished by age, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment.                               Our set of

“treatment states” is comprised of the seven states that implemented income-based waivers

(Alabama, Arkansas, California, New Mexico, Oregon, South Carolina, and Washington) and

duration-based waivers (Arizona, Delaware, Florida, Maryland, Missouri, New York, Rhode

Island, and South Carolina) during our sample period.13 For models including only teens, we

drop observations from Alabama and New Mexico because the waiver policies in these states

explicitly excluded females under the age of 19.14

B. Data

         We use several sources of data to estimate these models, where the different data sources

are necessary to capture different components of fertility-related behavior. For births, we use

Vital Statistics natality data aggregated to the state-level. These birth data are very well

measured in the aggregate as well as for several population subgroups, including by state of

residence, age, race/ethnicity, and educational attainment.15 The Census Bureau also provides


12
   We estimated these variables using data from the outgoing rotation group files from the Current Population
Survey, available from the National Bureau of Economic Research.
13
   Both New York and Virginia implemented their waivers in the last quarter of the final year in the sample period
and are not considered treatment states for the purpose of this discussion or figures; in the regressions the waiver
indicator associated with the state observation is set equal to 0.25 in the final year.
14
   One important consideration in quasi-experimental analyses like this is the potential for policy endogeneity
(Besley and Case, 2000). In this case, one might expect that locations having greater trouble with unwanted
pregnancies may be more likely to adopt more aggressive family planning policies. The bias in such an
environment, however, would go in the direction of finding a positive relationship between, say, teen childbearing
and family planning, not a negative one, as we are finding. Moreover, in our subsequent analysis of contraceptive
use, we introduce a triple-difference identification strategy using those who are ineligible as an in-state control
group. This approach should reduce the likelihood that policy endogeneity is driving our results.
15
   Vital Statistics data on births are also available by maternal marital status, but these data are not reliably measured
due to the imputation of marital status, often based on the last names of the parents, in some states and changes in


                                                           11
population estimates by state/year by age, gender, and race/ethnicity, so we can combine these

two sources of data to generate birth rates for these subgroups. We use data on weeks of

gestation to convert the dating of births from their year of occurrence to the year of their

conception.16 We start with births that occur in 1990 through 2003 (the most recent year

available at the time we began this study) and convert them to births that were conceived in 1990

through 2002. All other explanatory variables are merged onto these data to correspond to the

year of conception.

         Data on abortions come from the Guttmacher Institute. Their abortion data is obtained

from surveys of abortion providers, inquiring about the number of procedures performed in the

past year (or in the year before that). These data are generally recognized as the most accurate

available. Abortion counts are recorded by the location of the provider, however, not the state of

residence of the women having abortions. The Guttmacher Institute takes advantage of other

available data from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to generate abortion counts by state

of residence. CDC data tends to provide an undercount of the number of abortions provided,17

but those data include information on the state of occurrence of the abortion and the state of

residence of the woman. Guttmacher uses these data to transform their occurrence-based data to

residence-based data; we use those data in our analysis.18 During our sample period, they are

available for 1991, 1992, 1996, 1999, and 2000. Similarly, for teen abortions Guttmacher has

adopted a set of assumptions designed to create a set of estimated teen abortion rates by state of




the method of recording marital status during the sample period (see the 1997 Technical Appendix from the Vital
Statistics of the United States: Natality). Due to this limitation, we have chosen to omit an analysis using these data.
16
   The weeks of gestation variable contains some missing data. For those births missing this information, we
assumed that the pregnancy lasted 40 weeks, which was the modal value in these data.
17
   AGI abortion counts average 15 percent higher than those obtained by CDC (Alan Guttmacher Institute, 1997).
18
   These data have been graciously provided to us by Stanley Henshaw at AGI.


                                                          12
residence for the years 1992, 1996, 1999, and 2000 (Henshaw, 1997; Henshaw and Feivelson,

2000; and Guttmacher Institute, 2006); we use these data as well.

C. Descriptive Statistics

       Descriptive statistics regarding national trends in births and abortions can be found in

published sources. For all women of childbearing age, the birth rate fell slightly in the early

1990s, but has been reasonably stable since then (Martin, 2005). The abortion rate, on the other

hand, has fallen steadily over the period (Finer and Henshaw, 2003). In 1991, 26.3 abortions

were performed for every 1,000 women of childbearing age (15-44), but that level fell to 21.3 in

2000 (the latest year for which Guttmacher Institute data are available). For teens, the birth rate

in the U.S. has fallen dramatically since the early 1990s, starting that decade at over 60 births per

1,000 women aged 15-19 and falling to a rate of 41.6 in 2003 (Guttmacher Institute, 2006). At

the same time, the teen abortion rate has fallen from 35.2 abortions per 1,000 women aged 15-19

in 1992 to a rate of 24.0 in 2000.

       Note that this is the period that waivers were introduced. Of course, it would be

premature to draw any conclusions from these aggregated statistics regarding whether these

patterns of behavior could be attributed to the expansion of eligibility for Medicaid family

planning services in particular states. We turn our attention to an econometric analysis of this

question in the following section.

D. Results

       Before reporting the results of our full econometric analysis, we begin with Figures 1 and

2, which displays trends in birth rates for all non-teens and teens, respectively, for states that are




                                                 13
distinguished by their waiver status.19 In Figure 1 we see that birth rates for non-teens in states

with no waivers have been trending upward relative to the levels in the two types of waiver

states. These differential patterns start before any waivers were introduced and highlight the

importance of holding constant state trends. The observed pattern also suggests that the

underlying trend is potentially best described by a quadratic functional form. There does not

seem to be any dramatic decline in birth rates among non-teens in waiver states in later years

relative to the non-waiver states. This does not rule out the existence of a treatment effect, but it

does suggest that any such effect is unlikely to be very large at an aggregate level. Birth rates for

teens (Figure 2), on the other hand, appear to have dipped in states that implemented income-

based waivers in the middle of our sample period. This large decline precedes the waivers

introduced in Arkansas, California, and South Carolina by a year or two and is unlikely to be

attributable to the waiver directly. Again, the differential trends across states highlight the need

to control for this in the econometric models that we estimate.

        Table 3 reports estimates from regression models of the form of equation (1), where the

dependent variable represents the log of the birth rate (top panel) and the log of the abortion rate

(bottom panel). Results are presented for teens and non-teens separately for births and for teens

and all women (mostly non-teens) for abortions. We report models that include no state-specific

linear trends as well as linear and quadratic trends to examine the sensitivity of the results to

these alternative specifications.

        The results provide strong evidence that income-based family planning waivers reduce

births, particularly for teens. For teens and non-teens in models without state-specific trends,

births are estimated to fall by about 7.1 percent and 5.3 percent, respectively. As predicted

19
   In these figures, we have treated New York and South Carolina as income-based waiver states based on our
subsequent analysis indicating that income-based waivers had a much larger impact on the number of family
planning recipients than duration waivers.


                                                    14
earlier, including state trends reduces the size of the estimated effects to 4.7 percent and 1.7

percent. Quadratic trends have little impact on the estimates; these waivers are found to reduce

births by 4.2 percent and 2.0 percent for teens and non-teens, respectively.

         The results for duration waivers are less robust. The point estimates are close to zero and

statistically insignificant for teens. When estimated among non-teens, all point estimates are

negative, and are statistically significant for non-teens in models with no trends and linear state

trends, but statistically insignificant in the model with quadratic state trends. We believe that

these findings are suggestive that these waivers might have an impact on reducing fertility for

non-teens, but the evidence is not sufficient to strongly support that conclusion.          For the

remainder of the analysis we focus more of our attention on income-based waivers.

         The bottom panel of Table 3 conducts similar analyses regarding abortion rates. Because

we have more data available for women 15-44 than we do for teens, we estimate models for

women 15-44, rather than for non-teens, 20-44. Data limitations, described earlier, reduce the

sample size of available state/year cells relative to that in the birth regressions, particularly for

teens.   The results of this analysis provide little evidence of an impact on abortion rates

attributable to the introduction of a family planning waiver. The problem is largely about

imprecision; standard errors of 10 percent or more suggest that the impact on abortion rates

would have to be enormous before one could reject a null hypothesis of no effect. For women

15-44, standard errors are somewhat smaller, but they are still large enough that only very large

effects could be statistically significant.     The point estimates are sensitive to empirical

specification and never large enough to be significant. This is not conclusive evidence that

family planning waivers have little or no effect on abortions, but rather it indicates that we are

unable find any evidence in support of such an effect.




                                                 15
         Table 4 extends our analysis of the impact on birth rates by examining different

population subgroups (Columns 1 and 2). All results reported here are based on specifications

that include state-specific quadratic trends. When women are differentiated by their age, we see

that income-based waivers have the largest impact on women 18-19 and 20-24 years of age.

Estimates for other age groups are not statistically significant. By race, there are differences in

point estimates for the impact of income-based waivers, but these differences are not statistically

significant.

         The bottom panel of the table examines births to women with different levels of

educational attainment. For this analysis, we use the natural log of the number of births to

women in each category because we do not have relevant population numbers to create birth

rates. We also focus on women 20-44 because so many teens are still enrolled in school. 20 The

results of this analysis indicate that the impact of income-based waivers decreases with

educational attainment.        Because eligibility for these waivers is negatively correlated with

educational attainment, as discussed subsequently, these findings provide additional support for

the notion that our results are identifying a causal impact.

         The remainder of the table incorporates the fact that not all women are eligible for the

benefits associated with, in particular, an income-based waiver. Duration-based waivers are also

targeted at particular population subgroups (women who recently had a child and would

otherwise have to give up their benefits), but identifying those subgroups is very difficult in

large-scale, publicly available data. On the other hand, we are able to use microdata from the

2000 Census to approximate the fraction of a state’s female population in different population




20
  We also restricted the sample period used for this analysis to 1992-2001 because a few states do not have births by
educational attainment recorded in the Vital Statistics data for 1990, 1991, and 2002.


                                                         16
subgroups who would be made eligible by an income-based waiver.21                               We can use these

calculated eligibility rates to scale our earlier estimates of the impact of these waivers and arrive

at a simulated impact on the eligible population.22 We restrict this exercise to the population of

women 20-44 because it is not clear how to assign eligibility to a teen based on recorded

household income.

         The results of this analysis are reported in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4. Column 3 reports

the percentage of women estimated to be eligible for income-based waivers in each population

subgroup (other than teens). For all non-teens, income-based waivers increased the reach of

Medicaid family planning services to additional 22.5 percent of the women. This statistic ranged

from 14 percent in the state of Washington to 42 percent in New Mexico. Younger women, non-

white women, and less-educated women were considerably more likely to be eligible for benefits

under an income-based waiver. Column 4 reports the ratio of the coefficient estimates in

Column 1 to the estimated percentage made eligible by an income-based waiver in Column 3.

This ratio reflects an estimate of the impact of the waiver on the eligible population. We

estimate that births fell by almost nine among all eligible women and by up to 15 percent for

women 20-24.




21
   The eligibility calculations are based upon the eligibility criteria described in Broaddus, et al. (2002). They begin
by determining whether a woman’s income and family structure would enable her to receive Medicaid in the
absence of a waiver and then calculates her income-based eligibility in the presence of the waiver. Our eligibility
measure is the increment to the fraction of women eligible in each waiver state. We make no pretense of thoroughly
coding eligibility as a function of the complete set of state rules regarding detailed aspects of family income and
asset holdings.
22
   An alternative approach would be to include in the regression an interaction term between estimated eligibility
and the waiver indicator variable. Our first attempt to do so included this interaction term along with the waiver
indicator, but without any time-series variability in our eligibility measure, the results were not estimated with a
great deal of precision. Our second attempt included the interaction term without the waiver indicator. The results
of that analysis provided point estimates that were virtually identical to those we report in Column 4 with t-statistics
very similar to those reported in Column 2. Our view is that this exercise is doing little more than the scaling that
we described and that reporting it this way is a more accurate description of our methods.


                                                          17
V. ESTIMATING THE IMPACT ON SEXUAL ACTIVITY AND CONTRACEPTIVE USE

A. Econometric Methodology

         To investigate the impact of the expansion of eligibility for Medicaid family planning

services on individual behavior, we apply quasi-experimental methods very similar to those

described above to our sample of women from the NSFG. We specify a reduced-form

relationship between the implementation of waiver policies and individual-level outcomes.

Specifically, we estimate linear probability models of the following form:23

          Yist = φo + φ1 (inc. waiver ) st + φ2 (dur. waiver ) st + γ s + I (1995) + I (2002) + X ist + ε ist      (2)

The dependent variable Yist is defined alternatively as an indicator for whether an individual

engaged in sexual intercourse in the past three months, whether a sexually-active individual did

not use birth control at last intercourse in the past three months, and whether an individual had

unprotected sex in the past three months (the interaction of the other two binary outcome

variables). We estimate these linear probability models for all women and for population

subgroups. Estimated standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state level. We weight all

regressions by NSFG sampling weights.

         The X-vector includes indicators for age category, race/ethnicity, marital status, category

of educational attainment, and whether the respondent has children. State level variables are

mainly the same as those described earlier in our analysis using Vital Statistics data.24 As before,

in regressions run specifically for teenagers, we drop observations from the states of Alabama

and New Mexico because the waiver policies in these states explicitly excluded females under

the age of 19.

23
   All results are qualitatively insensitive to the choice of linear probability models rather than probit models.
24
   Because we only have three years of data in the NSFG, we do not control for the full set of policies included in the
state-level analysis, because there is not enough variation in some of these variables. For example, every state in the
data has an S-CHIP policy implemented by 2002 and none do in 1988 or 1995. This policy is thus completely
characterized by the indicator variables for survey year.


                                                          18
         We can also augment this model incorporating a woman’s eligibility status for an

income-based waiver.25 In contrast to our analysis of Vital Statistics data described earlier, with

microdata we can estimate for each individual whether or not they would be eligible for this type

of waiver and can interact this measure of eligibility with an income-based waiver indicator

variable representing the status of the policy in each woman’s state/year of residence:

                Yist = φo + φ1 (inc. waiver ) st + φ2 (inc. waiverst ⋅ eligist ) + φ3 (dur. waiver ) st
                                                                                                                  (3)
                                 + γ s + I (1995) + I (2002) + X ist + ε ist

In this formulation, the income-based waiver indicator variable holds constant other broad

factors that may be occurring in income-based waiver states following the waiver and the

interaction terms highlights whether or not the behavior of those directly affected by the waivers

changes in response. This is a triple-difference estimation strategy. Because we are concerned

about imputing eligibility for teens based on the difficulty of measuring their income, we use this

approach for non-teens only.

B. Data

         To examine sexual activity and contraceptive use, we use data from the 1988, 1995, and

2002 cycles of the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). These surveys interviewed 8,450,

10,847, and 7,643 women between the ages of 14 and 45 in the three survey years,

respectively.26 The samples are non-representative in that they over-sample teens and other

groups of women, but sampling weights are provided to correct for this. State identifiers are
25
   Conducting a similar exercise for duration-based waivers is complicated by the complexity of predicting
eligibility for waivers of this type. To do so, one would need to know Medicaid coverage in the period following
each birth (in states with post-partum based policies) and the woman’s income at that time to determine whether she
would have had to go off of Medicaid without the waiver. The NSFG does inquire about Medicaid coverage at the
time of delivery of each child, but has no retrospective income measure. Using current income as a proxy for
income at the time of birth, we were only able to identify 50 women in these data whose deliveries were covered by
Medicaid, whose current income would make her otherwise ineligible for family planning services after the post-
partum period expired, and whose most recent birth occurred in a state with a duration-based waiver in place at the
time. As a result, we chose not to report an analysis incorporating simulated eligibility for a duration-based waiver.
26
   The 2002 survey also includes information on men, but with just one year of data and only cross-sectional
methods available to us, we chose not to use these data.


                                                          19
required for this analysis and are not included on public use NSFG files, but they are available to

researchers with permission from the National Center for Health Statistics.27

C. Descriptive Statistics

         Descriptive statistics regarding sexual activity and contraceptive use for all women and

for teens for the years 1988, 1995, and 2002 are reported in Table 5. These statistics update

those reported in Levine (2001). In 2002, 36 percent of teens and 72 percent of women age 15-

44 had sexual intercourse in the three months prior to the survey. The large majority of sexually

active women practice contraception; 17 percent of sexually-active teenagers and 24 percent of

sexually active women failed to use contraception at their last intercourse.28 Although levels of

sexual activity are similar across racial/ethnic groups, there are very significant differences in

rates of contraceptive use, particularly for teens.

         These data reveal some noteworthy trends in sexual behavior and contraceptive use

among teenagers over this time period. (There are no obvious trends among women age 15-44.)

Rates of sexual activity have declined for all teens, particularly for black, non-Hispanic teens.

Fewer teens fail to use contraception now than in the past, although Hispanics still have a higher

rate of non-use in 2002 than they did in 1988. With less sexual activity and more contraceptive

use, it is not surprising that teen birth rates have been falling. This is further borne out in the

statistics showing that that fewer teens are both sexually active and not using contraception in the

bottom panel of the table.

D. Results: Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use

         Table 6 reports the estimated coefficients of interest from equation [2] for teens and non-

teens and equation [3] for non-teens only for the three dependent variables – sex in past three

27
   All analyses using these state identifiers need to be performed in their Research Data Center in Hyattesville, MD.
We thank Christopher Rogers for his assistance in using these data.
28
   Table A1 details the types of contraceptive methods that women in the 2002 NSFG used.


                                                         20
months, no birth control during last intercourse in the past three months, and unprotected sex in

the past three months. The results in the top panel (from equation [2]) for non-teens indicates

that there was no statistically significant impact of the waivers on the likelihood of sex in the

past three months, but that income-based waivers increased the likelihood of contraceptive use

among sexual active women. We are unable to conclude much regarding the behavior of teens

alone because of the magnitude of the standard errors.

         The bottom panel of the table switches to a triple difference identification strategy that

incorporates predicted eligibility for income-based waivers, as in equation [3]. For all non-teens,

we see that there is little evidence suggesting that sexual activity is affected, but we continue to

find evidence of increased use of contraception. Over 5 percent fewer sexually active women

failed to use contraception at their last intercourse and 3.5 percent fewer women could be

identified as having unprotected sex in the past three months.29 Both estimates are significant at

the 5 percent level. These results suggest that the reason that birth rates fell in response to

income-based family planning waivers is because they increase the use of contraception.

VI. DISCUSSION

A. Estimate of Cost per Birth Avoided

         Since waiver programs require federal expenditures to cover the cost of the family

planning services provided, a reasonable question is how much these services cost per birth

avoided. We can integrate our estimates along with outside information regarding the estimated

cost per program participant to arrive at this figure. According to the Guttmacher Institute


29
   We attempted to reconcile this estimate with the estimated reduction in births obtained from Vital Statistics, but
we ultimately concluded that such a comparison required too many unverifiable assumptions and the results of this
exercise were sensitive to the parameter values we chose. In theory, if we had complete data on the likelihood of
becoming pregnant in a given month in the absence of contraception (incorporating both biological capacity and
frequency of sexual activity) and the intensity of contraceptive use along with its failure rate, we could simulate how
an increase in the likelihood of using contraception would alter birth rates. Unfortunately, our measure of
contraceptive use – contraception at last intercourse in the past three months – is insufficient for that purpose.


                                                         21
(2007b), public spending on family planning services totaled $1.26 billion in FY 2001.

According to Frost, et al. (2004), 6.7 million women received services at publicly provided

family planning clinics in 2001. This means that the average cost per woman served is $188. Of

course, the cost estimate that we really need is the marginal cost of providing additional services

to women brought into the program in the presence of waivers, but no such evidence exists.

Instead, we will assume that there is a constant marginal cost and continue to use this $188

figure.

          We can combine this figure with the results provided in this paper to provide a ballpark

estimate of the cost of these services per birth avoided. Our analysis of MSIS data on Medicaid

family planning receipt showed that income-based waivers increased the percentage of women

receiving services by 5.4 percentage points (Table 2 – model with quadratic trends). This means

that for every 1,000 women of childbearing age, 54 more obtained family planning through

Medicaid after the waiver than before. The birth rate in those states in 1992, before the waivers,

stood at a level of about 74 births per 1,000 women. Our estimates in Table 3 suggest that

income-based waivers reduced births by 2 percent, or about 1.5 births per year per 1,000 women.

Combining these two estimates, we conclude that one birth was avoided for every 36 additional

Medicaid family planning recipients. At $188 per recipient, this means that the cost of avoiding

one additional birth through an income-based waiver is roughly $6,800. Earlier in the paper, we

estimated that income-based family planning waivers had a 22 to 44 percent take-up rate. This

means that one birth was avoided for every 82 to 164 women made eligible.

B. Impact of Waivers Compared to Other Interventions

          An alternative framework for thinking about the impact of these waivers is to compare

the reduction in fertility associated with them to that associated with other policy changes that




                                                 22
could accomplish this goal. First, it is important to recognize that past attempts to increase

contraceptive use generally have not been successful in reducing teen fertility, as described

earlier. Second, the most recent policy measure aimed at reducing nonmarital and/or teen

fertility is welfare reform.30         In previous work we have found that family cap policies

implemented as part of welfare reform in the early and mid 1990s were not effective at reducing

birth rates among targeted women (Kearney 2004, Levine 2002.) In their extensive review of

studies examining the impacts of welfare reform policies more generally, Grogger and Karoly

(2005) conclude that “there is little evidence that welfare reform as a whole lowers childbearing”

(p. 196).

        More broadly, researchers have examined the incentive role of the welfare system on teen

and nonmarital childbearing. Moffitt (1998) reviews this literature and reports that while no

consensus exists on the magnitude of the impact, the wide range of point estimates across studies

does suggest that there is some positive causal relationship between welfare benefits and the

likelihood of female headship. This suggests some role, potentially quite modest, for lowering

rates of fertility through a reduction in benefits. Third, from a more historical perspective,

abortion legalization in the early 1970s was one policy change that led to a significant reduction

in (presumably unwanted) fertility, particularly among teens. Levine, et al. (1999) finds that

abortion legalization reduced overall fertility by 4 percent and teen fertility by 12 percent.31

With the exception of the greater impact associated with a radical policy change like abortion




30
   It was an explicit goal of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of
1996 to reduce the incidence of out-of-wedlock childbearing.
31
   These estimates are probably somewhat misleading because they incorporate travel between states that occurred
during the period in which abortion was legal in some states, but not others. Levine, et al. estimates that if there
were no travel between states (i.e. moving from a total ban on abortion to legal abortion), the overall birth rate
would have fallen by over ten percent. Presumably, taking travel into account in estimating the teen fertility effect
would also lead to a substantially higher estimate.


                                                        23
legalization, our estimates indicate that family planning waivers represent a relatively successful

attempt at reducing rates of (presumably unwanted) births.

C. Contribution to Decline in Teen Fertility Rate

       Earlier, we discussed the fact that teen fertility rates declined dramatically since the early

1990s, falling from a rate of 60.3 births per 1,000 women aged 15-19 in 1990 to a rate of 43.0 in

2002 (Guttmacher Institute, 2006). We also know that the introduction of an income-based

family planning waiver is estimated to reduce the teen birth rate by 4.2 percent (in a model with

quadratic state trends). Although the impact of the waivers was substantial, they clearly can

explain very little of the downward trend in teen fertility. Over our sample period, only 22

percent of teens live in the seven states instituting income-based waivers by 2002. This means

that the national teen birth rate would be predicted to decline by .22 .042 60.3 = .56, or 3 percent

of the overall decline.

VII. CONCLUSION

       This study took advantage of the quasi-experiment inherent in the waiver process that

allowed some states to expand access to contraception for some women.                We began by

presenting evidence that these income-based waivers did indeed increase the number of women

receiving family planning services through Medicaid by two to three times. We then reported

the results of models for teens and non-teens, which showed that births fell as a result. Income-

based waivers were found to reduce births by 1.7 to 2 percent for non-teens and 4.2 to 4.7

percent for teens. Incorporating information on predicted increases in eligibility brought about

by state income-based waiver policies, we estimate that births fell by 8.9 percent among newly-

eligible women age 20-44. We further document that this impact can be attributed to increased

contraceptive use among sexually-active women.




                                                24
       We used the results of our analysis to show that income-based family planning waivers

reduced one birth for every 36 additional Medicaid family planning recipients. Combining this

with external information regarding the cost of family planning provision, we estimate the cost

of preventing an unwanted birth to be around $6,800. Based on our review of other interventions

designed to reduce unwanted births, this seems like a relatively effective policy intervention.




                                                25
                                         References


Averett, Susan L., Daniel I. Rees, and Laura Argys. 2002. “The Impact of Government Policies
and Neighborhood Characteristics on Teenage Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use.”
American Journal of Public Health. 92(11): pp. 1773-1778.

Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on
Women’s Life Cycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 121(1): pp. 289-320.

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case. 2000. “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of
Endogenous Policies” Economic Journal 110(467): F672-F694

Broaddus, Matthew, Shannon Blaney, Annie Dude, Jocelyn Guyer, Leighton Ku, and Jaia
Peterson. 2002. Expanding Family Coverage: States’ Medicaid Eligibility Policies for Working
Families in the Year 2000. Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1997. Technical Report: Explaining the Decline in Welfare
Receipt, 1993-1996. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President of the United States.

Council of Economic Advisors. 1999. “Technical Report: Economic Expansion, Welfare
Reform, and the Decline in Welfare Caseloads: An Update.” Washington, D.C.: Executive
Office of the President of the United States.

Crouse, Gil. 1999. “State Implementation of Major Changes to Welfare Policies, 1992-1998.”
Washington, D.C.: Office of Human Services Policy, Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

DiCenso, Alba, Gordon Guyatt, A. Willan, and L. Griffith. 2002. “Interventions to Reduce
Unintended Pregnancies among Adolescents: Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled
Trials.” British Medical Journal. 324 (7351): 1426-1434.

Edwards, Joanna, Janet Bronstein, and Kathleen Adams. 2003. Evaluation of Medicaid Family
Planning Demonstrations. Alexandria, VA: The CNA Corporation.

Finer, Lawrence B. and Stanley K. Henshaw. 2003. “Abortion Incidence in the U.S. in 2000.”
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health. 35(1): 6-15.

Frost Jennifer J., Adam Sonfield, and Rebecca Benson Gold. 2006. “Estimating the Impact of
Expanding Medicaid Eligibility for Family Planning Services,” Occasional Report, New York:
Guttmacher Institute, No. 28.

Frost, Jennifer J., Lori Frohwirth, and Alison Purcell, 2004. “The Availability and Use of
Publicly Funded Family Planning Clinics: U.S. Trends, 1994-2001. Perspectives on Sexual and
Reproductive Health. 36 (5): pp. 206-215.



                                             26
Gallagher, L. Jerome, Megan Gallagher, Kevin Perese, Susan Schreiber, and Keith Watson.
1998. One Year after Federal Welfare Reform: A Description of State Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) Decisions as of October 1997. Washington D.C.: Urban Institute,
Occasional Paper Number 6.

Gertler, Paul J. and John W. Molyneaux. 1994. “How Economic Development and Family
Planning Programs Combined to Reduce Indonesian Fertility,” Demography 31(1) (February):
33-63.

Gertler Paul J. and John W. Molynueax. 2000. “The Allocation and Impact of Planning
Program Inputs in Indonesia,” Population Development Review, Vol. 26 (Sup) pp. 61-88.

Gold, Rachel Benson. 2004. “Doing More for Less: Study Says State Medicaid Family
Planning Expansions are Cost-Effective.” The Guttmacher Report on Public Policy. 7(1): 1-2.

Gold, Rachel Benson and Adam Sonfield. “Reproductive Health Services for Adolescents under
the State Children’s Health Insurance Program.” Family Planning Perspectives 33(2): pp. 81-
87.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn A. Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Guttmacher Institute. 1997. Issues in Brief: The Limitations of U.S. Statistics on Abortion. New
York: Alan Guttmacher Institute.

Guttmacher Institute. 2006. U.S. Teenage Pregnancy Statistics: National and State Trends and
Trends by Race and Ethnicity. New York: Alan Guttmacher Institute.

Guttmacher Institute. 2007a. “State Medicaid family planning eligibility expansions,” State
Policies in Brief, New York: Guttmacher Institute, June 2006,
http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SMFPE.pdf. (accessed March 28th, 2007).

Guttmacher Institute. 2007b. Public Funding for Contraceptive, Sterilization and Abortion
Services, FY 1980-2001.     http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/fpfunding/index.html (accessed
March 28th, 2007).

Henshaw, Stanley K. Teenage Abortion and Pregnancy Statistics by State, 1992.            Family
Planning Perspectives. Vol. 29, No. 3 (May/June 1997). pp. 115-122.

Henshaw, Stanley K. and Dina J. Feivelson. Teenage Abortion and Pregnancy Statistics by
State, 1996. Family Planning Perspectives. Vol. 32, No. 6 (November/December 2000). pp.
272-280.

Kearney, Melissa S. “Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Benefits on Fertility Behavior?
A Look at the Family Cap” Journal of Human Resources, 2004, 39(2): 295-325.



                                              27
Kirby, Douglas. 1997. No Easy Answers: New Research Findings on Programs to Reduce Teen
Pregnancy. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.

Kirby, Douglas. 2001. Emerging Answers: New Research Findings on Programs to Reduce
Teen Pregnancy. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.

Levine, Phillip B. 2001. “The “Sexual Activity and Birth Control Use of American Teenagers,”
An Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior among Youths. Jonathan Gruber, editor. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Levine, Phillip B. 2002. “The Impact of Social Policy and Economic Activity Throughout the
Fertility Decision Tree.” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 9021.

Levine, Phillip B. 2004. Sex and Consequences: Abortion, Public Policy, and the Economics of
Fertility. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and David J. Zimmerman. 1999/ "Roe v.
Wade and American Fertility." American Journal of Public Health. pp. 199-203.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert D. Plotnick, 1990. "Effects of State Welfare, Abortion and Family
Planning Policies on Premarital Childbearing Among White Adolescents" Family Planning
Perspectives. 22 (6): 246-251+275.

Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Paul D. Sutton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Fay Menacker, and
Martha L. Munson. 2005. “Births: Final Data for 2003.” National Vital Statistics Reports.
54(2).

Mellor, Jennifer M. 1998. "The Effect of Family Planning Programs on the Fertility of Welfare
Recipients: Evidence from Medicaid Claims." Journal of Human Resources. 33 (4): pp. 866-
895.

Moffitt, Robert. 1998. “The effect of welfare on marriage and fertility.” In Welfare, the family,
and reproductive behavior, ed. R. Moffitt, Washington DC: National Academy Press: 50-97.

Molyneaux, John W. and Paul J. Gertler. 2000. “The Impact of Targeted Family Planning
Programs in Indonesia.” Population and Development Review 26: 61-85.

National Center for Health Care Statistics. Fertility, Family Planning, and Reproductive Health
of U.S. Women: Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth. Vital and Health
Statistics Series 23, Number 5. Hyattsville, MD: December 2005.

Paton, David. 2002. “The Economics of Family Planning and Underage Conceptions.” Journal
of Health Economics. 21 (2): 207-225.




                                               28
Pritchett, Lant H. “Desired Fertility and the Impact of Population Policies,” Population and
Development Review 20(7) (March): 1-55.

Rowe, Gretchen, Kevin McManus, and Tracy Roberts. 2004. The Welfare Rules Databook:
State Policy as of July 2001. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Rowe, Gretchen with Victoria Russell. 2004. The Welfare Rules Databook: State Policy as of
July 2002. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, October.

Rowe, Gretchen with Jeffrey Versteeg. 2005. The Welfare Rules Databook: State Policy as of
July 2003. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute

Santelli, John, Roger Rochat, Kendra Hatfield-Timajchy, Brenda Colley Gilbert, Kathryn Curtis,
Rebecca Cabral, Jennifer S. Hirsh, Laura Schieve, and Other Members of the Unintended
Pregnancy Working Group. 2003. “The Measurement and Meaning of Unintended Pregnancy.”
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health. Vol. 35, No 2. pp. 94-101.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Setting the Baseline: A Report on State
Welfare Waivers. 1997. Washington, D.C.: Office of Human Services Policy, Assistant Secretary
for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Wall Street Journal Online, “Large Majorities Support More Access to Birth Control
Information, and Agree that it is a Good Way to Prevent Abortions.” Wall Street Journal
Online: Health Care Poll. Vol. 5, No. 10: June 22, 2006.




                                             29
                             Figure 1: Trend in Non-Teen Birth Rates by Waiver Status
90



85



80



75



70



65



60



55



50
     1990   1991     1992     1993       1994   1995     1996      1997     1998        1999   2000     2001       2002


            Income-Based Waiver States             Duration-Based Waiver States                Non-Waiver States
                                 Figure 2: Trend in Teen Birth Rates by Waiver Status
70



65



60



55



50



45



40



35



30
     1990   1991      1992     1993     1994     1995      1996     1997      1998      1999   2000     2001   2002

                   Income-Based Waiver States        Duration-Based Waiver States          Non-Waiver States
                                   Table 1: States with Section 1115 Medicaid Family Planning Waivers
                                                                                           Basis for Eligibility

                                                                           Losing Coverage          Losing Coverage          Based Solely on
 State                      Date approved         Date implemented           Postpartum             for Any Reason            Income (FPL)
 Alabama                      7/1/2000                10/1/2000                                                              133% of poverty
 Arizona                      4/1/1995                 8/1/1995                  2 years
 Arkansas                     6/18/1996                9/1/1997                                                                   200%
 California                   1/1/1997                 1/1/1997                                                                   200%
 Delaware                     5/17/1995                1/1/1996                                          2 years
 Florida                      8/23/1998                9/1/1998                  2 years
 Illinois                     6/23/2003                4/1/2004                                          5 years
 Iowa                         1/10/2006                2/1/2006                                                                   200%
 Louisiana                    6/6/2006                 7/1/2006                                                                   200%
 Maryland                     12/5/1994                2/1/1995                  5 years
 Michigan                     3/1/2006                 7/1/2006                                                                   185%
 Minnesota                    7/20/2004                7/1/2006                                                                   200%
 Mississippi                  1/31/2003               10/1/2003                                                                   185%
 Missouri                     4/29/1998                2/1/1999                   1 year
 New Mexico                   8/1/1997                 7/1/1998                                                                   185%
 New York                     9/27/2002               10/1/2002                                                                   200%
 New York                     9/27/2002               10/1/2002                  2 years
 North Carolina               11/5/2004               11/5/2005                                                                   185%
 Oklahoma                     11/5/2004                4/1/2005                                                                   185%
 Oregon                      10/14/1998                1/1/1999                                                                   185%
 Rhode Island                 11/1/1993                8/1/1994                  2 years
 South Carolina                1/1997                  7/1/1997                                                                   185%
 South Carolina                12/1993                 7/1/1994                  2 years
 Texas                       12/21/2006                1/1/2007                                                                   185%
 Virginia                     7/22/2002               10/1/2002                  2 years
 Washington                   3/6/2001                 7/1/2001                                                                   200%
 Wisconsin                    6/14/2002                1/1/2003                                                                   185%
Notes: Waivers in Alabama, Illinois, Louisiana, Michigan, New Mexico, North Carolina, and Oklahoma are restricted to individuals age 19 and older.
The dates for California correspond to policies funded by the state; federal financing of these waiver policies commenced two years later.
Sources: Frost, et al. (2006), http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_MFPW.pdf (accessed 9/28/05),
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/medicaid/waivers/waivermap.asp (accessed 9/28/05), and Guttmacher Institute (2006)
<http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SMFPE.pdf> (accessed 9/2/06).
Table 2: Impact of Waivers on the Number of Medicaid Family Planning Clients as a Proportion
                            of the Female Population Age 15-44

                                   Mean Proportion
                                    Medicaid FP               No State          Linear State         Quadratic
                                   Clients in 1992            Trends              Trends            State Trends
                                         (1)                    (2)                 (3)                  (4)
 Income-Based Waiver                    0.046                  0.116                0.088                0.053
                                                              (0.027)              (0.024)              (0.013)

 Duration-Based Waiver                    0.037                 -0.006              0.013                0.012
                                                               (0.007)             (0.011)              (0.008)

 Neither                                  0.044                  ---                  ---                  ---

 Number of Observations                    ---                   538                 538                  538
Notes: Columns (2) to (4) report results from separate regressions where the dependent variable is the proportion of
the female population age 15-44 who received Medicaid family planning services. All regressions control for state
and year fixed effects, the state unemployment rate, the maximum welfare benefit for a family of three in the state-
year, and whether the following policies were in place in the respondent'
                                                                        s state at the beginning of the survey year –
welfare family cap, TANF, SCHIP, Medicaid coverage of abortion, abortion parental notification requirements,
abortion delay rules, and mandated private health insurance coverage of family planning services. They also control
for the percent of the state-year female population in the following demographic groups: married, white, Hispanic,
four education groups, and age 15-17, 18-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, and 35-39. All regressions are weighted by the
population of women age 15 to 44 in the state and year. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state level.
Data on Medicaid family planning beneficiaries for the years 1999-2002 are from the Medicaid Statistical
Information System (MSIS), downloaded from http://www.cms.hhs.gov in December 2006. Comparable data for
1992-1998 comes from national HFCA-2082 tables, graciously provided to us by Kosali Simon.
          Table 3: Impact of Medicaid Family Planning Waivers on Births and Abortions
                                   for Teens and Non-Teens

                                                                                   Births: Non-Teens (20-44)
                                            Teens (15-19)                         Abortions: All Women (15-44)

                                               Linear       Quadratic                       Linear      Quadratic
                                No State        State         State              No State    State        State
                                Trends         Trends        Trends              Trends     Trends       Trends

                                                                        Births

 Income-Based Waiver             -0.071        -0.047        -0.042              -0.053      -0.017       -0.020
 Implemented                     (0.024)       (0.013)       (0.014)             (0.012)     (0.009)      (0.009)

 Duration-Based Waiver            0.002        -0.008         0.014              -0.016      -0.016       -0.007
 Implemented                     (0.020)       (0.015)       (0.010)             (0.008)     (0.009)      (0.006)

 Number of Observations            637           637           637                 663        663          663

                                                                     Abortions

 Income-Based Waiver             -0.085         0.064         0.175              -0.039       0.121        0.075
 Implemented                     (0.065)       (0.102)       (0.159)             (0.035)     (0.055)      (0.087)

 Duration-Based Waiver            0.010        -0.073        -0.040               0.064       0.012       -0.071
 Implemented                     (0.055)       (0.065)       (0.138)             (0.049)     (0.048)      (0.090)

  Number of Observations           196          196           196              255           255           255
Notes: Each column represents the results from separate regressions on the log of the birth or abortion rate in
models that also include the following control variables: the unemployment rate, indicators for whether welfare
reforms were implemented (including pre-TANF waivers) and for whether the reforms included a family cap, the
maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a family of three, an indicator for whether S-CHIP was implemented in the
state, indicator variables for whether there are laws restricting abortion access by creating mandatory delays,
requiring some form of parental involvement for minors, and restriction on Medicaid funding for abortions, an
indicator for whether states have comprehensive contraception coverage, variables measuring the percentage of the
state’s population that is married, white, Hispanic. Regressions for women 20-44 also include the following
education and age controls: high school dropout, high school graduate, attended some college and between the ages
of 15-17, 18-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, and 35-39. For the teenage regressions, observations from Alabama and New
Mexico are dropped from the analysis sample because these states implemented income-based waivers that
explicitly did not apply to women under the age of 19. All regressions are weighted by the relevant population of
women in the state and year. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and are adjusted for clustering at the state
level.
              Table 4: Impact of Medicaid Family Planning Waivers on Overall Births
                       and Births of Eligible Women, by Demographic Group

                                                                                                  Impact of Income-
                                                                        Estimated % Made           Based Waiver on
                                   Income-Based        Duration-        Eligible by Income-       Eligible Women in
                                      Waiver          Based Waiver         Based Waiver                 Group
                                        (1)                (2)                   (3)                      (4)
 Age group
 Age 15-17                             -0.012             0.019                  ---                      ---
                                      (0.014)            (0.011)

 Age 18-19                             -0.068             0.014                  ---                      ---
                                      (0.018)            (0.016)

 Age 20-24                             -0.051             0.014                 34.4                    -0.148
                                      (0.021)            (0.016)

 Age 25-34                             -0.009             -0.001                21.9                    -0.041
                                      (0.006)            (0.009)

 Age 35-44                             -0.007             -0.013                18.1                    -0.039
                                      (0.013)            (0.008)

 Age 20-44                             -0.020             -0.007                22.5                    -0.089
                                       (0.009)           (0.006)

 Race/ethnicity
 White, non-Hispanic                   -0.010             -0.006                19.3                    -0.041
                                      (0.007)            (0.008)

 Black, non-Hispanic                   -0.013             0.002                 32.1                    -0.040
                                      (0.021)            (0.008)

 Hispanic                              -0.029             0.029                 31.2                    -0.093
                                      (0.010)            (0.023)

 Education
 High School Dropouts                  -0.038             -0.052                36.8                    -0.103
                                      (0.013)            (0.022)

 High School Graduates                 -0.028             -0.015                27.0                    -0.104
                                      (0.009)            (0.007)

 Some College                          -0.003             -0.010                20.3                    -0.015
                                      (0.008)            (0.015)

 College Graduates                      -0.007            -0.016                  10.1                   -0.069
                                       (0.007)           (0.008)
Notes: Each row in Columns 1 and 2 represents the results from separate regressions where the dependent variable
is the log of the birth rate (by age and race) or the log of the number of births (by education) in models that all
include state-specific quadratic trends. In Column 3, statistics reflect the estimated percentage of the population that
is eligible for income-based waivers in those states with such waivers in the 2000 Census. Statistics in Column 4
reflect the simulated impact of income-based waivers on the eligible population, which is the coefficient in Column
1 divided by the percentage (divided by 100) in Column 3. See notes to Table 3 for additional X variables in all
regressions and other comments.
             Table 5: Sexual Activity and Contraception Use by Race/Ethnicity

                             Ages: 15-19                                        Ages: 15-44

                   1988         1995           2002             1988              1995          2002

                                             Sexual Activity in Past 3 Months

 All               0.43         0.40           0.36              0.78             0.77           0.72
 White NH          0.43         0.40           0.38              0.79             0.79           0.74
 Black NH          0.51         0.46           0.35              0.79             0.77           0.68
 Hispanic          0.31         0.45           0.31              0.72             0.73           0.70

                            No Contraception Use during Last Intercourse in Past Three Months
                                            (Conditional on Sexual Activity)

 All               0.23         0.32           0.17              0.22             0.25           0.24
 White NH          0.20         0.30           0.11              0.20             0.23           0.21
 Black NH          0.32         0.30           0.26              0.28             0.29           0.31
 Hispanic          0.31         0.47           0.37              0.28             0.32           0.31

                    Sexually Active in Past Three Months and No Contraception Used at Last Intercourse

 All               0.10         0.12           0.06              0.17             0.19           0.17
 White NH          0.09         0.11           0.04              0.16             0.18           0.16
 Black NH          0.16         0.14           0.09              0.22             0.22           0.21
 Hispanic          0.10         0.20           0.12              0.20             0.23           0.22
Source: National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG)
                Table 6: Impact of Waivers on Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use

                                                              No Birth Control During Last      Unprotected Sex in
                                     Sex in past 3 months     Intercourse in Past 3 Months        Past 3 Months
                                              (1)                          (2)                          (3)

                                          Non-Teens (20-44): n = 23,123

 Income-Based Waiver                         0.045                        -0.064                       -0.043
                                            (0.028)                      (0.029)                      (0.025)

 Duration-Based Waiver                       -0.001                       0.013                        0.009
                                            (0.029)                      (0.029)                      (0.024)

                                             Teens (15-19): N = 3,800

 Income-Based Waiver                         -0.178                       0.002                        -0.022
                                            (0.053)                      (0.128)                      (0.048)

 Duration-Based Waiver                       -0.196                       0.048                        -0.009
                                            (0.055)                      (0.073)                      (0.031)

                                          Non-Teens (20-44): n = 23,123

 Income-Based Waiver                         0.043                        -0.051                       -0.034
                                            (0.025)                      (0.029)                      (0.024)

 Income-Based Waiver*                        0.009                        -0.054                       -0.035
 Predicted Eligibility                      (0.026)                      (0.018)                      (0.017)

 Duration-Based Waiver                         -0.004                       0.011                       0.008
                                              (0.029)                     (0.029)                      (0.025)
Notes: The top two panels report the results of estimating equation (2) with indicator variables for a main waiver
effect for each type of waiver included in the model. For non-teen women, we additionally estimate a model that
interacts an indicator for an income-based waiver with another variable indicating whether the individual is
predicted to be covered by the waiver. These regressions are reported in the third panel. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the state level and are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for the following
individual demographics: age group (where appropriate), race/ethnic group (where appropriate), education group
(except for teens), marital status, and whether the respondent has any children living in her household. All
regressions also control for the state-year unemployment rate, the maximum welfare benefit for a family of three in
the state-year, whether a welfare family cap was in place in the respondent'   s state at the beginning of the survey
year, year effects, and state fixed effects. Observations are weighted by NSFG survey weights. For the teenage
regressions, observations from Alabama and New Mexico are dropped from the analysis sample because these
states implemented income-based waivers that explicitly did not apply to women under the age of 19.
                           Appendix Table 1: Form of Last Birth Control among Sexually Active Women

                                                           Percent of women using method, conditional on contraceptive use
                             Percent using any
                              method at last     Natural                                Female       DepoProvera/         Sterile
                                intercourse      methods      Condom        Pill         Insert        Norplant      (either partner)
                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)                (6)
All women                          74.3            6.1         19.6         28.4          5.4            2.9               37.6
(n=18,602 )
Teens                              74.2             6.2         40.9        44.6          1.6             6.2                0.5
(n=1,410 )
Non-teens                          74.3             6.1         17.7        26.9          5.7             2.6                40.9
(n=17,192 )
Unmarried                          77.4             5.8         25.4        38.9          4.4             4.4                21.1
(n=7,816 )
Less than HS                       68.3             4.4         13.8        17.2          4.9             4.3                55.3
(n= 3,221 )
White non-Hispanic                 76.8             6.1         18.5        29.2          5.4             2.2                38.6
(n=11,017 )
Black non-Hispanic                 69.7             3.8         20.5        27.6          4.6             5.3                38.3
(n= 4,503 )
Hispanics                          65.1             7.3         22.0        25.9          5.6             5.8                33.3
(n= 2,502 )
No Children in Household           72.7             6.2         25.6        44.0          4.7             2.2                17.3
(n= 6,530 )
Children in Household              75.2             6.1         16.0        19.0          5.8             3.4                49.8
(n=12,072 )
