                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         GLOBALIZATION, GROWTH AND DISTRIBUTION IN SPAIN 1500-1913

                                           Joan R. Rosés
                                        Kevin H. O'Rourke
                                       Jeffrey G. Williamson

                                        Working Paper 13055
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13055


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




We gratefully acknowledge help with the data from Enrique Llopis, Arthur van Riel, David Reher,
and Jan Luiten van Zanden, as well as the excellent research assistance of Taylor Owings and Sunny
Ying Sun. The argument has also been improved by the comments of Leandro Prados and participants
at the Seventh International Atlantic Economics conference (Madrid, March 18 2007) and the Third
Iberometrics Conference (Valencia, March 23-24 2007). O'Rourke acknowledges financial support
from the European Union through its Marie Curie Research Training Network programme, contract
number MRTN-CT-2004-512439. He and Williamson additionally thank the IIIS for its financial support.
Rosés acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Education (Grant SEJ2006-08188/ECON).
Williamson acknowledges additional financial support from the National Science Foundation SES-0001362
and the Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Joan R. Rosés, Kevin H. O'Rourke, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Globalization, Growth and Distribution in Spain 1500-1913
Joan R. Rosés, Kevin H. O'Rourke, and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 13055
April 2007
JEL No. F1,N7,O4

                                               ABSTRACT

The endogenous growth literature has explored the transition from a Malthusian world where real
wages, living standards and labor productivity are all linked to factor endowments, to one where (endogenous)
productivity change embedded in modern industrial growth breaks that link. Recently, economic historians
have presented evidence from England showing that the dramatic reversal in distributional trends --
from a steep secular fall in wage-land rent ratios before 1800 to a steep secular rise thereafter -- must
be explained both by industrial revolutionary growth forces and by global forces that opened up the
English economy to international trade. This paper explores whether and how the relationship was
different for Spain, a country which had relatively poor productivity growth in agriculture and low
living standards prior to 1800, was a late-comer to industrialization afterwards, and adopted very restrictive
policies towards imports for much of the 19th century. The failure of Spanish wage-rental ratios to
undergo a sustained rise after 1840 can be attributed to the delayed fall in relative agricultural prices
(due to those protective policies) and to the decline in Spanish manufacturing productivity after 1898.

Joan R. Rosés                                         Jeffrey G. Williamson
Department of Economic History & Institutions         Department of Economics
Carlos III de Madrid University                       216 Littauer Center
Madrid 28903 Spain                                    Harvard University
jroses@clio.uc3m.es                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                      and NBER
Kevin H. O'Rourke                                     jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu
Department of Economics and IIIS
Trinity College
Dublin 2, IRELAND
and NBER
kevin.orourke@tcd.ie
               1. Growth and Distribution: How Was Spain Different?



       A large literature has emerged over the past fifteen years in which economic

theorists (Goodfriend and McDermott 1995; Hansen and Prescott 2002; Lucas 1999,

2002; Galor and Weil 2000; Jones 2001; Doepke 2004; Cervellati and Sunde 2005;

O’Rourke, Rahman and Taylor 2007) have attempted to model the dramatic structural

break in European living standards which occurred at some point between 1750 and

1850. Real wages and labor productivity were relatively stagnant before the late 18th

century, when it appears that both depended positively on land-labor ratios and when

population growth depended positively on real wages, all of which is consistent with the

famous model offered by Thomas Malthus (1826). After 1850, real wages and labor

productivity enjoyed a sustained and impressive increase that continues to this day,

experience clearly inconsistent with Malthusian thinking since population has continued

to increase, and at a faster rate. The prevailing view is that the industrial revolution must

have been responsible for the abrupt secular change in these productivity trends.

       However, a recent paper by two of the present authors (O’Rourke and Williamson

2005) exploited new data documenting relative factor price trends over the very long run,

and pointed out that there was another, equally dramatic change in income distribution

trends which occurred in northwest Europe at about the same time. Prior to the 19th

century, there had been a long epoch during which the wage-land rent ratio declined,

implying a rise in inequality (since land owners were at the top of the income distribution

while landless laborers were at the bottom: Hoffman et al. 2002). This trend is consistent

with a Malthusian world in which an increasing population pressed on a fixed



                                             3
endowment of land, to the benefit of landlords. At some point in the 19th century this

pattern reversed dramatically in England, the Lowlands and the rest of northwest Europe:

wages started to rise relative to land rents, implying a decline in inequality. This more

modern trend is inconsistent with a Malthusian world in which wage-rent ratios were

determined by the land endowment per worker, since the land-labor ratio continued to

decline over the two centuries following 1800.

        In short, the ancient link between factor prices and factor endowments was broken

in the early 19th century, at least in northwest Europe. What explains the break? One

obvious explanation is that it was caused by the same industrial revolutionary forces

underlying the break in living standards and labor productivity trends. While not

everyone agrees on the exact timing, all scholars agree that the rate of technological

advance accelerated in English industry about this time (Clark 2007; Crafts and Harley

1992; Mokyr 1990, 2002, 2005). In a specific factors model in which two commodities

are produced – agricultural products (using land and labor) and manufactured goods

(using capital and labor), productivity advance and accumulation in English industry

should have drawn workers out of agriculture and into the cities, raising wages, lowering

agricultural land rents, and inflating the ratio of the two.

        These industrial revolutionary forces are the focus of the theoretical papers cited

earlier, and they were certainly important in explaining the reversal in distributional

trends as well. However, that reversal can also be explained by an epochal change in the

world economy that coincided with the Industrial Revolution: Europe became

dramatically more open to trade in the decades following the French Wars (O’Rourke and

Williamson 1999, 2002a, 2002b; Findlay and O’Rourke 2007). Only in the 19th century




                                               4
did intercontinental trade have its effects on commodity and factor price convergence

which was the focus of those two famous Swedish economists, Eli Heckscher and Bertil

Ohlin (Flam and Flanders 1991). Thus, global market integration helped cut the links

between domestic factor prices and domestic land-labor ratios. For England at least,

globalization and the industrial revolution made equally important contributions to the

dramatic change in secular distribution trends (O’Rourke and Williamson 2005).

       But what about other parts of Europe where the industrial revolution came late,

where the modern commitment to free trade was less passionate, and where modern pro-

global transport revolutions might have been more modest? And what about those parts

of Europe where productivity growth and population increase were both slower in the

pre-modern, closed-economy era? In this paper, we ask whether wage-rent ratios behaved

the same way in Spain as in England and the rest of northwest Europe between 1500 and

1913, and whether industrialization and global forces played the same roles there as they

did in the leading European economies. Given that Spain and the rest of the European

periphery were much more protectionist than the industrial core, we expect to find a less

dramatic rise in the wage-rental ratio and we expect that trade policy played a big role in

accounting for the difference.

       We use the specific factors trade model (Jones 1971), with exogenous

endowments and technology, to explore Spanish experience in a comparative context.

Section 2 reviews just how Spain differed from England and the rest of northwest Europe

in terms of globalization experience and productivity performance in the very long run.

Section 3 documents Spanish relative commodity and factor price experience over the

four centuries before 1913, and compares it with England and Holland. Section 4 exploits




                                            5
the price dual to extract estimates of Spanish total factor productivity growth in both

agriculture and industry. It also compares these new (quantitative) estimates with the

traditional literature, based as they are on older, more qualitative evidence, especially for

the pre-1800 period. Section 5 explores the determinants of relative commodity and

factor prices before and after the early 19th century transition, sorting out the influence of

domestic endowments, domestic productivity and global forces. Section 6 explores some

counterfactuals that allow us to make explicit comparisons between Spain and England.

Section 7 concludes.



     2. Globalization and Productivity Growth: Spain versus Northwest Europe

                                         since 1500



Going Global: Comparing Spain with the Leaders

       An extensive literature now documents clearly the timing and importance of the

first global century, the 19th century. It is not our purpose to review this evidence in

detail, but only to show that while Spain was certainly part of that global century, there

were powerful anti-global forces at work there that made a difference. Where countries

had liberal attitudes toward trade, commodity prices converged between trading markets

as global market integration took place (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999, 2002a) and

world trade boomed (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002c, Estevadeordal et al. 2003).

Furthermore, there was nothing like this move towards world market integration between

1500 and 1800, an era of discovery and enterprise without liberal trade policy and cheap




                                              6
transport. The economic leaders in the Atlantic economy – Great Britain and Holland –

were, of course, central actors in this globalization drama.

         The mainstream literature divides Spanish foreign trade experience since

Columbus in to three periods. Up to the 1820s, American domestic and re-export trade

had an important impact on total Spanish trade. The loss of the colonies introduced a

short but difficult period of adjustment from the 1820s to the 1840s when Spanish trade

contracted dramatically as it struggled to shift from American to European markets.

During the century and a half after the 1840s, Spain underwent an impressive increase in

trade.

         In the first period, the Spanish traded goods sector shrank: many commodities in

which Spain was once self-sufficient -- such as corn, rice, and sugar -- became imports;

and even those goods Spain previously exported -- such as leather manufactures, iron,

and alum -- began to be imported by the early 17th century. Mauricio Drelichman (2005)

attributes this collapse in traded goods sectors to a Dutch disease caused by the massive

influx of precious metals from America. Spanish monarchs developed a series of

mercantilist policies to control their returns on this trade: several privileged trade

monopolies were established, only a few ports were allowed to participate in the

American trade, and most of it remained in hands of merchants in Cadiz. While a very

large share of Spanish exports to America were European re-exports, Spain also exported

wool, spirits, wine, raisins and other primary products to Europe and imported cotton

yarn, linen and wool textiles and flour in return (Prados de la Escosura 1988). Restrictive

mercantilist trade policies were reinforced by wartime disruptions at the end of the 18th

century (Findlay and O’Rourke 2007: Chp. 7): total exports declined by one third from




                                              7
1784 to 1820. Spanish foreign trade did not grow again until the 1840s. Thereafter,

Spanish exports grew at rates similar to the rest of Europe (Prados de la Escosura 1988:

183). As in earlier centuries, 19th century Spain mainly exported food, raw materials and

semi-finished goods and imported raw materials and manufactures (Prados de Escosura

1988: Table 5.5). About 60 percent of Spanish trade involved Western Europe, Britain

and France being the major trading partners (Tena 2005: Table 8.7).

       Was the evolution of Spanish trade policy different? Not on the basis of the pre-

1800 anti-global policies just summarized, since they were common throughout Europe.

Yet, Spain went global with much less enthusiasm during the first global century up to

1913. Consider trade shares: for the UK, the share of exports and imports in GDP rose

from 52 to 55% over the 55 years between 1855-59 and 1910-14 (Mitchell 1988: 453,

836); for Spain, the trade share also rose, from 7.9 to 21.3% over the sixty years between

1850-54 and 1910-14 (Tena 2005: Table 8.8). While trade boomed in both countries,

Spain was clearly much less open than Britain, in the sense that it had much lower trade

shares. And while Spanish commercial policy got increasingly liberal across the late 19th

century -- the average tariff rate fell from 14.9% in 1865 to 8.2% in 1913 (Williamson

2006b), it was still much more protectionist than free trade Britain.

       The big difference between free trade Britain and protectionist Spain lay with

agriculture and the grain trade. The Spanish government imposed an embargo on grain

imports in 1802, and it was used many times up to 1869, after which protection of local

wheat producers was achieved instead by relatively high tariffs (Montañés 2006). In

contrast, over the same period Britain removed its embargo soon after the French Wars,

reduced the tariff on grain over the two decades prior to Corn Law Repeal in 1846, and




                                             8
then stuck to free trade thereafter. As we shall see, this difference in policy had a very big

impact on trends in the relative price of agricultural products in 19th century Spain and

Britain (Figure 10).



When Did They Go Global?

       Let us start with the leader. Were English commodity prices more closely linked

to English endowments prior to the 19th century? And if so, when did this traditional,

closed economy relationship break down? A previous paper explored the question of

when the structural break took place (O’Rourke and Williamson 2005: Figure 6): it

assumed a simple relationship between relative commodity prices (agricultural vs

manufacturing) and the land-labor ratio, and plotted Chow test statistics for every year

between 1502 and 1935 to see where a structural break in this relationship was most

likely to have taken place. There was a slow, hardly noticeable rise in the test statistic

between 1500 and 1700, followed by a significant rise from 1700 to 1750, and a larger

rise from 1750 to 1800. This timing coincides well with what we know about the gradual

opening of the English economy to international trade during the course of the 18th

century. While the Chow tests suggested that traditional links between relative

commodity prices and endowments were already breaking down during the 18th century,

the sharpest acceleration in the test statistic occurred between about 1800 and 1840. The

best candidate for a structural break was the second quarter of the 19th century, with the

peak in the series occurring in 1838. Strikingly, this 1838 peak is very similar to the

timing of decline in both the Atlantic freight index (Harley 1988: Figure 1) and the grain

price gap between the US and Britain (O’Rourke and Williamson 2005: Figure 3).




                                              9
Furthermore, it is consistent with qualitative accounts regarding the liberalization of

British trade policy which have long been a staple in the economic history literature. That

is, prior to 1828, grain imports were prohibited if domestic prices fell below a certain

‘port-closing’ level, and during the early postwar years grain imports were effectively

excluded much of the time. In 1828, the Duke of Wellington’s government replaced these

import restrictions with tariffs which varied with the domestic price, a policy that not

only lowered British grain prices but also increased the integration of British with

Continental grain markets. Moreover, this adoption of the sliding scale tariff came when

several other moves towards freer trade were in motion: a reform of the Navigation Acts

in 1822; tariff reductions across the board; and the repeal of more than 1,100 tariff acts in

1825. Of course, prior to 1815 the French Wars had severely restricted international trade

(O’Rourke 2006). In short, by 1838 there had already been a radical liberalization of

British commercial policy (Williamson 1990), and Britain stuck with that pro-

globalization policy stance up to the more famous 1846 Repeal of the Corn Laws and

beyond.

       Was Spanish pro-global experience any different? Let us begin by exploring the

same Chow test statistic that emerges from the simple closed economy regression, as in

the British case. In order to see if the answers we obtain depend on the specification of

this regression, we provide four versions. The first is the specification given in equation

(4) of Table 1 below, in which relative commodity prices are regressed not just on the

land-labor ratio, but on total factor productivity in agriculture and manufacturing, as well

as on a time trend, with an AR(1) term added as well to correct for serial correlation. The

second excludes the time trend and AR(1) correction; the third further excludes TFP in




                                             10
manufacturing (so that relative commodity prices are taken to be a function of the land-

labor ratio and agricultural TFP alone); and the fourth lets relative commodity prices

depend solely on the land-labor ratio, as in previous work on England. All variables are

expressed in logs. Figure 1 plots the Chow test statistics for every year. In each of the

four cases, the Chow statistic rises slowly over the two centuries before 1800, and then

leaps dramatically upwards after 1800 or so. The large Chow statistics peak in the late

1840s and early 1850s, a little later than Britain. In what follows, we will take 1840 as a

benchmark year after which an open economy specification is more appropriate for the

Spanish economy, but Figure 2 shows clearly that it was a long transition.

       Thus, Spain underwent very much the same kind of pro-global transition as did

the European leader, or at least so say the statistics. As Leandro Prados de la Escosura

(1988) points out, however, the 19th century trade boom was not without slumps.

Furthermore, we have already seen that trade shares were much lower in Spain and tariffs

much higher. A break in the Spanish export series is clearly observable after the 1830s

and 1840s (as Spain struggled with the loss of her American colonies), two decades

during which they grew at a rate half of those typical of Europe. Over the half century

1853-1899, exports accelerated and grew at rates (3.3 percent per year) that exceeded

those in Europe. Finally, between 1899 and 1913 trade growth fell below the European

average, partly as a consequence of the loss of the Cuban, Puerto Rican and Philippine

colonies in 1898, and partly as a consequence of rising protection, domestic regulation,

and diminished competitiveness. In short, while Spain was clearly less pro-global than

Britain, its transition to openness followed much the same timing as Britain, except that

Spain underwent a late 19th century anti-global backlash which Britain did not.




                                            11
What about Comparative Productivity Performance?

       Section 4 will estimate total factor productivity for Spanish agriculture and

industry over the very long run. Here we ask what the traditional literature tells us so that

later we can gauge our estimates against that standard .

       With the exception of late 19th century agriculture and industry, estimates of

Spanish sectoral total factor productivity growth are relatively scarce. However, the

qualitative literature argues that productivity advance in these two sectors was limited, or

even negative, from the 16th to the 19th century. The mainstream view is that an absence

of technological change was produced by anti-growth institutions and ecological

constraints. While the Spanish economy only underwent extensive, as opposed to

intensive, growth during the 16th century, even that was followed by a dramatic decline in

the 17th century, before an 18th century recovery. On net, therefore, the standard view is

that very little, if any, productivity growth took place in Spain across the three centuries,

while there was significant productivity growth in Britain.

       A lively debate has emerged regarding the evolution of agricultural total factor

productivity over the long 19th century. Employing controversial and scarce quantitative

evidence, Jaume Vicens Vives (1977) was the first to assert that land productivity

stagnated over the century, thus delaying Spanish economic development. Nicolás

Sánchez-Albornoz (1977), Jordi Nadal (1974) and other economic historians supported

this pessimist argument emphasizing the absence of technological innovation. Several

authors have also emphasized the ecological limits to Spanish agricultural development

due to limited (and uncertain) rainfall and poor soil (Huguet del Villar 1969; Tortella

1981, 1994).




                                             12
       In the 1980s, a new generation of economic historians began to express some

doubts about this pessimist view of the 19th century. The GEHR (1983, 1989) concluded

that a notable increase in productivity took place between 1891/95 and 1931, while

Ramón Garrabou and Jesús Sanz (1985) estimated that cereal productivity grew by 57

percent from 1800 to 1895. More recently, Prados de la Escosura (1988, 1989) estimated

that labor productivity grew at 0.4 percent per year from 1800 to 1910, while land

productivity grew between 0.2 and 0.6 percent per year. Thus, he concluded that

agricultural output grew decidedly faster than population over the 19th century, although

less than in other European countries. James Simpson (1989, 1995) is more pessimistic,

arguing that agricultural output only grew a bit faster than Spanish population, and that

significant technological change had to wait for the second half of the 20th century.

Finally, Bringas Gutierrez (2000) has employed both the primal and the dual TFP

measures, concluding that productivity advance in Spanish agriculture from 1800 to 1905

was 0.49 percent per year, although his estimates suggest that a large part of this progress

was concentrated in the last third of the century.

       Comparative studies underline the relative backwardness of Spanish agriculture.

Recent work by Robert Allen (2000) has found that Spanish relative agricultural labor

productivity declined between 1500 and 1800: in 1500, Spanish labor productivity was

89 percent of England, while it was 70 percent in 1800. Allen concludes that Spain

missed the agricultural revolution. The situation had not changed much by the end of the

19th century: Spanish labor productivity was 62 percent of Britain in 1890 and 68 percent

in 1910 (O’Brien and Prados de la Escosura 1992).




                                             13
         Opinions about the evolution of Spanish industrial productivity can also be

divided into optimists and pessimists, and, like agriculture, the debate is also plagued by

the absence of quantitative evidence. Nadal (1974) has forcefully argued for a rapid

productivity advance over the 19th century. More recently, Albert Carreras (1990)

advanced a similar view stressing the importance of progress during the 1830-1860

period. Pessimists have sharply challenged this view (Tortella 1994; Prados de la

Escosura 1988; Fraile Balbín 1991), stressing instead the relative backwardness of

Spanish industry.



      3. Relative Commodity and Factor Prices: Spain versus Northwest Europe
                                    since 1500


         Figure 2 reports secular income distribution trends as measured by the ratio of the

wage to land rent (w/r: 1900=100). The experience between 1568 and 1913 is plotted for

three countries, two economic leaders in the European northwest – England and Holland

– on the one hand, and Spain, on the other.1 The difference between them is striking.

         The first notable difference is in their secular trends before the modern era. The

northwest underwent a great secular fall in w/r, or equivalently a great secular rise in

inequality over the 300 years between the mid-16th century and the mid-19th century.

True, the spectacular fall in the English w/r up to the early-17th century was not quite so

dramatic in Holland, and the latter underwent a partial rebound in the first half of the 18th

century which England did not share. Still, the big secular fall in w/r over the 300 years

before the mid-19th century was common to both: in England, it fell by 76% between

1
 While the Spanish series in Figure 2 may appear to be more volatile, this is simply because the w/r data
for Spain are reported by year, while the data for England and Holland are averaged over longer periods.
See Appendix 1 and 2.


                                                    14
1568-1588 and 1848-1868, while in Holland it fell by 57% over the same three centuries.

It fell by only 9% in Spain over the same period, or hardly at all. Up to the mid-19th

century, the European northwest underwent an impressive rise in inequality favoring the

landed rich while Spain did not.

         The second notable difference between Spain and the northwest lies with the

modern era of globalization and industrial revolutions. Industrially-leading northwest

Europe underwent a complete reversal in distribution trends after the mid-19th century,

recording an egalitarian rise in w/r up to 1913 (and beyond). Spain did not. Whatever it

gained between mid-century and the 1880s, it lost from then to 1913. While there is

volatility in the Spanish w/r series 1850-1913, there is none of the secular trend reversal

we see in northwest Europe, or at least if there was, then it was sharply reversed in the

1880s.

         Figure 3 reports secular trends in the price ratio of agricultural to industrial

products (PA/PM: 1750=100), using annual data wherever possible (the English data are

however decadal up to the early 19th century, which explains why they are smoother than

the other series). Figure 4 presents smoothed versions of these three series, generated

using the Hodrick-Prescott filter, with a smoothing parameter of 300. England underwent

a steady and impressive rise in the relative price of farm products (alternatively, a fall in

the relative price of manufactures), recording about a tripling in PA/PM over the three

centuries before 1800. The relative price of farm products also rose in Holland over the

same period, although the magnitude of the increase was somewhat smaller, less than a

doubling. There was also an increase in Spain between 1500 and 1800, although the long

swings in relative prices were so pronounced there that it is hard to be sure that this was




                                             15
in fact a trend. In both Spain and Holland there was an increase for the first century or so,

followed by a decline, and then another rise during the 18th century. Relative agricultural

goods prices seem to have fallen sharply during the Napoleonic Wars in both Spain and

the Netherlands, which can presumably be attributed to the trade-destroying effects of

that conflict making manufactures scarcer on the Continent (O’Rourke 2006). By the

middle of the 19th century, relative commodity prices were stabilizing in all three

countries, with declines in relative food prices in the Netherlands after the 1850s or so, in

Spain after the 1880s, and (less obviously) in England after the 1840s, declines which

might plausibly be attributed to the effects of declining transoceanic freight rates.

However, in the Spanish case this eventual decline was preceded by several decades of

rising relative food prices, which might perhaps reflect the somewhat later integration of

Spanish markets with those of the rest of the world.



    4. Estimating Spanish Productivity Advance 1568-1913 from the Price Dual



Using the Price Dual to Infer Productivity Trends

       In order to assess the impact of Industrial Revolutionary forces on Spanish factor

prices, we need some measure of industrial technological progress. Moreover, since

Spain was primarily an agricultural economy for all but the very end of our period, we

also need a measure of technological progress in agriculture if we want to explain trends

in income distribution. To obtain such a measure, economic historians typically estimate

total factor productivity growth, or the share of output growth not explained by the

growth in factor inputs. In order to compute this, one needs data on such inputs as capital




                                             16
stocks, which are increasingly difficult to obtain the further back in history we reach.

Fortunately, price data offer an alternative called the dual (for a recent example, see

Antràs and Voth 2003): total factor productivity can be calculated as the rate at which

output prices decline relative to an appropriately weighted average of factor input prices.

Since there exist relatively abundant factor and commodity price data for early modern

Spain, we can calculate total factor productivity back to the late 16th century, for both

agriculture and manufacturing.

       More formally, let

(1) Y = A F(K, L)

where Y is output, K and L are inputs of capital and labor respectively, and A is a measure

of total factor productivity. If payments to capital and labor exhaust output, then it is a

straightforward to show that

(2) ΔA = ΔY - ηK ΔK - ηL ΔL


where Δ indicates growth rates, and the ηi are the shares of income going to factor i.

Alternatively,

(3) ΔA = ηK Δr + ηL Δw - ΔP

where r represents real profits, and w is real wages. Equation (2) is the usual (primal)

expression for the Solow residual or TFP growth: the difference between the growth rate

of output and a weighted sum of the growth rates of factor inputs, with the weights being

the shares of each input in total output. Equation (3) is our dual measure of total factor

productivity growth: the difference between the growth in (value added) output prices

and the weighted sum of the growth rates of real factor prices.




                                            17
       For agriculture, we take the two inputs to be labor and land. We have combined

these using a Divisia Index, weighting land rents and agrarian wages by 0.35 and 0.65

respectively. Data on rents came from a variety of sources (see Appendix). In order to

generate a national series we have weighted each regional rent series by the share of that

region in total cultivated land.

       Our manufacturing TFP series is based on the textile industry, the most important

manufacturing activity during the period. The first step was to obtain a Divisia Index of

value added, as opposed to gross output, prices. This was done by subtracting the growth

rate of intermediate input prices from the growth rate of textile prices, with a weight for

intermediate inputs of 0.35. As for factor prices, we have only used textile wages (with a

weight of 0.65 in value added) up to 1850. Therefore, we implicitly assume that profits

were constant over this early period. For the period after 1850, however, we have

combined data on wages (with a weight of 0.65 in value added) and data on interest rates

(with a weight of 0.35) using a Divisia price index.

       The first panel of Figure 5 shows the evolution of TFP in Spanish agriculture

from 1568 to 1913. The figure appears to correspond closely with the pessimistic view of

Spanish agriculture surveyed in Section 2. Four periods are clear: (1) an initial

contraction that lasted up to 1650; (2) a subsequent period of expansion over the

following eighty years (1650-1730); (3) a second contraction that lasted up to the end of

Napoleonic Wars; and (4), finally, a moderate 19th century expansion of TFP.

Productivity gains in agriculture seem inversely related to the expansion of Spanish

population up to the 19th century, perhaps indicating that when population grew, marginal

and less productive land was exploited.




                                            18
       The second panel of Figure 5 documents the evolution of TFP in Spanish textiles

from 1568 to 1913. Once again, the figure corresponds quite closely with the qualitative

accounts of the Spanish economy reviewed in Section 2. The rate of growth of TFP in

textiles was moderate up to the early 18th century, after which it experienced a slow

acceleration, particularly during the second half of the 18th century. TFP stagnated during

the turbulent first third of the 19th century, but then it increased dramatically as a

consequence of the arrival of British machinery and the adoption of the factory system

(Rosés 1998). After the cotton famine of the 1860s, textiles experienced a second phase

of dramatic TFP growth before it was choked off by a crisis produced by the loss of

colonial markets and consequent excess capacity.



   5. What Determined Spanish Commodity and Factor Price Trends 1580-1913?



       If sustained global commodity market integration only began in the 19th century,

then it follows that while the distributional implications of international trade should not

have been manifested in the centuries before, they should have afterwards. This

hypothesis has been successfully tested using English factor endowments, commodity

prices, productivity and factor prices from 1500 to 1936 (O’Rourke and Williamson

2005). Now we want to do the same for Spain. To do so, we have constructed time series

1580-1913 for land-labor ratios (LANDLAB, agricultural land in hectares divided by

population), the ratio of agricultural prices to industrial prices (PAPM), the ratio of daily

wage rates to farm land rents per hectare (WAGERENT), total factor productivity in

agriculture (TFPAG), and total factor productivity in manufacturing (TFPMAN). The




                                             19
sources of the total factor productivity data have already been discussed in the previous

section, while the rest can be found in Appendix 2. Figures 6 and 7 present these five

series as they are entered into the regressions below, that is in logarithmic form.



What Determined Spanish Commodity and Factor Price Trends Prior to 1800?

       For the closed economy between 1580 and 1800, Table 1 estimates a simple log-

linear OLS regression2 of PAPM on land-labor ratios, TFP in agriculture, and TFP in

manufacturing, Since LANDLAB is trend stationary, we include a time trend in all

regressions. All coefficients have the signs that economic theory suggest they should, and

typically have very high t-statistics: whenever there was population pressure on the land,

it raised the relative price of farm products (the elasticity of PAPM with respect to the

land-labor ratio ranges from -0.7 to -0.9); whenever there were improvements in

agricultural total factor productivity, it lowered that relative price (the elasticity of PAPM

with respect to TFPAG lies between -1.2 and -1.3); and whenever there were

improvements in manufacturing total factor productivity, it raised that relative price (the

elasticity of PAPM with respect to TFPMAN lies between 0.8 and 0.9).

       In equation (1) we just include the land-labor ratio on the right hand side of the

regression, and here the coefficient on the land-labor ratio is statistically significant at

conventional levels. However, when an AR(1) correction is included in equation 2, as the

Durbin-Watson statistic suggests it should be, the coefficient on the land-labor ratio

becomes statistically insignificant. Part of the reason for this may be seen in Figure 6.

Over the first 150 years or so, the land-labor ratio and PAPM appear to rise and fall


2
  Ordinary Least Squares is acceptable since logPAPM, logTFPAG, logTFPMAN and logWAGERENT
are all stationary, while logLANDLAB is trend-stationary.


                                             20
together, whereas they should be negatively related, ceteris paribus. In order to explain

this apparent anomaly, we need to appeal to other factors, such as movements in total

factor productivity in agriculture. Agricultural TFP declined and then rose over these first

150 years, which may explain the initial rise and then fall of PAPM. When TFPAG is

included in the regression, the coefficient on land-labor ratios becomes statistically

significant regardless of whether we correct for serial correlation (equation 3) or not

(equation 4). Equation (4) is our preferred specification. Note that the R2 is 0.97,

suggesting that the closed economy model works very well, and that exogenous world

market conditions had little influence on PA/PM over those three pre-modern centuries.

       We can use the estimates in Table 1 to decompose the sources of those long

cycles in PA/PM before 1800 (Figures 2 and 3), namely its sharp rise over the 16th century,

its equally sharp fall across the 17th century, and the rise again to 1800. Figure 8 presents

the movements in PAPM that according to equation (4) should have occurred as a result

of changes in land-labor ratios and TFP in the two sectors. As can be seen, the most

important influence on PA/PM appears indeed to have been total factor productivity in

agriculture. As mentioned above, movements in the land-labor ratio were working to

lower PAPM during the first fifty years of our sample, and to raise it thereafter, whereas

in fact PAPM rose and then fell. Similarly, movements in TFPMAN served to lower and

then raise PAPM, and were thus working in the ‘wrong direction’ for most of the period

as well. The rise and fall in PAPM is thus completely accounted for by the fall and rise of

TFPAG, at least until 1720 or so, when all three factors were serving to raise relative

food prices.




                                             21
       What about wage-rent ratios in pre-19th century Spain? In a closed economy, a

decline in land-labor ratios should lead to a fall in the wage-rent ratio, and for standard

Malthusian reasons. Rising industrial productivity, due either to rising capital-labor ratios

or to better industrial technology, should raise wage-rent ratios. The impact of better

agricultural productivity on wage-rent ratios will depend on whether it was labor-saving

or land-saving. Table 2 estimates these relationships by regressing the wage-rent ratio

(WAGERENT) on endowments (LANDLAB), industrial productivity (TFPMAN), and

agricultural productivity (TFPAG), for the years 1580-1800. (Once again, all variables

are expressed in natural logarithms.) As hypothesized, the wage-rent ratio is positively

related to the land-labor ratio (with an estimated elasticity of over 2.3 and a very high t-

statistic). On the other hand, industrial TFP had no economy-wide impact on wage-rent

ratios, consistent with the heavily agricultural orientation of the Spanish economy at that

time. The wage-rent ratio was positively related to agricultural productivity (with an

estimated elasticity of about 0.9 and with very high t-statistics), suggesting that farm-

based productivity-enhancing technical change, organizational change or output mix

change between arable and livestock tended to be labor-using and land-saving in pre-

modern Spain. Interestingly, it was labor-saving and land-using for England during the

same period (O’Rourke and Williamson 2005), a result which is consistent with the

traditional literature on England, including the writings of Marx and Dobb. We urge

others to offer explanations for this difference in English and Spanish factor-saving

experience in agriculture.




                                             22
What Determined Spanish Commodity and Factor Price Trends After 1840?

       Now consider the determinants of relative commodity and factor prices after

Spain went global some time in the 19th century. We analyze the issue econometrically

for the period 1840-1913. As we argued in section 2, this period was chosen since it

seems likely that the transition from a relatively closed economy to a relatively open one,

in which relative commodity prices were effectively de-linked from domestic

endowments, was only complete by about 1840. Our econometric analysis thus ignores

the 40 years or so during which Spain underwent this globalization transition.

       As before, stationarity tests (both augmented Dickey-Fuller and Phillips-Perron)

indicate that wage-rent ratios, the relative price of food, and TFP in both manufacturing

and agriculture were stationary during this period. However, the same tests

unambiguously indicate that the land-labor ratio was non-stationary. The implication is

that the land-labor ratio cannot have been a determinant of either PAPM or WAGERENT

during this period. If relative commodity prices were no longer influenced by domestic

endowments, this was presumably because, in the relatively open Spanish economy of the

time, PAPM was primarily driven by world prices, and possibly Spanish tariff policies as

well. The question thus becomes, what was the impact of these exogenous relative

commodity prices on Spanish wage-rent ratios?

       Table 3 estimates a (log-linear) open-economy model of the wage-rent ratio over

the period 1840-1913. Once again simple OLS regressions are valid, given that all

variables are stationary, although in regressions (1) and (3) we include a time trend to

take account of any omitted variables, and in regressions (1) and (2) we include an AR(1)

correction for serial correlation. In an open economy, WAGERENT could still be a




                                            23
function of TFPAG and TFPMAN, but it should also be a function of relative commodity

prices PAPM, which are now taken as exogenous in a newly globalized world. The

specific factors trade model predicts that as the relative price of food declines, resources

should be transferred out of agriculture, and land rents (returns to the immobile factor)

should fall relative to wages (returns to the mobile factor): thus WAGERENT should be a

negative function of PAPM. The model is confirmed: the estimated elasticity of

WAGERENT with respect to PAPM ranges from -1.5 to -2.6, with very high t-statistics.

TFPMAN now has a positive impact on WAGERENT, with estimated elasticities ranging

from 1.3 to 2.8 and again with very high t-statistics. The fact that TFPMAN was now

having an effect on economy-wide factor prices is consistent with the growing

importance of manufacturing in Spain during this period: the share of Spanish

employment accounted for by manufacturing, mining and construction rose from 12.8%

in 1798 to 17.3% in 1860. Another important difference between the regression results

for the pre-1800 and post-1840 periods concerns the impact of TFPAG, which had a

positive impact on wage-rent ratios before 1800, but a negative impact after 1840, as

Table 3 shows. This suggests that technological progress in agriculture switched from

being labor-using and land-saving to being labor-saving and land-using, as was the case

in England. The new results are consistent with conventional narratives of the Industrial

Revolution, suggesting that unbalanced productivity growth favoring manufacturing

should have raised WAGERENT.




                                            24
                              6. Historical Counterfactuals



        We can now turn to the issue of what explained the post-1840 trends in Spanish

wage-rent ratios, in particular the rise through 1880 or so followed by the gradual decline

until the outbreak of World War I. In order to do this, we take our preferred econometric

specification in Table 3 (equation 1), and use it to ask three counterfactual questions.

First, how would Spanish wage-rent ratios have behaved if the relative price of

agricultural products (PA/PM) had remained constant between 1840 and 1913, rather than

rising until the mid-1880s and then declining? Second, what would have happened if total

factor productivity in Spanish manufacturing had remained constant after 1840, rather

than rising as it actually did (with notable interruptions in the early 1860s and following

the Spanish-American War)? And third, what would have happened if total factor

productivity in Spanish agriculture had remained constant after 1840, rather than

fluctuating as it did?

        Figure 9 provides the answers to these questions. The top panel plots the actual

movements in Spanish wage-rent ratios over the period (or more precisely, the predicted

values emerging from equation 1), as well as the three counterfactuals also generated

using that equation. ‘Constant TFPAG’ keeps TFPAG fixed at its 1840 level; ‘Constant

TFPMAN’ keeps TFPMAN fixed at its 1840 level; and ‘Constant PAPM’ keeps PAPM

fixed at its 1840 level. By comparing these three counterfactual with the actual series, the

contribution of each of these three independent variables to Spanish wage-rent ratios can

be assessed. These contributions are measured by the vertical distances between the

actual and counterfactual series, and are given in the lower panel of Figure 9.




                                             25
       The first point is that it would have made little difference to Spanish wage-rent

ratios if TFPAG had remained constant. This can be seen from the fact that the actual and

‘Constant TFPAG’ series are extremely close to each other throughout. The only point

when the two diverge significantly is around 1880-85, when agricultural TFP was at its

post-1840 nadir (Figure 7). The fact that the ‘Constant TFPAG’ series lies below the

actual series in the 1880s indicates that the agricultural TFP slump was raising wage-rent

ratios (as the negative coefficients on agricultural TFP in Table 3 indicate). For most of

the period, however, the movements in agricultural TFP were simply too modest to

matter much for economy-wide relative factor prices.

       TFP in manufacturing, on the other hand, seems to have had an important impact

on Spanish wage-rent ratios after 1840. Since TFPMAN was, for the most part, rising,

WAGERENT should have risen due to this effect alone (the coefficient on Textiles TFP

in Table 3 is positive). Thus, if manufacturing TFP had instead remained constant,

Spanish wage-rent ratios would have been lower than they actually were, and Figure 9

suggests that this effect was very large. The vertical distance between the actual and

‘Constant TFPMAM’ series (plotted separately in the lower panel of the Figure) rises to a

peak in 1860, before collapsing during the cotton famine; and then rises to another peak

just before the turn of the century, before narrowing again. Industrial progress was

serving to raise wage-rent ratios in Spain between 1840 and 1860, and again between the

mid-1860s and 1880. It continued on balance to contribute to rising wage-rent ratios

between 1880 and 1898, but then served to lower them thereafter. Movements in

industrial TFP can thus help explain wage-rent ratio growth between the mid-1860s and

1880, and declining wage-rent ratios after 1898, but in other periods industrial TFP




                                           26
movements were swamped by off-setting movements in PAPM. This was true between

1840 and 1860, and between 1880 and 1898.

       PAPM trends were broadly upward until the mid-1880s, and broadly downward

thereafter. Movements in PAPM should therefore have served to lower wage-rent ratios

between 1840 and 1885 or so, and to raise them thereafter. Between 1840 and 1860, it

seems that this negative PAPM effect was offset by the positive effect of TFP growth in

manufacturing, and the net effect was a relatively stable wage-rent ratio. Between 1865

and 1885, the increase in PAPM served to lower wage-rent ratios sharply, as evidenced

by the growing gap between the actual and ‘Constant TFPAG’ series in Figure 9.

However, this effect was dominated by the rising industrial TFP between 1865 and 1880,

with the agricultural TFP slump of the late 1870s and early 1880s playing a supporting

role. The net impact was thus rising wage-rent ratios. From 1880 until 1898, buoyant

PAPM put some slight downward pressure on wage-rent ratios, while it appears from the

bottom panel of Figure 9 that movements in TFPAG and TFPMAN were canceling each

other out. The net impact was thus a slight decline in wage-rent ratios. After 1898, falling

PAPM was serving to raise wage-rent ratios, but this was dominated by the off-setting

effects of falling manufacturing TFP.

       It appears that Spanish and English experience after 1840 was different in one

crucial respect: in Spain, movements in relative commodity prices and in industrial TFP

were nearly always having opposite effects on wage-rent ratios, whereas in England

rising industrial productivity and falling relative food prices both served to raise wage-

rent ratios. In the Spanish case, there are four distinct phases. In the first phase (1840-60),

industrial TFP growth raised WAGERENT, but PAPM rose in Spain sufficiently that




                                              27
there was no great movement in WAGERENT either way. In the second phase (1865-

1880), a rising PAPM continued to lower WAGERENT, but this effect was swamped by

the combined effects of a rising TFPMAN and a falling TFPAG, with the result that

Spanish wage-rent ratios rose during this period. In the third phase, movements in

sectoral TFPs cancelled each other out, and the slight fall in Spanish wage-rent ratios was

due to a continued high level of relative food prices (they rose prior to 1885 or so, and

fell thereafter). From 1898 onwards, falling Spanish food price should have raised wage-

rent ratios, like in Britain, but this effect was swamped by the economic effects of

Theodore Roosevelt’s implementation of his American manifest destiny, Spain’s loss of

her final American and Pacific possessions, and the resulting slump in Spanish

manufacturing as her old markets evaporated.

        Finally, what would have happened if 19th century Spanish relative prices and

manufacturing productivity had behaved as they did in Britain? Figure 10 plots PAPM

and TFPMAN (in log form) for both countries between 1840 and 1913. As can be seen,

the long run trend in TFPMAN was very similar in the two countries, although the

Spanish series is far more volatile.3 It follows that the long run trend in Spanish wage-

rent ratios would have been much the same if it had experienced British manufacturing

productivity growth. Figure 11 shows that this is indeed the case where the ‘English

TFPMAN’ counterfactual series is generated by substituting the English TFPMAN series

for the Spanish one in equation (1) of Table 3. As can be seen, this counterfactual series

is very close to the actual series (which repeats Figure 9).




3
 The TFPMAN levels are not in the same units, so the higher TFPMAN for Spain is an artifact. Britain, of
course, had the technological edge in manufacturing at this time.


                                                   28
       Relative prices are another matter. While PAPM fell in England after 1840, it rose

dramatically in Spain, at least until the 1880s (Figure 10). The implication is that Spanish

wage-rent ratios would have been much higher and would have increased after 1840 had

Spanish relative agricultural prices fallen as they did in Britain. Figure 11 shows this to

be the case (e.g. compare the ‘English prices’ counterfactual with the ‘actual’ series).



                        7. Concluding Remarks and an Agenda



       We began this paper by asking whether Spain’s relatively late industrial

revolution, and her far more hesitant embrace of freer trade, might have mattered for

Spanish income distribution trends, especially during the 19th century when countries like

Britain made such a dramatic break with the past. The answer is most definitely yes. Just

as with England, the sector-specific factors model provides a very good guide as to how

endowments and technology determined the evolution of relative commodity and factor

prices in Spain before 1800. Just as with England, endowments stopped determining

Spanish commodity and factor price trends some time in the mid-19th century, indicating

that Spain had switched to being a more open economy. Just as with England, industrial

revolutionary forces helped push wage-rent ratios up in Spain during the 19th century, and

just as with England wage-rent ratios were inversely related to the relative price of food,

yet another indication of the relevance of Heckscher-Ohlin and Stolper-Samuelson

economics for this phase of global economic history.

       Why, then, did Spain not experience the same dramatic egalitarian rise in wage-

rent ratios between 1840 and 1913 that Britain and the Netherlands did? The answer lies




                                             29
with the fact that relative commodity prices and productivity growth in manufacturing

had off-setting effects on wage-rent ratios in Spain, while in Britain they were

reinforcing. For most of the post-1840 epoch, PAPM rose in Spain, instead of falling, and

this exerted a drag on Spanish wage-rent ratios, which counteracted the positive effect of

rising manufacturing productivity. When PAPM finally started falling after the 1880s,

Spanish manufacturing went into a slump. Why did Spanish relative food prices rise so

steeply up to the 1880s? Why did Spanish industrial productivity fall so sharply after the

1890s? Finally, to what extent was Spanish experience typical of the southern and eastern

European peripheries during this first great age of globalization? We need answers to all

three questions to understand the evolution of Spanish income distribution in the century

before 1913.




                                             30
References




R. Allen (2000), "Economic Structure and Agricultural Productivity in Europe, 1300-

       1800," European Review of Economic History 3 (April): 1-25.

P. Antràs and H.-J. Voth (2003), “Factor Prices and Productivity Growth During the


       British Industrial Revolution,” Explorations in Economic History 40 (January):

       52-77.


M. A. Bringas Gutiérrez (2000), La Productividad de los Factores en la Agricultura

       Española, 1752-1935 (Madrid: Banco de España).

A. Carreras (1990), Industrialización española. Estudios de Historia Cuantitativa

       (Madrid: Espasa Calpe).

M. Cervellati and U. Sunde (2005), “Human Capital Formation, Life Expectancy, and the

       Process of Development,” American Economic Review 95 (5): 1653–72.

G. Clark (2007), A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World

       (forthcoming, Princeton University Press).

N. F. R. Crafts and C. K. Harley (1992), “Output Growth and the Industrial Revolution:

       A Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View,” Economic History Review 45 (4): 703-

       30.

M. Doepke (2004), “Accounting for Fertility Decline during the Transition to Growth,”

       Journal of Economic Growth 9 (September): 347–83.

M. Drelichman (2005), “The Curse of Moctezuma: American Silver and the Dutch

       Disease,” Explorations in Economic History 42 (July): 349-80.



                                            31
A. Estevadeordal, B. Frantz, and A. M Taylor (2003), “The Rise and Fall of World

       Trade, 1870-1939,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 359-407.

R. Findlay and K. O’Rourke (2007), Power and Plenty: Trade, War and the World

       Economy in the Second Millennium (forthcoming, Princeton University Press).

H. Flam and M. J. Flanders (1991), Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory (Cambridge, Mass.:

       MIT Press).

P. Fraile Balbín (1991), Industrialización y grupos de presión: la economía política de la

       protección en España, 1900-1950 (Madrid: Alianza).

O. Galor and D. N. Weil (2000), “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian

       Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond,” American Economic

       Review 90 (September): 806-28.

R. Garrabou and J. Sanz (1985). “La agricultura española durante el siglo XIX,

       inmovilismo o cambio?” in Historia agraria de la España Contemporánea

       (Barcelona: Crítica).

M. Goodfriend and J. McDermott (1995), “Early Development,” American Economic

       Review 85 (March): 116-33.

Grupo de Estudios de Historia Rural (GEHR) (1983), “Notas sobre la producción agraria

       española, 1891-1931”, Revista de Historia Económica 2: 185-252.

-- (1989), “El sector agrario hasta 1935”, in Estadísticas históricas de España. Siglos XIX

       y XX (Madrid: Banco Exterior).

G. D. Hansen and E. C. Prescott (2002), “Malthus to Solow,” American Economic

       Review 92 (September): 1205-17.




                                            32
C. K. Harley (1988), "Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913: The Primacy of

       Mechanical Invention Reaffirmed," Journal of Economic History 48 (December):

       851-76.

P. T. Hoffman, D. S. Jacks, P. A. Levin and P. H. Lindert (2002), “Real Inequality in

       Europe since 1500,” Journal of Economic History 62 (June): 322-55.

E. Huguet del Villar (1969), “El factor geográfico y el gran problema de España”, in

       Lecturas de economía española (Madrid: Gredos).

C. I. Jones (2001), “Was the Industrial Revolution Inevitable? Economic Growth Over

       the Very Long Run,” Advances in Macroeconomics 1, 2, article 1.

R. W. Jones (1971), “A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History,” in J.

       Bhagwati et al. (eds.), Trade, Balance of Payments, and Growth (Amsterdam:

       North-Holland).

R. E. Lucas (1999), The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future, mimeo., University of

       Chicago, Department of Economics.

-- (2002), Lectures in Economic Growth (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

T. R. Malthus (1826), An Essay on the Principle of Population (Cambridge: Cambridge

       University Press).

J. Mokyr (1990), The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress

       (New York: Oxford University Press).

— (2002), The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy

       (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

— (2005), “Long-Term Economic Growth and the History of Technology,” in P. Aghion




                                           33
       and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1 (Amsterdam:

       Elsevier).

E. Montañés (2006), “Las transformaciones de la agricultura en el régimen liberal,” in A.

       González Enciso and J. M. Matés (eds.), Historia Económica de España

       (Barcelona: Ariel).

J. Nadal (1975), El fracaso de la revolución industrial en España (Barcelona: Ariel).

P. O´Brien and L. Prados de la Escosura (1992), “Agricultural Productivity and European

       Industrialization, 1890-1980,” Economic History Review 45 (3): 514-36.

K. H. O’Rourke (2006), “The Worldwide Economic Impact of the French Revolutionary

       and Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1815,” Journal of Global History 1 (1): 123-49.

K. H. O’Rourke, A. Rahman and A. M. Taylor (2007), “Trade, Knowledge and the

       Industrial Revolution,” mimeo.

K. H. O'Rourke and J. G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History: The Evolution

       of a 19th Century Atlantic Economy (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

-- (2002a), “When Did Globalization Begin?” European Review of Economic History 6

       (April): 23-50.

— (2002b), “The Heckscher-Ohlin Model Between 1400 and 2000: When It Explained

       Factor Price Convergence, When It Did Not, and Why,” in R. Findlay, L. Jonung

       and M. Lundahl (eds.), Bertil Ohlin: A Centennial Celebration (Cambridge,

       Mass.: MIT Press).

— (2002c), “After Columbus: Explaining Europe’s Overseas Trade Boom, 1500-1800,”

       Journal of Economic History 62 (June): 417-56.

— (2005), “From Malthus to Ohlin: Trade, Growth and Distribution Since 1400,”




                                           34
       Journal of Economic Growth 10 (January): 5-34.

L. Prados de la Escosura (1988), De Imperio a Nación. Crecimiento y atraso económico

       en España. 1780-1930 (Madrid: Alianza Universidad).

-- (1989), “La estimación indirecta de la producción agraria en el siglo XIX: réplica a

       Simpson,” Revista de Historia Económica 3: 703-18.

J. R. Roses (1998), “Measuring the Contribution of Human Capital to the Development

       of Catalan Factory System (1830-61),” European Review of Economic History 2

       (1): 25-48.

J. Simpson (1989), “La producción agraria y el consumo español en el siglo XIX,”

       Revista de Historia Económica 2: 364-88.

-- (1995), Spanish Agriculture: the Long Siesta, 1765-1965 (New York: Cambridge

       University Press).

A. Teña (2005), “El sector Exterior,” in Estadísticas Historicas de España, vol. 2

   (xx:xx).

N. Sánchez-Albornoz (1977), España hace un siglo: una economía dual (Madrid:

   Alianza Editorial).

G. Tortella (1981), “La economía española, 1830-1900,” in Historia de España, vol. VIII

       (Madrid: Espasa Calpe): pp. 9-167.

G. Tortella (1994), El desarrollo de la España contemporánea. Historia económica de

       los siglos XIX y XX (Madrid: Alianza Editorial).

J. Vicens Vives (1977), Manual de Historia Económica de España (Barcelona: Editorial

       Vicens Vives).




                                            35
J. G. Williamson (1990), “The Impact of the Corn Laws Just Prior to Repeal,”

       Explorations in Economic History 27 (April): 123-56

-- (2006a), ”Globalization, De-Industrialization and Underdevelopment in the Third

       World Before the Modern Era,” Journal of Iberian and Latin American History

       (Revista de Historia Económica) 24 (Primavera): 9-36.

— (2006b), “Explaining World Tariffs 1870-1938: Stolper-Samuelson, Strategic Tariffs

       and State Revenues,” in R. Findlay, R. Henriksson, H. Lindgren and M. Lundahl

       (eds.), Eli F. Heckscher, 1879-1952: A Celebratory Symposium (Cambridge,

       Mass.: MIT Press).




                                          36
                                        Data Appendix 1


                                      1. Holland 1500-1913

1.1 Dutch Wage-Rent Ratio Series

Nominal Rents per Hectare (guilders): Holland 1500-1830 [1]. Background data to Graph 2, p.
74 in Jan Luiten van Zanden, “The Development of Agricultural Productivity in Europe 1500-
1800,” NEHA-jaarboek 61 (1998): 66-85. Data sent by van Zanden to the authors July 3, 2000 as
an email attachment.
Nominal Rents per Hectare (guilders): the Netherlands, 1820-1910 [2]. Five-year averages
starting 1820-24, average for all of the Netherlands, farm land and pasture, sent July 6, 2000 as an
email attachment (along with description) from Arthur van Riel.
Nominal Land Prices per Hectare in Groningen (guilders): northern Netherlands, 1713-
1914 [3]. Prices of farmland in Groningen, sent July 6, 2000 as an email attachment (along with
description) from Arthur van Riel.
Nominal Daily Wage (Amsterdam, building trades), 1500-1910 [4]. H. Nusteling, Welvaart en
Werkgelegenheid in Amsterdam 1540-1860 (Amsterdam: De Bataafsche Leeuw 1985), Table 5.2,
index R3 (weighted average of R1, carpenters, and R2, painters), pp. 255-7.
Nominal Daily Wage (Amsterdam), 1910-1939 [5]. D. J. van der Veen and J. L. van Zanden,
“Real-Wage Trends and Consumption Patterns in the Netherlands, c.1870-1940,” in P. Scholliers
(ed.), Real Wages in 19th and 20th Century Europe: Historical and Comparative Perspectives
(New York: Berg 1989), Table 8.6, pp. 227-8.
Linking the Wage-Rent Series 1500-1913. For 1500-1830, we construct wage-rent series as
[4]/[1], interpolating over missing years. For 1820-1910, we construct the series as [4]/[2],
interpolating over missing years. The two series are linked at the decade average over 1820-1830
= 1825. For 1910-1913, we construct wage-rent series [5]/[3], linking this extension to the
previous series at 1910.

1.2 Dutch PA/PM Series

Nominal PA and PM: Holland 1500-1800. From Jan Luiten van Zanden, “What Happened to the
Standard of Living before the Industrial Revolution? New Evidence from the Western Part of the
Netherlands,” in R. Allen, T. Bengtson, and M. Dribe (eds.), The Standard of Living before the
Industrial Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
Nominal PA and PM Holland 1800-1913. From data file constructed by Arthur van Riel, Prices
of Consumer and Produced Goods, 1800-1913.

                                      2. England 1500-1913

2.1 English Wage-Rent Series

Nominal Rents per Acre (£): England 1500-1831. From G. Clark, “Land Rental Values and the
Agrarian Economy: England and Wales, 1500-1912,” European Review of Economic History 6, 3
(December 2002), pp. 281-308, Table 8; values are given for 1500-39 (taken to be 1520), 1540-
59 (1550), 1560-79 (1570) and 1580-99 (1590); reported by decade for the 17th century; reported
at 5 yearly intervals from 1700 onwards; interpolated geometrically to get annual; rents are
assumed constant from 1500-1520, in line with the data on land and farmhouse rental values in G.
Clark, “The Secret History of the Industrial Revolution,” mimeo, October 2001, Table 2, p. 15.;
and also in line with the data in R. C. Allen, “The Price of Freehold Land and the Interest Rate in


                                                37
the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries,” Economic History Review XLI, 1 (February 1988),
pp. 33-50.
Nominal Rents per Acre (£): England 1831-1870. From J. Thompson, “An Inquiry into the
Rent of Agricultural Land in England and Wales during the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, LXX (December 1907), Appendix, Table A, p. 612.
Nominal Rents per Acre (£): England 1871-1900. An unweighted average of Thompson (1907)
and H. A. Rhee, The Rent of Agricultural Land in England and Wales (London: Central
Landowners Association, 1949), Appendix Table 2, pp. 44-5.
Nominal Rents per Acre (£): England 1900-1913. Rhee (1949).
Nominal Daily Wage (pence): England 1500-1670. Male day wages in agriculture, pence per
day; reported decadal, interpolated geometrically to get annual. From G. Clark, “The Long March
of History: Farm Laborers’ Wages in England 1208-1850,” mimeo, University of California,
Davis (n.d.), Table 4, p. 26.
Nominal Daily Wage (pence): England 1670-1851. “Winter” farm wages, pence per day;
annual. From G. Clark, “Farm Wages and Living Standards in the Industrial Revolution: England,
1670-1850,” Economic History Review 54, 3 (August 2001), pp. 477-505.
Nominal Weekly Wage (shillings): England 1851-1902. Average weekly cash wages of
ordinary laborers paid at 67 farms in England and Wales, shillings per week. From A. Wilson
Fox, “Agricultural Wages in England and Wales During the Last Fifty Years,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society 66, 2 (1903), pp. 273-359 and Appendix II, pp. 331-2.
Nominal Weekly Wage (shillings): England 1902-1913. Bowley and Wood’s index of average
agricultural wages, England and Wales, in a normal week. Taken from B. R. Mitchell, British
Historical Statistics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 158-9.

2.2 English PA/PM Series

Nominal PA: England 1500-1640. “Average - all agricultural products,” including grains, other
arable crops, livestock and animal products; reported decadal, interpolated geometrically to get
annual. From J. Thirsk (ed.), The Agrarian History of England and Wales, Volume IV: 1500-1640
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967), Table XIII, p. 862.
Nominal PA: England 1640-1749. “Average - all agricultural products,” including grains, other
field crops, livestock and animal products; reported decadal, interpolated geometrically to get
annual. From J. Thirsk (ed.), The Agrarian History of England and Wales, Volume V: 1640-1750
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), Table XII, p. 856.
Nominal PA: England 1749-1805. Wheat; reported decadal, interpolated geometrically to get
annual. From P. Deane and W. A. Cole, British Economic Growth 1688-1959, 2nd ed.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962),Table 23, p. 91.
Nominal PA: England 1805-1913. Total agricultural products; annual. From Mitchell and Deane
(1962), pp. 471-3.
Nominal PM: England 1500-1640. “Industrial products”; reported decadal, interpolated
geometrically to get annual. From Thirsk (1967), Table XIII, p. 862.
Nominal PM: England 1640-1749. “Industrial products”; reported decadal, interpolated
geometrically to get annual. From Thirsk (1985), Table XII, p. 856.
Nominal PM: England 1749-1796. “Other prices” (equals unweighted average of Schumpeter’s
producer goods); annual. From Deane and Cole (1962), Table 23, p. 91.
Nominal PM: England 1796-1913. Price indices of merchandise exports, annual (equals Imlah
and Board of Trade). From Mitchell and Deane (1962), pp. 331-2.




                                               38
                                        Data Appendix 2


                            1. Spanish Wage-Rent Series 1568-1913

1.1 Nominal Rents: 1568-1820

The sources are: J. A. Álvarez Vázquez, Rentas, precios y crédito en Zamora en el Antiguo
Régimen (Zamora: Colegio Universitario de Zamora, 1987); L. J. Coronas Vida, La economía
agraria en tierras de Jaén 1500-1650 (Granada: Universidad de Granada, 1994); M. Duran,
Renda i producció agraria a Catalunya, segles XVI-XVIII (Barcelona: Phd Dissertation, 1984);
A. García Sanz, Desarrollo y crisis del Antiguo Régimen en Castilla la Vieja. Economía y
Sociedad en tierras de Segovia, 1500-1814 (Madrid: Akal, 1977); M. González Mariscal,
"Propiedades y rentas territoriales del cabildo de la catedral de Sevilla, 1524-1606. Primeros
resultados y reflexiones" (Santiago: Congreso de la Asociación de Historia Económica, 2005); E.
Llopis (personal communication); J. A. Sebastián Amarilla, “La renta de la tierra en León durante
la Edad Moderna. Primeros resultados y algunas reflexiones a partir de fuentes monásticas,”
Revista de Historia Económica 8 (1).
The procedure for constructing the series is: First, the original regional series, commonly for
wheat, have been converted into grams of silver with price data from E. J. Hamilton, American
Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain, 1501-1650 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1934) and War and Prices in Spain, 1651-1800 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1947) and G. Feliu, Precios y salarios en la Cataluña moderna (Madrid: Banco de España,
1991), and silver content of coins from Feliu. Second, we have taken log-growth rates of silver
rents. Finally, we split these series into a national Divisia rent index with weights based on the
distribution of cultivated land by regions in Spain from J. Simpson, Spanish Agriculture: the
Long Siesta, 1765-1965 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995). When several series are
available for the same region (particularly Castile), we have taken an unweighted average of
them.

1.2 Nominal Rents: 1820-1913

Average agricultural land prices are taken from M. A. Bringas Gutiérrez, La Productividad de los
Factores en la Agricultura Española, 1752-1935 (Madrid: Banco de España, 2000). These prices
are converted into yearly series with data from M. A. Bringas Gutiérrez, I. Moral Arce, and M. J.
Roca Castro, "Una estimación del precio de la tierra en Cantabria, 1860-1936. Primer ensayo"
(Santiago: Congreso de la Asociación de Historia Económica, 2005). When data are not available
on a yearly basis, we interpolate linearly to get annual. Finally, the land price data has been
converted to rents by multiplying them by long-run interest rates. Interest rates are from P. Tedde
de Lorca, El Banco de San Carlos 1782-1829 (Madrid :Banco de España, 1988), P. Tedde de
Lorca, El Banco de San Fernando, 1829-1856 (Madrid: Alianza, 1999), and A. Carreras and X.
Tafunell , Historia Económica de la España Contemporánea (Barcelona: Ariel, 2003).

1.3 Nominal Daily Wage in Agriculture: 1568-1913

1568-1756: Unskilled building workers taken from D. Reher and E. Ballesteros, “Precios y
salarios en Castilla la Nueva: la construcción de un índice de salarios reales, 1509-1991,” Revista
de Historia Económica, XI, 1 (1993), pp. 101-151. All data were converted into silver content
with data from Feliu.




                                                39
1756-1913: Average wages for male agrarian journeymen taken from Bringas Gutiérrez. When
data are not available yearly, we have used the Reher and Ballesteros data on unskilled wages to
generate an annual series by means of Fisher indices.

1.4 Nominal Daily Wage in Textiles: 1568-1913

1568-1773: Barcelona’s bricklayers wages in silver taken from Feliu.
1773-1830: Average wage for cotton printing in Barcelona taken from N. Mora, “El poder
adquisitiu dels treballadors d’indianes a Barcelona, 1770-1816,” in S. Castillo and R. Fernández
(eds), Campesinos, artesanos, trabajadores (Lleida: Milenio, 2000), spliced with skilled building
wages taken from Reher and Ballesteros, then converted to silver with data taken from Feliu.
1830-1850: Average wages in Catalan textile industry from J. R. Rosés, The Early Phase of
Catalan industrialisation, 1830-1831 (Phd. Dissertation, European University Institute, Florence:
1998).
1850-1913: Average male and female wage in cotton textiles taken from La formación del
mercado de trabajo industrial en la Cataluña del siglo XIX (Madrid: Ministerio de Trabajo y
Seguridad Social, 1995).

1.5 Benefit Rates in Textiles: 1850-1913

Wage rate series augmented with data on benefits taken from Carreras and Tafunell.

                               2. Spanish PA/PM Series 1568-1913

2.1 Agricultural Price Indices (PA): 1568-1913

1563-1800: Price data are from Hamilton, American Treasure and War and Prices, converted into
silver using Feliu.
1800-1850: Price data are from Reher and Ballesteros and J. Moreno, “El nivel de vida en la
España atrasada entre 1800 y 1936. El caso de Palencia,” Investigaciones de Historia Económica
4 (2006), pp. 9-51, converted into silver using Feliu.
1850-1913: Price data are from L. Prados de la Escosura, El progreso económico de España,
1850-2000 (Madrid: Fundación BBVA, 2003).

2.2 Textile Price Indices (PM): 1568-1913

1563-1800: Textile prices throughout. We have constructed value added price indices by
subtracting from output prices intermediate prices multiplied by 0.35. Price data for outputs and
intermediates are from Hamilton, American Treasure and War and Prices, converted into silver
using Feliu.
1800-1850: Textile prices throughout. We employ the same method as with the earlier period.
Output price data are from Moreno and J. R. Rosés, “Industrialización regional sin crecimiento
nacional: La industrialización catalana y el crecimiento de la economía española (1830-1861),”
Revista de Historia Industrial, vol.45 (2004), pp. 49-80. Intermediate prices are from Rosés and
Estadísticas Históricas de España (Madrid: Fundación BBVA, 2005).
1850-1913: Price data are from L. Prados de la Escosura, El progreso económico de España,
1850-2000 (Madrid: Fundación BBVA, 2003).




                                                40
                   3. Spanish Population and Land Endowment 1580-1913

David Reher furnished us with his new calculations for Spanish population. Land endowments
are obtained from Bringas Gutiérrez. When data are not available on a yearly basis, we linearly
interpolated to get annual.




                                               41
          Table 1. Explaining Spanish Relative Price Trends, 1580-1800

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)
C                             8.559157    9.086219    11.26068        11.34949
                            (6.787755)     (2.522)  (31.11615)      (14.94844)
Land-labor ratio             -0.819977 -0.928576      -0.70076        -0.69853
                            (-3.068204) (-1.22603) (-10.77433)      (-4.405322)
Agricultural TFP                                     -1.229826       -1.274845
                                                    (-55.47668)     (-52.86637)
Textiles TFP                                          0.837795        0.878796
                                                    (22.13732)      (22.43639)
Time trend                   -0.002632 -0.002886 -0.002024           -0.002103
                            (-4.188118) (-1.504265) (-10.92797)     (-5.509129)
AR(1)                                     0.737271                    0.690661
                                        (14.73356)                  (12.66281)
R-squared                     0.057676    0.570168    0.940191        0.967626
Adjusted R-squared            0.049031   0.564199     0.939083         0.96687
S.E. of regression            0.343616   0.233137     0.086968         0.06428
Sum squared resid             25.73973   11.74018     1.633705        0.884242
Log likelihood               -75.99639 10.20064       228.6726        294.6652
F-statistic                  6.671526    95.50749     848.8677        1279.254
Prob(F-statistic)            0.001541     0.00000     0.00000         0.00000
Mean dependent variable       4.557683   4.557495     4.557683        4.557495
S.D. dependent variable       0.352363   0.353156     0.352363        0.353156
No. of observations              220         220         220             220
Durbin-Watson stat.           0.524848   1.925827     0.655162        2.124138

                                Source: see text.




                                       42
    Table 2. Explaining Spanish Wage-Rent Ratio Trends, 1580-1800

                                     (1)            (2)        (3)
C                               -10.62067       -10.68236  -10.32006
                                (-8.58837)     (-8.769393)(-13.95386)
Land-labor ratio                  2.37889       2.379865    2.321565
                               (9.457569)      (9.446505) (16.37483)
Agricultural TFP                  0.88101       0.879191    0.914572
                               (15.86841)      (15.94741) (20.72791)
Textiles TFP                    -0.025411                  -0.091084
                               (-0.276703)                (-1.043521)
Time trend                       0.001473       0.001388    0.001443
                               (1.992187)      (2.065221) (3.004587)
AR(1)                            0.490084       0.491991
                               (8.226769)       (8.29993)
R-squared                        0.835424       0.835365    0.783284
Adjusted R-squared               0.831578       0.832302    0.779271
S.E. of regression               0.148305       0.147986    0.169395
Sum squared resid                4.706794        4.70846    6.198014
Log likelihood                   110.7418       110.7028    81.33427
F-statistic                      217.2618       272.7306    195.1741
Prob(F-statistic)                0.00000         0.00000    0.00000
Mean dependent variable          4.336815       4.336815    4.336887
S.D. dependent variable          0.361374       0.361374    0.360553
No. of observations                 220            220         220
Durbin-Watson stat.              2.002592       2.002626    1.029213

                           Source: see text.




                                  43
        Table 3. Explaining Spanish Wage-Rent Ratio Trends, 1840-1913

                                (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)
C                           14.83904          18.8875      13.69862      19.14153
                          (15.31393)       (17.19979)    (15.04668)    (21.64639)
PAPM                       -2.001821        -2.170436      -1.52326     -2.629435
                          (-10.06653)      (-11.10891)   (-7.633283)   (-14.29192)
Agricultural TFP           -2.249057        -2.292801     -2.047739     -2.553998
                          (-15.04043)      (-15.78105)   (-12.74421)   (-18.66645)
Textiles TFP                1.773071         2.062152      1.248279      2.787771
                          (7.187869)       (7.685314)    (5.977197)    (15.12632)
Time trend                  0.013151                       0.012335
                          (6.624447)                     (9.625887)
AR(1)                         0.5489         0.89556
                          (5.155172)       (15.78971)
R-squared                   0.803718        0.763919      0.743965      0.842859
Adjusted R-squared          0.789285        0.750233      0.729123      0.836124
S.E. of regression          0.138221        0.150485      0.156716      0.121895
Sum squared resid           1.299146        1.562562      1.694632      1.040081
Log likelihood               44.5658        37.73487      34.73273       52.7949
F-statistic                 55.68796        55.81822       50.1237      125.1529
Prob(F-statistic)            0.00000        0.00000       0.00000       0.00000
Mean dependent variable      4.34307         4.34307       4.34307       4.34307
S.D. dependent variable     0.301111        0.301111      0.301111      0.301111
No. of observations             74              74            74            74
Durbin-Watson stat.         2.263447        2.610977      1.139497      0.757638

                               Source: see text.




                                      44
                  Equation 4, Table 1                                  Including TFPAG, TFPMAN
  40                                                       120

                                                           100
  30
                                                            80

  20                                                        60

                                                            40
  10
                                                            20

   0                                                         0
    1600   1650   1700   1750   1800    1850   1900           1600   1650   1700   1750   1800   1850   1900


                   Including TFPAG                                            LANDLAB only
1,000                                                      400


 800
                                                           300

 600
                                                           200
 400

                                                           100
 200


   0                                                         0
    1600   1650   1700   1750   1800    1850   1900           1600   1650   1700   1750   1800   1850   1900


                           Figure 1. Chow test statistics, 1597-1909
                                       Source: see text.




                                                      45
                                               England
                    500



                    400



                    300



                    200



                    100



                      0
                          1600   1650   1700      1750   1800   1850   1900



                                         Netherlands
                    500



                    400



                    300



                    200



                    100



                      0
                          1600   1650   1700      1750   1800   1850   1900



                                                Spain
                    500



                    400



                    300



                    200



                    100



                      0
                          1600   1650   1700      1750   1800   1850   1900




Figure 2. Secular trends in w/r: Spain vs. Northwest Europe, 1568-1913 (1900=100)
                          Source: Data appendices 1 and 2.




                                                46
                   England
140

120

100

80

60

40

20

 0
      1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900


                 Netherlands
500


400


300


200


100


 0
      1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900


                    Spain
400



300



200



100



 0
      1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900



  Figure 3. Trends in PA/PM, 1501-1913
     Source: Data appendices 1 and 2.




                     47
                     England
  120

  100

   80

   60

   40

   20

    0
        1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900


                   Netherlands
  280

  240

  200

  160

  120

   80

   40
        1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900


                      Spain
  240



  200



  160



  120



   80
        1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900



Figure 4. Smoothed trends in PA/PM, 1501-1913
        Source: Data appendices 1 and 2.




                       48
                          Agricultural TFP
     280

     240

     200

     160

     120

      80

      40
            1600   1650   1700        1750   1800   1850   1900


                           Textiles TFP
    1000


     800


     600


     400


     200


       0
            1600   1650   1700        1750   1800   1850   1900


Figure 5. TFP in agriculture and textiles, 1568-1913 (1568=100)
             Source: see text and data appendix 2.




                                 49
                    LANDLAB                                                      PAPM
4.8                                                    5.5

4.7
                                                       5.0
4.6

4.5
                                                       4.5
4.4

4.3
                                                       4.0
4.2

4.1                                                    3.5
      1600   1650      1700         1750   1800                 1600      1650      1700   1750   1800



                    TFPAG                                                        TFPMAN
5.6                                                    3.6

                                                       3.4
5.2
                                                       3.2
4.8                                                    3.0

4.4                                                    2.8

                                                       2.6
4.0
                                                       2.4

3.6                                                    2.2
      1600   1650      1700         1750   1800                 1600      1650      1700   1750   1800


                                                  WAGERENT
                              5.5


                              5.0


                              4.5


                              4.0


                              3.5


                              3.0
                                    1600   1650              1700      1750      1800



                       Figure 6. Regression data, 1580-1800 (logs)
                                 Source: Data appendix 2.




                                                  50
                        LANDLAB                                                             PAPM
4.80                                                            6.8

4.75
                                                                6.4
4.70

4.65                                                            6.0

4.60                                                            5.6
4.55
                                                                5.2
4.50

4.45                                                            4.8
   1840   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910          1840   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910



                          TFPAG                                                         TFPMAN
 5.2                                                            5.2


 5.0
                                                                4.8

 4.8
                                                                4.4
 4.6

                                                                4.0
 4.4


 4.2                                                            3.6
   1840   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910          1840   1850   1860   1870   1880   1890   1900   1910


                                                       WAGERENT
                                5.2


                                4.8


                                4.4


                                4.0


                                3.6


                                3.2
                                  1840   1850   1860   1870     1880   1890   1900   1910



                               Figure 7. Regression data, 1840-1913 (logs)
                                         Source: Data appendix 2.




                                                           51
       Movements in PAPM due to LANDLAB                         Movements in PAPM due to TFPAG
-2.8                                                  -4.8

                                                      -5.2
-2.9

                                                      -5.6
-3.0
                                                      -6.0
-3.1
                                                      -6.4

-3.2
                                                      -6.8

-3.3                                                  -7.2
       1600    1650      1700    1750     1800                1600     1650      1700     1750     1800


        Movements in PAPM due to TFPMAN                      Predicted movements in PAPM (all factors)
3.2                                                   5.6

3.0
                                                      5.2

2.8
                                                      4.8
2.6
                                                      4.4
2.4

                                                      4.0
2.2

2.0                                                   3.6
       1600    1650      1700    1750     1800                1600     1650      1700     1750     1800


                      Figure 8. Decomposing trends in PAPM, 1580-1800
                                      Source: see text.




                                                 52
   8


   7


   6


   5


   4


   3


   2
   1840   1850    1860   1870        1880     1890      1900   1910

                 Constant TFPAG             Constant TFPMAN
                 Constant PAPM              Actual


   3


   2


   1


   0


  -1


  -2


  -3


  -4
   1840   1850    1860   1870        1880     1890      1900   1910

                     Contribution of agricultural TFP
                     Conbtribution of PAPM
                     Contribution of textiles TFP



Figure 9. Counterfactual analysis and decomposing the sources
            of wage-rent ratio changes, 1840-1913
                       Source: see text.




                                53
6.8


6.4


6.0


5.6


5.2


4.8


4.4
  1840   1850   1860   1870       1880    1890   1900   1910

                        England          Spain


                           PAPM

5.2

5.0

4.8

4.6

4.4

4.2

4.0

3.8

3.6
  1840   1850   1860   1870       1880    1890   1900   1910

                        England          Spain



                   TFP in manufacturing


  Figure 10. Spanish and English prices and productivity
              Source: Data appendices 1 and 2.




                           54
8


7


6


5


4


3


2
1840   1850     1860       1870        1880        1890          1900   1910

                              Actual
                              English prices
                              English TFPMAN


          Figure 11. Counterfactual analysis: Spain vs England
                            Source: see text.




                                  55
