                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE PERMANENT INCOME HYPOTHESIS AND
                CONSUMPTION DURABILITY: ANALYSIS
                     BASED ON JAPANESE PANEL DATA


                           Fumio Hayashi



                       Working Paper No. 1305




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 198)4




I am grateful for comments and suggestions received during
workshops at Osaka, Nagoya, Nothwestern and MIT. All the corn-.
pitations were done at the Economic Planning Agency of the Japanese
governnent. The researob reported here is part of the NEER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #1305
                                          March 1984




         The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consutnptiori Durability:
                     Analysis based on Japanese Panel Data


                                   ABSTRACT



The permanent income hypothesis is tested on a four—quarter panel of about two

thousand Japanese households for ten commodity groups. Consumption is a

distributed lag function of expenditures, and the utility function is

additively separable in time. Durability is defined as the persistence of the

distributed lag. The permanent income hypothesis implies that, for each

commodity group, expected change in expenditures is correlated neither with

past expenditure changes on other commodities nor with expected change in

disposable income, if its own lags are controlled for. The main results are

the following: (1) durability is substantial even for food and services, (2)

the permanent income hypothesis applies to almost all (probably more than

ninety percent) of the population, and (3) the habit persistence hypothesis is

rejected in favor of the permanent income hypothesis.




                                                   Fumio Hayashi
                                                   Institute of Socio—Economjc
                                                       Planning
                                                   University of Tsukuba
                                                   Sakura, Iharaki 305, JAPAN
1. INTRODUCTION and SUMMARY

    The empirical validity of the permanent income hypothesis' is a long-

standing issue that has been debated for nearly three decades. At the heart

of the debate is the question of whether or not consumption is "too sensitive"

to income fluctuations. Its operational meaning was not given until the

publication of Hall's (1978) paper which has shown that the permanent income

hypothesis implies the marginal utility of consumption is a martingale. Since

then quite a few papers have studied the issue of the excess sensitivity of
       -.
consumpclon.
               2..r'iany
               -              .    .     .                     ..   -         -
                           or triem nave aiso tried to estimate tne traction or

households in the population that follow the permanent income hypothesis

rather than simply keep track of disposable income. Although those papers

differ in terms of the component of consumption (food, nondurables, services,

or durables) and the kind of data set (time—series, cross—section, or panel)

that they use, there seems to be a consensus that the permanent income hypo-

thesis applies to 70 to 100 percent of the population.

    As impressive as it is, the empirical literature has failed to address

two important issues. First, not much attention has been paid to the distinc-

tion between consumption and expenditures. Total expenditures are dichoto-

mized into perishables (nondurables and services) and durables. Since the

permanent income hypothesis is a theory about the flow of consumption, the

empirical literature has either looked at perishables alone or singled out

durables for special treatment. However, it is not entirely clear that most

commodities labeled as nondurables and services are perishable so that

consumption and expenditures can be equated. A good example is dental

services.3 People go to a dentist not because they enjoy the treatment but

because they hope that their teeth will be in good shape for some time to

come. So dental services are essentially durable expenditures. Another
                                        —2—

example is a pleasure trip. It is obviously physically perishable, but it

might have a lasting psychological effect on preferences as people derive

utility from the memory of a trip. If so, recreational expenditures should be

treated as if they are durable expenditures. Second, all the empirical

evidence that has been put forth to support the permanent income hypothesis —

with   a possible exception of Hall and Mishkin (1982) — seems to be also

consistent with the habit persistence hypothesis (Brown [19521) that current

consumption is determined by the history of past consumption and current

in'rm      Tf hriic.hr,1d   ir   fnrwrd—1rrkinc f.
                                             --——-      by th nrmnpnt-
                                                     ———d—.
income hypothesis, the distinction between permanent and temporary tax changes

is a crucial one. That is not the case if households are backward—looking as

is postulated by the habit peristence hypothesis. So it is important from the

viewpoint of stabilization policies to discriminate the permanent income

hypothesis from the habit persistence hypothesis.

       This study attempts to address the above two issues as wellas obtain a

sharper estimate of the fraction of the population that is explained by the

permanent income hypothesis. It uses a four—quarter panel of about two

thousand households in Japan for ten commodity groups. The unique feature of

this data set is that it has information on expectations about expenditures

and income. The most striking fact revealed by the data set is that an

increase in expenditures tends to be followed by a decrease, i.e., the first—

order autocorrelation in expenditure changes are negative. This seems to be

inconsistent with the permanent income hypothesis, if consumption is well

proxied by expenditures.

       The theoretical model in this study makes an explicit distinction between

consumption and expenditures by postulating that consumption is a distributed

lag function of current and past expenditures. Otherwise the model is a
                                      —3--


 standard one: the household's objective function is additively separable in

 time, and the lifetime budget constraint is the only constraint faced by the

household. It is shown, under a certain set of restrictions on the house-

hold's preferences, that consumption follows a martingale. This means that

change in expenditures on any single commodity group depends only on its own

past changes and unforecastable events, namely it is an univariate auto—

regression. If the commodity is perishable both physically and psychologi—

cally (so that expenditures affect the utility only for the current period),

there should be no lagged expenditure changes in the univariate autoreg-

ression; if the commodity is highly durable, lagged expenditure changes should

have coefficients close to unity in absolute value. Thus the theoretical

model provides a unified treatment of commodities with differing degrees of

durability. This is useful from the viewpoint of macroeconomic stabilization

policies, because the implied equation is stated in expenditures, not in

consumption, and expenditures are components of aggregate demand.

     There are three major empirical findings that emerge from the estimation

of the model. First, lagged expenditure changes are significant even for food

and services, which suggests that they are not really perishables. Second, if

its own lags are controlled for, current change in expenditures is not

sensitive to the forecastable part of current income change. That is to say,

the rnartingale hypothesis is valid in consumption, but not in expenditures.

Third, current change in expenditures is sensitive to the unforecastable part

of current income change.   It is hard to reconcile this finding with the habit

persistence hypothesis which assumes households are backward—looking.

     The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the data set

and takes a look at sample means, standard deviations, and correlations of

relevant variables. Section 3 presents the theoretical model and derives the
                                    —4--


equation stated in expenditures. A few econometric issues concerning the

estimation of the equation on a short panel are discassed in Section 4.

Parameter estimates are presented in Section 5. The paper concludes with a

few remarks in Section 6.




2. DATA DESCRIPTION

     The data set for the present study is obtained from the 1982 Survey of

Family Consumption compiled by the Economic Planning Agency of the Japanese

government. This is an interview panel survey in which families reported to

visiting interviewers every three months over a four—quarter period (1981:Q2—

1982:Q1). More specifically, respondents are asked at the end of each quarter

to provide the following information: (1) expenditures on ten different and

mutually exclusive commodity groups for the quarter,4 (Ii) "normal" income net

of taxes and social security contributions, (iii) "temporary" income net of

taxes and social security contributions, (iv) the respondentts expectations

(at the end of each quarter) of all the variables in the above three items for

the following quarter, and (v) family characteristics (occupation, family

size, age of the head, and housing tenure).5 "Normal" income is equal to

after—tax labor income net of bonuses. "Temporary" income is the sum of

property income, bonuses, severence pay, and tax returns at the end of a

calender year. The survey does not cover one—person households. Although

this is not a diary survey, interviewers actually visited the households every

quarter and the respondents filled out the questionaire La the presence of the

interviewer. There are practically no attritions: for any quarter at least

99.5 percent of the surveyed 5,837 households responded. Information about

food, for example, is elicited by the question: "How much did your family
                                     —5—

spend on food for the last three months?' and "How much do you expect your

family will spend on food for the next three months?"

     Of the original sample, only "workers' households," namely households

whose head is on a payroll, are selected. They are about 58 percent of the

original sample. Farmers and households with unincorporated business are

excluded from the sample as their income pattern is distinctly different from

that of workers' households who receive semiannual bonuses. If the age of the

head either increases by more than a year or decreases, the household is

deleted in forming the panel. It became necessary to delete the sample from

the entire Tokyo prefecture and other parts of the country, because I could

not form a four—quarter panel due to some coding problem. At this stage the

sample size became 2,518. From this, households which did not provide

relevant information (455 cases) and then households which changed their

housing tenure (from a homeowner to a nonhomeowner or from a nonhomeowner to a

homeowner) (46 cases) are deleted.6 This left a sample oF 2,017 cases. For

this sample I examined the empirical distribution and decided to remove seven

cases which reported extreme values.7 The sample size become 2,010.

    The variables used in the analysis are as follows (for a quick reference


see Table 8):


   Cl = expenditures
                   on food (including liquor and beverages and excluding

          meals away from home);

   C2 = expenditures
                   on     rents, fuel and utilities;

   C3 = expenditures
                   on     clothing and household textiles;

   C4 = expenditures
                   on     consumer durables (including furniture, electric

          appliances, mtsical instruments, cameras, automobiles, bikes,

          bicycles, sports equipments, and stainless sinks);

   C5     recrettonal expenses (including vacation expenses, movies,
                                          —6—

            admission fees, and meals away from home);

    C6 =    "cultural"    expenses (including reading materials, tuition for

            cultural activities such as flower arrangement, cooking, tea

            ceremoy, music and dance);

    C7 = educational       expenses (including tuition, books, supplies and

            equipments for kindergardens, elementary and high schools, colleges

            and universities);

    C8 = medical       expenses not paid by the national health insurance, glasses

            and medical appliances for personal use;

    C9 = "social'      expenses (including gifts and contributions);

    ClO =   other   expenditures (including housewares, repairs, personal care

            services, transportation and communication, telephone charges,

            private insurance premiums, shoes, unbrellas, and vehicle

            operations);

    IT = "temporary"       income consisting of bonuses, income from interests,

            dividends and estates, insurance payments, severance pay, and tax

            returns;

   YN = "normal"       income consisting of regular wages and salaries; the sum of

            YN and YT is equal to income net of taxes, social security

            contributions, and national health insurance taxes;

   YD       YN + YT, disposable income;

   AGE = age of the household head;

   FSZ      family size (i.e., the number of persons in the family).



I use subscripts to denote the quarter. For example, Cl1 is food expenditures

in the first quarter of the panel (1981:Q2), and Cl4 is food expenditures in

quarter four (1982:Ql). Consumption and income variables are all deflated by

the corresponding components of the CPI (consumer price index). Variables C9,
                                     —7—

YN and YT are deflated by the overall CPI. A weighted average of the trans-

portation, communication, and miscellaneous components of the CPI is used to

deflate ClO. Since prices were very stable during the period covered by the

panel (the inflation rate during the period was 2.8 percent), the choice of

the deflator is immaterial. Panel A of Table 1 displays the means and

standard deviations of the relevant variables.

     In the subsequent analysis, I will use consumption expenditures and

income adjusted for family size. This adjustment is done by dividing the

variable by the number of equivalent adults which is estimated by regressing

the log of the variable on family size dummies. The regressions are run on

pooled data. Table 2 reports the results of expenditures and income regress-

ions on pooled data. If the regressions were run for each quarter, the

intercept term would pick up economy—wide shocks and the residual would be

purged of any seasonal and macroeconomic fluctuations. The antilog of the

residual from the pooled regression is taken to be the value of the variable

adjusted for family size. If the (unadjusted) value is zero, its adjusted

value is set at zero also. Put more formally, the family size—adjusted value

of    is the ratio of the unadjusted value fo X divided by fx(FSZt), where

is a function defined in Table 2 that converts family size in period t, FSZt,

into the number of equivalent adults specific to X (X =   C1,C2,,,.,C10).8   For

example, ci2 = 1.0,     ci3 = exp(.232), ci4 = exp(.326), ci5
exp(.423), and so forth. These numbers come from the estimated coefficients

of the family size dummies reported in Table 2. The number of equivalent

adults is normalized to unity for two—person families. (Note that the sample

does not include one—person households.)   The means and standard deviations

of the family sLze—adjusted variables thus obtained are displayed in Panel B

of Table 1.   Since the R2 for the regressions reported in Table 2 is uniformly
                                         —8—

very low except for food expenditures and since very few households changed

its family size during the period of the survey, this particular way of

adjusting for family size should not (and in fact did not) influence the

results to be reported in this paper in any important way.

       The present data set contains information on expectations held by

households. Since the period of the survey is from 1981:Q2 to 1982:Q1,

reported expectations refer to the period of 1981:Q3 to 1982:Q2.          I will put

subscript "e" to denote expected values; for example, C1 denotes the house—

holds expectation, formed at the end of period t—i, of Ci in period t

(t =   2,3,4,5,   or t = 1981:Q3 to l982:Q2.). Exactly the same procedure for

family size adjustment is used for expected values of expenditures. It is

assumed that households can correctly foresee their family size one quarter

ahead, so that actual family size is used to make family size adjustment on

expected values. To be more precise, the family size—adjusted value of             is

the unadjusted value of X divided by fx(FSZt), where             is the function that

translates family size in period t, FSZt, into the number of equivalent adults

specific to X (X =    Cl,C2,...,ClO;   t =   2,3,4,5).   Since there is no information

on FSZ5 in the present four—quarter panel, it is assumed that FSZ5 is equal to

FSZ4. I also assume that each relevant component of the CPI is correctly

foreseen by households one quarter ahead, so that actual values of the

relevant deflators are used to convert expected values of expenditures and two

components of income into real terms.

       The theory to be presented in the next section is stated in terms of

changes in expenditures. Theoretical considerations apart, it is a good idea

to work with changes since levels of expenditures are likely to have household

specific components that are time invariant. Table 3 displays the means and

standard deviations of changes in the ten (family size—adjusted) commodity
                                      —9—

groups and in the two (family size—unadjusted) components of income. As

expected, the most volatile commodity group is durables. Both the level and

the change of durables goods expenditures have a high standard deviation.

This is a consequence of the lumpiness of durable purchases. In fact, in any

given quarter, over forty percent of the sample reported zero expenditures on

durables.

     A quite surprising fact is revealed if one examines the autocorrelation

structure of changes which is reported in Table 4. The first—order auto—

correlation is uniformly negative and large in absolute value, even for

changes in food expenditures. It is not surprising that changes in durable

expenditures are negatively autocorrelated because of the lumpiness of durable

purchases. However, the fact that an increase in food expenditures tends to

be followed by a decrease is unsettling, because one would expect households

to smooth out consumption over time. In fact, Hall's (1978) permanent income

hypothesis implies that changes in consumption are serially uncorrelated as

the level of consumption is changed only when the consumer receives new

information. That implication is strongly rejected by the present data.

     Several explanation are conceivable for the strong negative autocorre—

lation. First, as Table 1 shows, expenditures have seasonality. In

particular, expenditures go up in the fourth quarter and come back down in the

first quarter of the following year. If the effect of seasonality is muiti-

plicative rather than additive, then the autocorrelation coefficients in

changes will be negative.   1 performed seasonal adjustment on expenditures and

income to re—calculate the sample autocorrelations.9 This is reported in the

right half of table 4. Although the size of autocorrelation involving the

fourth quarter is now smaller in general, the strong negative autocorrelation

still remains.
                                    — 10 —




     The second explanation is measurement error. Survey data on expenditures

are necessarily subject to measurement error. If the levels of expenditures

are measured with error, changes in measured expenditures will have a moving

average term which induces negative autocorrelation. The third explanation is

that preferences are subject to taste shocks. This also introduces a moving

average term in expenditure changes.10 Both measurement error and taste

shocks may explain some of the negative correlation in expenditure changes.

However, I do not think they are the main factor. For one thing, in a

separate study that uses monthly diary survey data, it Is found that monthly

change in food expenditures are strongly negatively correlated.11 Since it is

reasonable to assume measurement error in diary surveys is small, something

other than measurement error must be responsible for the negative auto—

correlation. Another reason that measurement error and taste shocks are

unimportant is provided by the vector autoregression (VAR) model estimated in

Table 5•12 Suppose that change in expenditures is the sum of new information

(forecast errors) and a moving average of measurement error and taste shocks.

It is plausible that measurement error and taste shocks are uncorrelated with

income changes. It is also plausible that income changes are correlated with

forecast errors. Then if current expenditure change is regressed on lagged

expenditure changes and lagged income changes, both lagged expenditure changes

and lagged income changes should be significant. The results in Panel A of

Table 5, on the contrary, say that only lagged expenditure changes are

significant at the 1% significance level except for C9 (social expenses). The

significant contemporaneous correlation between expenditure changes and income

changes reported in Panel B of Table 5 implies that expenditure changes are

not dominanted by measurement error and taste shocks.

     It is the basic theme of this paper that the main factor that lies behind
                                              — 11 —




 the    significant negative autocorrelation in expenditure changes is the

 durability of commodities. The next section sets up an optimization model

 that is capable of explaining the negative autocrrelation.




3. THEORY

        As is made   clear   in the previous section, the standard permanent income

hypothesis (Hall [1978]) is inconsistent with the data. Here I present a

modified version of the standard theory. The key feature will be the dura-

bility of commodities. Consider a household whose intertemporal decision

problem is to maximize


                                   T
(3.1)
                           E[   k=O
                                       u(Ct+k)]


subject to the budget constraint



(3.2)                      II (1
                  k0 v0
                       [
                                   ÷ R÷ i 1(Yt+k — Pt+kCt+k)J + At       0,




where Et is the expectation operator associated with the subjective proba-

bility distribution (assumed by the household) of future variables that are

uncertain to the household,             is the rate of subjective time preference, R is

the nominal interest rate, T is the length of the remaining life, C is a

vector of real expenditures on n commodity groups, p is the associated price

vector of dimension n, C is a vector of consumption of the n commodities,

u() is the instantaneous utility function, Y is after—tax nominal labor

inocme, and At is nominal nonhuman wealth (assets) at the beginning of period

        Note that a distinction is made between consumption C and expenditures
                                                    — 12 —



 C.     The j—th component of C, namely C., is linked to the j—th component of

 C    by


                                 M
 (3.3)
                                k=O
                                      k C t-k                 (j1,2,...,n).



That is, current consumption is a distributed lag function of current and past

expenditures. This is a generalization of the usual formula for durable goods

where        is service flows from the stock of durables and the distributed lag

coefficients               (k0,1,2,...) are of the Koyck type.
                  jk
        The first—order condition for this householdrs optimization problem is:


                   M            3u t+k                                                M          '-'
(3.4)       E {
                  k=O
                            k
                                 —           p.1 fl = E
                                             Jr.          t   (1 +   r.       ) [     k=O
                                                                                             k
                                                                                                 —
                                                                                                 C.
                                     j,t+k                                                           j,t+k+1

where r,+i is the real rate of interest on commodity j, i.e., l+r t+l =

(l+Rt)Pt/p+i                The right hand side of this equation is the marginal cost

of foregoing one unit of expenditures on the j—th commodity. This involves a

summation from 0 to N because a change in current expenditures influences

current and future consumption for M periods. The left hand side is the

marginal benefit of increasing l+r t+1 units of expenditures on commodity j

in the next period. This also involves a summation from 0 to N for the same

reason. In Appendix A it is shown that: Under (3.4),



(3.5)              E {[(1+r.
                       t         J,
                                             3u(
                                              —    t]/[         u(C )t    U   =   1         (j=1,2,...,n)
                                                                 Cjt

holds approximately if M (the length of the distributed lag) is small relative

to T (the length of remaining life), and holds exactly if (as is usually the

case for durables) jk is geometrically declining in k and rt÷i is known                                        in
                                                       — 13 —



t   and r t+1 r        t÷2

        Equation (3.5) can be made tractable under two alternative assumptions.

First, assume that the instantaneous utility function u() takes the following

form:




(3.6)              u(C) = — g1exp(—                       —
                                                              ... — gexp(—
                                               ici)                                      iC).

Rewrite (3.5) as



(3.7)              (1+r.          )[
                                       u( t+1)           u(     )
                                                                    i
                                                                        =   i   -   e.
                       J,t+1                                                         ,J,t+1
                                           j,t+1           jt


where e,+i is the difference between the right hand side of (3.5) and the

right hand side of (3.7), that is, e,÷i is the forecast error of the right

hand side of (3.7). Take the log of both sides of (3.7) and use the approxi-

mation   that   ln(1+x)      x to obtain



(3.8)             ln(l+r+i) + 1n(5) + ln[_________]                             —
                                                                                     ln[ au(C)     I
                                                                                                       =   —
                                                                                                               e+i.
                                                                i,t+1                         it

Now use (3.6) on (3.8) to obtain



                             —         =
                                           d       +
                                                       et÷i             (j1,2,...,n)



where



                             —1
(3.10)                            [ln(l+r.              + 1n()].
                  d.

     Another    way to make       (3.5)     tractable is to assume that the instantaneous
                                               — 14 —




utility    funciton u() is quadratic:



(3.11)        u() a'C — (1/2)C'BC


and that

(3.12)        (1+r. t+1 = 1.



It then is easy to show that (3.5) reduces to (3.9) with dit = 0.     This is a

multi—commodity version of of Hall's (1978) martingale hypothesis. Under

either assumption about the instantaneous utility function, consumption on

commodity j is unrelated to lagged consumption on other commodities. Note

that this result is obtained under the assumption which does not assume intra—

temporal separability among commodities.'4

        The foregoing discussion has ignored two issues, namely family size and

seasonality. I will incorporate them into the model in the following fashion.

Let jt be the commodity—specific number of equivalent adults in period t.

will use lower case letters c and c. to represent expenditure and consum-

ption on commodity j in period t expressed in equivalent adult per capita,

i.e.,




(3.13)
              jt
              c. = C.
                      jt jt/f.       and c. = C.
                                          it    jt     it
                                                     If.




It is reasonable to suppose that current consumption per equivalent capita is

a distributed lag function of expenditures per equivalent capita. So (3.3) is

modified as


                      M
              c. =                             (j1,2,...,n).
                     k=0         -     t-k
                                                — 15 —



        I   incorporate the family size and seasonality effects into the first

specification of the utility function (3.6) as



(3.6')         u =                           — ... — gexp(—
                     —g1exp(—                                  Ilct),


where         (j=1,2,...,n) serves to represent both seasonal variations in the

instantaneous utility function and the family size effects. The resulting

equation that corresponds to (3.9) is



(3.9')                    —
                                  = di   ÷
                                             e+i        (j=1,2,...,n),



with



(3.10')              =                          ln(ä)   +
                         u'{ln(1+r    t+1 +


       The family size and seasonality effects are incorporated into the second

specification of the quadratic utility function as



(3.11')        u =
                     {a       —
                                  (1/2)BJF,

where Ft is an overall index of family size and at is an n—dimensional vector

of seasonality factors. The resulting equation is again (3.9') where             is

redefined as             times Ft/fit and d is a function of the change in the

commodity—specific number of equivalent adults and of the seasonality factors

in periods t and t+1. In short, the family size effect is incorporated in

(3.9') in the family size—adjusted consumption c and in the intercept term
                                                                                  djt
and seasonality is incorporated in the intercept term.
                                                    — 16 —




     Substituting      (3.3') into (3.9') one obtains the equation stated in terms

of expenditures:



(3.14)                 —
                           c
               —
                    Pi(c —           ci)        —    ... — PjM(cj,t_M÷1   —
                                                                              cj,t_M)
                                                                                        +
                                                                                            e+i

                           (j1 ,2, .   . ,n)

where p0 is normalized to be unity and it is understood that                            varies from

season to season and depends on changes in family size. Appendix B shows that

approximately the same equation can be derived from a continuous—time model

where c's are unit averages over periods of an arbitrarily given length. If

the household's expectation as of t of c,+i is denoted by c+i, equation

(3.14) can be written as



           e
(3.14 )
          c÷i      -          =
                                          Pi(c —        c,_i)
                                                                 —
                                                                          — PM(c,_I+l       —
                                                                                                cM).
It is clear from (3.10') that                  in (3.14) and (3.14') depends on the

subjective rate of time preference                  and the (absolute) degree of risk

aversion u..   Equation           (3.14) has a strong implication that nothing should

Cranger cause c+i —
                             c     if expectations are rational [so that Et(e t+1

0]. So, for example, a fully anticipated tax cut should have no effect

whatsoever when it is enacted; only unexpected policies can influence the

behavior of expenditures. This can be easily tested on time—series data

(provided that the real rate is constant), but to do the same thing on short

panel data is difficult for two reasons.
                                    — 17 —




     First,   at any given point in time the forecast error e+i can be

correlated with any variable dated t if the correlation is taken with respect

to the distribution across households.'5 Since the present panel has a small

time dimension and a large cross—section dimension, estimation of equations

like (3.14) will have to exploit the cross—section dimension. But the

rational expectations hypothesis does not necessarily preclude correlation in

cross—section between the right hand side variables and the forecast error

term e1,+1. It is precisely for this reason that equation (3.14') rather

than equation (3.14) forms a basis for the equation to be estimated in section

5. The second difficulty is that the length of the panel data is too short to

allow for a realistic lag length in (3.14). But this can be overcome by the

use of instrumental variables, as we will see in the next section.

    My prior expectation is that the theory just presented will fail empiri-

cally. Probably the most likely source of failure is liquidity constraints or

borrowing constraints. Casual observations and my own experience show that

expenditures by economics graduate students (in the U.S.) are largely deter-

mined by their current income and their ability to borrow. A most natural way

to incorporate borrowing constraints is to let the interest rate be endogenous

and depend on the household's income and asset position. But then the Euler

equation (3.4) will become much more complicated, because the marginal benefit

of foregoing one unit of expenditures consists not only of increased expendi-

tures in the next period but also of improved credit conditions. Furthermore,

the present data set has no information on assets and liabilities, so it is

impossible to implement the idea of endogenous interest rates in a satis-

factory fashion.

     The view about borrowing constraints taken in this study is that part of

the households in the population behaves according to the permanent income
                                                   — 18 —




hypothesis described above while the remaining part does not. Households
which do not follow the permanent income hypothesis are subject to borrowing

constraints, in the sense that the marginal propensity to spend out of current

disposable income is unity. If a constant fraction a1 of additional dispos—

able income of constrained households goes to expenditures on commodity j, the

behavior of expenditures by constrained households is described by



                                                 PYD+i              PYDt
(3.15)          c. +1 —
                 j,t
                           c.
                              Jt     a.(
                                      J
                                                              —   —--—----)       (j1,2,...,n)
                                                   f                   f
                                           j ,t+1 j ,t+1           jt it

                  with
                                      J




where PYD is nominal disposable income and fj is the number of equivalent

adults specific to commodity group j. If the household's expectation as of t

of c,÷i and PYDt÷i are denoted by c+1 and PYD+l, respectively, and if

          and            are perfectly foreseen in period t, then this equation can

be rewritten as



(3.15')         c+1 —      c.      = a,EDY             (j=1,2,...,n)       with           = 1,



where



(3.16)          EDY. =
                              pyDe+-1        —
                                                  PYD
                                                        t
                  Jt
                                                        f
                         pi                       pit


is family size—adjusted expected disposable income change. In section 5, a

mixture of (3.14') — the equation for the households which follow the

permanent income hypothesis — and (3.15') —— the equation for constrained

households —      will   be estimated. The next section discusses econometric
                                           — 19 —



  issues concerning the estimation of (3.14') and (3.15').




 4.     ECONOMETRIC ISSUES

        The main objective in the remaining part of this
                                                         paper is to estimate the

 parameters of the two equations (3.14') and (3.15') that describe the behavior

 of unconstrained and constrained households.        This section discusses three
 issues that should be taken into account when one deals with cross—section or

 panel data. They are: (i) individual (or household—specific)
                                                                         effects, (ii)
 measurement error, and (iii) heteroskedasticity. Most of the discussion in

 this section will be technical and rather
                                                 lengthy. Nontechnical readers can
 skip to the last paragraph of this section without
                                                            losing continuity.
        I think it is reasonable to assume that the lag coeFficients

 (3.14') are the same across households. Those
                                                     are just a description of the

 mechanical relationship between expenditures and consumption; the shape of the

 lag distribution will be largely determined by the nature of the commodity,

not by (observable and unobservable) characteristics
                                                                of the household, It is,
however, probably unrealistic to assume that the rate of time preference             and
the degree of risk aversion i. (j=1,2,...,) are constant across households.

They will most likely depend on the age of the household head and some other

unobservable household characteristics. This means that the intercept term

      in (3.14') depends not only on observable household characteristics such

as age and change in family size but also on unobservable characteristics

(individual effects).16 One can always write              as:




(4.1)       dit =   linear   function of AGE and AGE2 +
                                                                   (j=1,2,..,n)
                                            — 20   —




where   AGE is the age of   the   household head and where the linear function of
AGE and AGE2 is the least squares projection of                on AGE, AGE2. So

represents unobservable household characteristics that are uncorrelated with

AGE and AGE2. The theoretical discussion in section 3 implies that                  also

depends on change in family size and seasonality. Since estimation will be

performed in the cross—section dimension for a fixed t (t4), there is no need

to explicitly incorporate seasonality in (4.1). Family size in period 5 is

not in the data set; I assume there is no change in family size from period 4

to period 5. This is why change in family size does not appear in (4.1). The

unobservable individual effect (i.e., unobservable household characteristics)

    will be a part of the error term in the estimation equation.

     Another source of the error term is the truncation remainder. As the

panel is only four quarters long, only three lags, namely
                   —
—1(c4 — c3)            2(c3 — c2)       —
                                            cD13(c2
                                                       c1) can be included in the


equation, and a part of the remaining lags,                             —   c. 4k' has to
                                                        —E P.k(c.
                                                       k-4   J  J, 5k
be included in the error term. It is easy to see from (3.14) and (4.1) that
the remaining lags can be written as the sum of three parts: (1) the part

that can be linearly predicted by AGE and AGE2; (ii) the individual effect

that are uncorrelated with AGE and AGE2; and (iii) a weighted sum of past

forecast errors e,5_k (k          4),   The deviation of the sum of (ii) and (iii)

from its population mean will be called the truncation remainder and denoted

by TR. It is reasonable to assume that AGE and AGE2 are uncorrelated with

(iii) above because the household can predict its future AGE perfectly. Thus

the truncation remainder TR for commodity j is the part of the remaining lags

that are uncorrelated with AGE and AGE2. This is the second component of the

error term.

        If, in addition, there is measurement error in expenditures, the error
                                                          — 21 —



term will have measurement error as the third component.'7 Thus the esti-

mation equation becomes



                      e      — c.
(4.2)                c.              =   linear
                                          .
                                                    function of AGE and AGE2
                      J5        J4



                     -               -          -
                           p.1(c.4       c.3)       p.2(c.3 - c.2) - p.3(c.2 - c.) + v,
where

(4.3)         v. =          — TR. + measurement
                                                             error in c1 c12, c13, c14 and c5.


The equation (3.15') that describes the behavior of constrained households

becomes, in the presence of measurement error,



(4.4)                c5 — c.4 = .EYD.4 + w.                            (j=1,2,...,n)



                                 e —
where w• is measurement error in c.
          J
                                                             c.       and in EYD.
                                                    •j5          J4
        There is no shortage of reasons why the error terms v and w in two

equations (4.2) and (4.4) are correlated with the right hand side variables.

Since the error term contains measurement error, there is the classical

errors—in—variables problem. The truncation remainder, TR, is obviously

correlated with the first three lags,                       c4 —            c3 —          and c2 —
                                                                      c3            c2,              c1.
Since individual differences in the                       rate    of time preference and in the degree

of risk aversion affects the behavior of expenditures, the individual effect

    is also correlated with the first three lags. But suppose there are

available a set of instruments, x, for which



(4.5)                E(v.x.) = 0         and E(.i.x.) = 0                  (j1,2,...,n).
                                             — 22 —




This assumption means that neither the individual effect, nor the truncation
remainder, nor measurement error is correlated with x. The two variables AGE

and AGE2 are valid instruments as it can be reasonably assumed that they are

uncorrelated with measurement errors.

        Let X be the fraction of constrained households in the population (from

which the sample was drawn), Then (4.2) holds with probability 1 —                      )   and

(4.4) holds with probability X.             The following equation can be derived (see

Appendix C):



               e                                                     2
(4.6)         c.  — c.,   =   linear    function of AGES and AGE
               J5    J4


              —                  —                                       — (1 —
                  (l—A)p.1(c.4       C.3)    (1—X)p.7(c.3 —   c.2)              X)p.3(c.2         c.i)

              + Xa.EDY.4 + n.,        with   E(n.x.) = 0       (j =       1,2,...,n),

where EDY4 family size—adjusted expected change in disposable income, is

defined in (3.16), and the error term fl is composed of the three components,

namely the individual effect, the truncation remainder, and measurement

errors. To derive (4.6) it is necessary to assume that the fraction X is

constant, independent of the right hand side variables and instruments. If

this assumption sounds too strong, one can think of (4.6) as a device to test

the permanent incoe hypothesis; testing for X              0 amounts to a test of the

hypothesis. Equation (4.6) can be estimated by two— or three—stage least

squares with x as instruments. This is the equation to be estimated in the

next section.

        The final econometric issue is heteroskedasticity. Since the present

data set is a random sample, the variables in (4.6) are i.i.d. (independently
                                                   — 23 —



and identically distributed) across households. So the unconditional variance

of ii.     is constant. However, the conditional variance of n. conditional on x.
     3                                                                           3                       3
is a function of                in general. In order to carry out valid statistical

inference the standard theory of two— and three—stage least squares is

inadequate. Fortunately, however, the theory has recently been generalized to

encompass heteroskedasticity (see, e.g. Chamberlain [1982]). I now briefly

summarize it.

         There are nequations to be estimated:



(4.7)                                  + ri..      (j=1,2,...,n; i1,2,...,N)



where ô. is a vector of coefficients, n is the number of commodity groups, i

is the household index, and N is the sample size (the number of households).

The dependent variable yjj corresponds to c5                     c4 of household i and the

vector of right hand side variables z1 corresponds to (1, AGE, AGE2, c4 —

c3,      c3 —   c,    c2 —      c1,    EDY4) pertaining to household 1. The column

vector of instruments x. •            are orthogonal to n..:          E(ri. .x..)    0.        The
                                 13                         13           13 13
generalized two—stage least squares estimator of .                      is   given by



(4.8)                ..3
                           = (ZX.
                                3 3 3.]
                                           XZ.)1(ZX.f'.Xy.)
                                            3 3   3 3 33 .3 3
                                                                        (j1,2,...,n),



where Z and           are matrices whose rows are                and xj, respectively, and
                                                                                                     y
is the N—dimensional vector whose elements are v. . 's.                      The matrix ,   .in   this
                                                                 lJ                       33
experession is given by


                                 N
                                               — 5.z..Yx. •x.}
                                j i(v.
(4.9)            fl.. = —                  •

                     jj     N             13     3 13   13 13
                                                           — 24 —




where 5. is a consistent estimator of 5..                             It can be shown (under a set of
            3                                                 3

appropriate regularity conditions) that (6k,                                        is asymptotically

normal in the presence of conditional heteroskedasticity. The theory of

three—stage least squares can be generalized to incorporate conditional

heteroskedasticity in a similr fashion.

          If the number of instruments xj is equal to the number of the right hand

side variables z, then the above generalized two—stage least squares

estimator reduces to the usual instrumental variables estimator



(4.10)                     (X!Z.)Xy.


and the generalized three—stage least squares estimator also reduces to this

estimator. It can be shown that the asymptotic variance—covariance matrix of

    is consistently estimated by



(4.11)           S'1
                  z.x.
                       ..      •jj
                                     S1
                                         z.x.
                  .1 1)
                           N
                 =                                    is                            in
where S
           zx.         N
                           E
                           i=1 '
                                z. .x. and .
                                         13       j        used in place of .
                                                                                j        calculating .
                                                                                                      jj.,
and that the asymptotic covariance matrix between ô. and                                 is consistently

estimated by



                 S'1  .              S
(4,12)
                  z.x. j             zx         (j,Z1,2,...,n),



whe r e




                                ((y.. -                           -
(4.13)
                                                6.z..)(y.
                                     — 25 —




If   z1 x, the estimator (4.10) is the usual OLS estimator. Its

heteroskedasticity—robust asymptotic variance is given by (4.11) with

x. This is the formula I used in calculating the standard errors in Table 5

for the VAR model. Formulas (4.10)—(4.13) are the ones I will use in calcu-

lating the point estimates and their associated standard errors for equation

(4.6) in the next section.

      To summarize: The equation to be estimated is (4.6) which explicitly

recognizes that a certain fraction X of the population is liquidity const-

rained. This equation will be estimated in the cross—section dimension.

Since the panel is only four quarters long, only three lagged expenditure

changes can be included on the right hand side, and the remaining lags (the

truncation remainder) are relegated to the error term. Also included in the

error term are the individual effect (i.e., individual differences in the rate

of time preference and the degree of risk aversion) and measurement error.

This provides a reason for correlation between the error term and the right

hand side variables. The equation will be estimated by instrumental variables

in a way that is robust to heteroskedasticity.




5.   RESULTS

      To anticipate the results, identification of A (the fraction of liquidity

constrained households in the population) turned out to be rather tenuous. So

I first present the parameter estimates of the pure permanent income hypo-

thesis represented by equation (4.6) with A = 0, and then turn to the esti-

mation of A.

      The critical issue in estimating equation (4.6) with A   0 by the

generalized two—stage least squares is the choice of instruments. Valid
                                       — 26 —




instruments must be uncorrelated with the three components of the error

term n, namely the individual effect, the truncation remainder, and measure-

ment error. I include AGE and ACE2 in the set of instruments. As for the

instruments for lagged expenditure changes
                                  —
                                                ct —   cti    (t2,3,4), I use the

associated unexpected changes              (t=2,3,4). It is reasonable to assume

that unexpected changes are uncorrelated with the individual effect which is

known to the household. As is shown in Table 6, there is some evidence of

statistically significant correlation between unexpected expenditure changes

and lagged actual expenditure changes, implying that unexpected changes carl be

correlatedwith the truncation remainder. But what Table 6 also tells us is

that the correlation is small in size —— much smaller than the correlation of

actual change with its own lagged changes. So the bias due to correlation of

instruments with the truncation remainder will be small, if any. There is no

a priori reason to preclude correlation between unexpected change and measure-

ment error. I use unexpected changes as instruments because I think there is

no other valid choice of instruments. But at least there is one case in which

measurement error causes no problem. It is the case where actual expenditures

    and its expectation c are subject to the same measurement error. In
                                           —
this case measured unexpected change
                                                ct   is free from measurement error.

If unexpected change contained a large measurement error, it would be serially

correlated. But Table 6 shows no particularly strong autocorrelation in

unexpected changes. Thus, the set of instruments for estimating equation

(4.6) with A = 0 for commodity group j    is:    (1AGE,AGE2, c4 —          c — c3,
c2 —   c2).   The number of instruments is equa1 to the number of the right

hand side variables.'8

    The results of the estimation of (4.6) with A = 0 by the generalized two—

stage least squares [which uses formulas (4.10) and (4.11)1 are given in Panel
                                             — 27 —



A of Table 7 for the ten commodity groups. The intercept, the AGE and AGE2

 coefficients are not reported because none of them are significant at 5

percent. All but one lag coefficients are highly significant. The estimated

first three lag coefficients p1, p2, p3 are small (but significant) for

food (Cl) and very close to unity for durables (C4) and clothes (C3). This is

very reasonable. What is (probably not really surprising but) revealing is

the large lag coefficients for commodity groups (C5—C9) that are usually

labeled as "services." Even though services are physically perishable, their

psychological effect on households' preference is long—lasting. The lag

coefficents for C5 seems unduly large because, if taken seriously, they mean

that people derive more utility from the memory of a trip than from the trip

itself. This is probably due to sampling error, as the standard errors for C5

is   very high.

       For later reference I report the parameter estimates by the ordinary

least square in Panel B of Table 7. The estimated lag coefficients are

smaller than the estimates by the two—stage least squares, because of measure-

ment errors and because the first three lagged changes are negatively corre-

lated with the truncation remainder (as is predicted by the permanent income

hypothesis).

      The estimated model allows for no feedback from lagged expenditure

changes on other commodity groups. It might he that the surprisingly high

durability of services is due to the influence of lagged expenditures on, say,

consumer durables. To check this, I expanded equation (4.6) with              X   0 to
include lagged expenditure changes on other commodity groups. So the equation

now has c5 —                                                              —
                  c4   as the dependent variable, and AGE, AGE2,                         (t =

2,3,4) and c —                  j, t   =   2,3,4)   on the right hand side. This

equation was estimated by the generalized two—stage least squares for the ten
                                         — 28 —




 commodity groups (j =   1,2,..,,1O)   with AGE, AGE2, and the associated unex-

 pected changes     —
                               1,2,...,1O) as instruments. Table 8 reports

 pertinent Wald—type statistics for the hypothesis that lagged expenditure

 changes on other commodity groups have all zero coefficients. Except for C4

 (consumer durables) and possibly C2 (rent, fuel and utilities), lagged

expenditure changes on other commodities are totally insignificant. One

possible reason for the rejection of the hypothesis for durables is that the

equation for durables is misspecified. The equation was derived from the

Euler equation (3.4) under the assumption of interior solution. But in any

given quarter over forty percent of the households in the sample reported no

expenditures on consumer durables. Since those households are at the corner

solution, the Euler equation does not hold for durables. Some other esti-

mation technique such as Tobit and Probit would be required in order to

correctly treat the durables equation. The possible niisspecification of the

durables equation was, in fact, the main reason for not using the generalized

three—stage least squares; by sticking to the (generalized) two—stage least

squares I can avoid biases due to the transmission of misspecificatiori in one

equation to another.

     I now turn to the estimation of equation (4.6) without the X       0

restriction.   I tried two alternative instruments for instrumenting
                                                                       EDY4,
family size—adjusted expected disposable income change. One is family size—

adjusted expected normal income change, which is obtained by substituting YN

in place of YD in the definition (3.16) of EDY4. As is seen from Table 5,

there is no significant feedback from lagged expenditures to normal income.

So it is reasonable to assume that this instrument is uncorrelated with the

truncation remainder. It is also plausible that the individual effect is

uncorrelated with this instrument. If normal income is measured without
                                       — 29 —




error,   there is no correlation between this instrument and measurement error

 in EDY4. The generalized two—stage least squares estimate of X turned out to

be .374 with a standard error of .131. However, estimates of the lag

coefficients jk (k =   1,2,3)   became unduly high; for example, estimate of

p.1 for j = 5 (recreatinal expenses) is 1.93 with a standard error of .69.

This is because the coefficients of lagged expenditures changes, which are

              have changed very little compared with the case with X = 0.      The

second alternative instrument is (lagged) unexpected disposable income change,

YD4 —   YD.   This produced an estimate of —.12!

     The reason for such unreliable estimates is that expected disposable

income change is hard to explain. A regression of EDY4 on (family size—

adjusted) expected normal income change yields an R2 of only about .08. (The

second instrument has even less explanatory power). Change in disposable

income is dominated by temporary income.

     After going through all this, I decided to treat EDY4 as predeter—

mined. That is, the instrument for EDY4 is EDY4 itself. The parameter

estimates for equation (4.6) with EDY4 predetermined are given in Table 9.

The estimates are rather implausible for a couple of reasons. For one thing,

the estimate of c's says that liquidity constrained households spends about

fouty—four percent of their additional income on durables. This is a bit

unrealistic. Probably this high estimate reflects the lumpiness of durables,

an element that is not incorproated in the permanent income hypothesis. If

durables are lumpy and if there are transaction costs in trading durables, it

seems plausible that optimizing households try to synchronize the timing of

durable purchases with income fluctuations. Another implausible fact about

Table 9 is that the estimates of the lag coefficients are too high, parti-

cularly for durables (C4) and recreational expenses (C5). Again, estimates of
                                      — 30 —




— (l_X)P.k    (k   1,2,3) have changed very little; the estimates of the lag

coefficients       in Table 9 are uniformly higher than those in Table 9A by

about fifteen percent. If reasonable estimates of the lag coefficients for

durables are around unity, the estimate of A of .12 seems to be biased

upwards.

     To examine the source of the bias, I calculated the sample correlation

between EDY4 and lagged expenditure changes. This is reported in Table 10.

Although correlation is not very strong, there is a tendency that correlation

becomes significantly negative as expenditure changes go back into the past.

This suggests that EDY4 is negatively correlated with the truncation remain-

der and hence is              correlated with the error term    which depends

negatively on the truncation remainder. This provides an upward bias on the

estimate of A.     On the other hand, measurement error in EDY4 implies a

downward bias. Although the direction of the bias can go either way in

general, an upward bias seems more likely because measurement error in

disposable income is likely to be small for the present sample of workers'

households.

     On the whole, then, the empirical evidence has brought up quite clearly

the surprisingly high durability of consumption expenditures while the

evidence for liquidity constraints is weak. But is this consistent with time—

series data? This is an important question to ask because on the U.S.

aggregate time—series data change in expenditures on nondurables and services

as a whole is very much like white noise (Hall [1978]). The Japanese National

Income Accounts have two different classifications of personal consumption

expenditures. The first has four commodity groups by durability (nondurables,

semidurables, durables, and services). Durable expenditures in this classi—

ficaiton seem to correspond to C4 (clurables) in the present survey data. The
                                     — 31 —




 second classification of expenditures is more in line with the one in the

 present survey data and has eight commodity groups: (1) food, beverages and

 tobacco, (Li) rents (including imputed rents), fuel, and utilities, (iii)

 clothes and footwears, (iv) furniture, household appliances, and housewares,

 (v) recreation and education, (vi) medical care, (vii) transportation and

communication, and (viii) other. Roughly speaking, items (i), (ii) and (iii)

correspond to Cl, C2 and C3, respectively, and item (v) corresponds to the sum

of C5, C6 and C7 in the present survey data. For those commodity groups,

third—order univariate autoregressions in changes are estimated by the

ordinary   least squares on the Japanese National Income Accounts data. The
results are reported in Table 11. Except for durables, the estimated lag
coefficients point to a substantial degree of durability. The time—series
estimates in Table 11 are to be compared with the ordinary least squares

estimates of equation (4.6) with X = 0 in Panel B of Table 7 which also

truncates the lag distribution at the third lag.19 The two sets of point

estimates are fairly close to each other with the exception of the durable

goods equation. The standard errors, however, are much larger for time—series

estimates, reflecting a relatively small amount of information contained in

aggregate time—series data. It thus seems fair to conclude that the panel

evidence in this paper is consistent with the time—series evidence and that

time—series data do not have enough power to detect consumption durability.

     The evidence presented so far is favorable to the permanent income

hypothesis with consumption durability. However, the evidence is aLso

consistent with the habit sistence               which posits that current

expenditures are determined by lagged expenditures and current disposable

income.20 If this hypothesis is right, expenditure change on commodity j from

period 3 (1981:Q4) to period 4 (l982:Ql) may be written as21
                                                 — 32 —




(5.1)      C4 c3 = linear               function of AGE, AGE2, FSZ4—FSZ3, (FSZ4—FSZ3)2



                                 -                        —         +
                    +
                        .1(c3        c2)
                                            +
                                                .2(c.2        c1)       ADY.3
                                                                                +   error,


where the error term includes the truncation remainder. In this equation

ADY3 represents family size—adjusted actual change in disposable income and

is defined by



(5.2)               ADY. = _____ ——
                               Pf P3f3
where, as before, PYDt is nominal disposable income, Pj is the price of

commodity j, and jt is the number of equivalent adults specific to commodity

j in period t. In contrast, the permanent income hypothesis that was

developed in section 3 implies that actual expenditure change c4 —                                     on
                                                                                              c2
commodity j reacts to unex, not actual, disposable income change. To
determine which hypothesis is more consistent with the data, I estimated the

following equation which has both actual and unexpected disposable income

changes:



(5.3)        c4 — c3       =   linear   function of AGE, AGE2, FSZ4—FSZ3, (FSZ4—FSZ3)2



                    +            —          +             —         +               +              +    error,
                        .1(c.3       c.2)       .2(c12        c1)       I.1ADY.3        y.2UDY.3



where family size—adjusted unexpected disposable income change UDY3 is

defined by


                     PYD4             PYD
(5.4)        UDY.3 = _______ —
                3
                                                   (j    =
                                                              1,2,...,1O).
                         P4 j4        Pj4 j4
                                        — 33 —




The parameter estimates for equation (5.3), with unexpected expenditure change

c.     c and c.        c as instruments for actual expenditure changes c. —
 j3     j3       j2    j2                                                   J
c2    and c2 —
                 c1   are given in Table 12. The results are again favorable to

the permanent income hypothesis. First, the estimated coefficients of lagged

expenditure changes are roughly in line with those in Table 7 and Table 9•22

The habit persistence hypothesis has no theory of why the lag coefficients

take the kind of pattern in terms of signs and magnitudes reported in the

Table. Second, the estimate of the coefficient of unexpected disposable

income change of .29 is much higher than the estimate of actual disposable

income change coefficient of .08.23 Households respond to unexpected rather

than actual income changes. This strongly suggests that households are

forward—looking as is assumed in the permanent income hypothesis. The

evidence in Table 12, however, does reject the permanent income hypothesis,

because if the hypothesis is literally correct actual income change ADY3

should have no role in equation (5.3). One interpretation of the coefficient

of actual    income change of about eight percent is that it   is the fraction of

liquidity    constrained   households in the population. This number is fairly

close to the estimate of       of about twelve percent.

      Throughout this section I have ignored taste shocks which, if present,

should form the fourth component of the error term. The instruments I have

used for lagged expenditure changes — unexpected expenditure changes —          are
positively correlated with unforecastable taste shocks. If so, the lag

coefficents jk estimated in this section are biased upwards while the

income coefficients remain unbiased. This may explain the significantly

positive lag coefficients for food expenditures, if food is a priori believed

to be perfectly perishable. However, as I argued toward the end of section 2,

there seems to be no strong reason to believe that taste shocks are important
                                       — 34 —



in   explaining the behavior of expenditure changes.




6. CONCLUDING REMARKS

      The initial aim of the research reported here was to obtain a sharp

estimate of the fraction of liquidity constrained households in the population

by exploiting the large cross—section dimension of the data. This paper was

not very successful on this account. The paper, however, was successful in

highlighting the long—lasting effect of consumption    expendtures   for services

and nondurables. Another useful by—product is the paper's demonstration of

the strong response of expenditures to unexpected income changes without an

explicit modelling of the income process, which leaves little doubt about the

forward—looking nature of consumers.

      The surprisingly high durablity of commodities has important implications

for the econometrics of consumer demand and for macroeconomic stabilization

policies. The usual specification in the econometrics of consumer demand is

that the demand for nondurables and for services is a function of their

current prices and total current expenditures. This is     appropriate   if the

effect on preferences of nondurables and services is instantaneous. Otherwise

the relevant variable is the user costs of capital, not current prices.24

Expenditures and consumption should be treated like investment and capital,

respectively.

      Since the existing literature has ignored the durability of nondurables

and services, its consensus estimate of the fraction of constrained households

is likely to be biased upwards; what appears to be the excess sensitivity of

expenditures to income may be merely due to the exclusion of lagged expendi-

tures. Thus the effectiveness of countercyclical tax policy to control
                                    — 35




aggregate demand by changing disposable income may   not   be a great as is

generally supposed. A potentially more important factor suggested by the

durability of commodities is the real interest rate as a determinant of (the

optimal stock of) consumption. If the real interest rate is controllable and

if consumption is sensitive to the real rate, then policymakers can manipulate

expenditures by the households that follow the permanent income hypothesis.

The present paper was silent on the issue of the interest elasticity of

consumption because of the small time—series dimension of the data.

     Although the paper was able to reject the permanent income hypothesis,

about a half of the excess sensitivity comes from durable purchases, as the

results in Tables 9 and 12 show. It seems plausible that the apparent

sensitivity of lumpy durable purchases can be generated by a model that allows

for a small wedge between the borrowing and lending rates without signifi-

cantly altering the behavior of nondurables and services expenditures. If so,

the permanent income hypothesis with this minor modification applies to

virtually all households. Furthermore, whether policymakers can exploit the

short—run sensitivity of durables purchases in order to control aggregate

consumer expenditures over a medium—run such as the length of a business cycle

is another question.

    More fundamentally, the empirical validity of the permanent income

hypothesis casts serious doubts about the wisdom of couritercyclical policies.

The fact that expenditure changes follow univariate autoregressions with order

higher than one implies that cyclical fluctuations in expenditures are a

result of optimization on the part of forward—looking consumers. What, then,

is the point in disturbing the optimally chosen time path of expenditures?
                                           — 36 —




                                 Appendix A: Proof of (3.5)

         This appendix proves (3.5) under two alternative assumptions.


Case 1: M is small relative to T.


Define

                                                                  u(Ct+k)
                                                    3u(Ct+k+1) — ________
                    tt+k =   E[(1 ÷ r÷i)
                                                      j,t+k+1       j,t+k


Then (3.4) becomes



                          tt+k   k) =
                    k=O

This     must be true at any future point in the remaining lifetime, so


                                 k) =     Q, s =     t,   t+1,...,t+T—1,
                    k=O

where L =    mm    (t+T—s, M) and st+T =   — E[u(Ct÷T)/3C.t+T].               Apply the
conditional expectations operator Et on both sides of this equation to obtain


(A. 1)                              =    s =   t,   t+1 ,..., t+T—1,
              k=O9+kt
where XT =                This is an m—th order difference equation in x. If the
               tyt÷t.
terminal value XT is given, (A.1) can determine the remaining value of
XT, namely x0, X1XTl• [The lifetime budget constraint (3.2) is
necessary to determine the level of XT•J              Since         (k =   1,2,...M)   is

declining in k, the difference equation is unstable. Since the terminal value
xT is finite, the initial value x0 must be small. In fact, if T is infinity,
then x0      0.



Case 2:           is declining geometrically in k,               is known in t, and

r,+i r+2.
                                                             — 37 —



        Since jk =         (0.)k, (3.3)           implies


                               .it   =C. +p..
                                       jt  j j,t—l


Consider the following small deviation from the optimal decision rule: Reduce
current expenditures on commodity j by one unit and increase the next period's
expenditure on commodity j by                        units. Since this deviation means an
additional saving of spit in period t, the additional income in period t+1 is
(1 +        —
        Rt)PJt         dollars. Note that this deviation leaves
unchanged from its level implied by the optimal decision rule. This small
deviation should neither decrease nor increase the objective function, so that


(A.2)
                 u       = 6
                               E[vi((1 +            R)p.       —
                                                                   PP,÷i)]
where u. =                           and v1 is the marginal utility of income in period
t+1. The marginal utility of income satisfies the equation


(A.3)          e =        (1
                               ÷ R) E(v÷i).

If            is known at t,          (A.2)        can be rewritten as


(A.4)                    = (1 +
                                  r+i         —                    6
                                                                       E(v÷i).

The right hand side of (A.4) has the interpretation of the "cost of capital"
adjusted for the marginal utility of income. Now


            E[(1 +       r÷1)6u÷iI
        =
            E[(1     ÷
                         r
                                          ÷
                                              r÷2
                                                          —
                                                               jj,t+2      6 E+i(v+2)I   [from (A.4)]


        =
            Et [(1   ÷
                         r        )(1 +
                                           r      ,t+2
                                                         -      )(1 +
                                                                        r +2J ,t+1 6 v1
                                                                                         [from (A.3)]


If r,+i =
                 r,t+2         this is equal to                    by (A.4).
                                                — 38 —




                                Appendix B: Time Aggregation

        There is no reason that the length of a unit period for the household's
optimization problem is exactly one quarter. The purpose of this appendix is
to show that the quarterly model ——             equation       (3.14) in the text —— can be
derived as an approximation to the continuous—time model.

        The continuous—time versions of (3.9) is


(B.1)         (r') —    (i) = e(T,T'),          E1e(r,T') = 0 for r' > T,


where the subscript j is dropped for notational simplicity and the intercept
term dt is ignored for simplicity. Let t =                     0,1,2,...    be points in the
continuous—time axis that mark the end of each quarter. Set T =                      t    and
        t+1 to obtain


(B.2)         (t+1) —   (t)     =
                                    e(t,t+1),    Ee(t,t+1) =         0.

In the continuous—time model, C is related to C by


(B.3)         (T) = j p(v)C(T—v)dv.

Combine (B.2) and (B.3) to get


(B.4)         e(t,t+1) =    f   p(v)C(t+1—v)dv —         J p(v)C(t—v)dv.
Now, consider the following step function as an approximation to p(v):


(B.5)        (v)     p(0) if 0        v < 1, (v) = p(1) if 1                v < 2, etc.


Then one obtains


(B.6)        e(t,t+1) J p(v)C(t+1—v)dv               —         p(v)C(t—v)dv
                                                         J°°


                        =               —        +               —
                            P(0)(C+i        C)       P(l)(C          Cci)
where Ct's are unit—averages, namely
                                         — 39 —




(B.7)                =      C(-r)dT.

Normalizing p(O) to be unity, one obtains from (B.6) that


(B.8)                —c=—              — Ci)   —          — cr2) —
               c÷1

                         + e(t,t+1).


If period t is the time interval between t—1 and t, the left hand side of
   fl'
kj.o)
I',-.
         is crie
                               .          I      I•.    r          I
                   cnange in unic—averagea expenaicures trom perioa t co perioa
t+1. Note that e(t,t+1) is orthogonal to information available at the end of
period t, since Ete(t,t+1) = 0.
                                               — 40 —




                                APPENDIX C: Derviation of (4.6)


        This appendix derives (4.6) under the assumption that A, the fraction of
constrained households in the sample, is an exogenously given constant. Write
the two equations (4.2) and (4.4) compactly as


(C.1)         y =          +v         for (4.2)


(C.2)        y =           + w,       for (4.4)


where the subscript j is dropped for notational simplicity. Let a dummy
variable D take the value of unity if the household is constrained and zero if
the household follows the permanent income hypothesis. The expected value of
D is A.     The two equations can be combined into one equation


(C3)         y = (1 —        +       + (1—D)v + Dw.
                      D)51z1   DS2Z2


If   D is independent of z1,z2,x,v,w, then the least squares projection of y on
x, E*(ylx), can be written from (C.3) as


(C.4)        E(ylx) = (1 —                        +
                                    A)1E*(z1x)        A.2E(z2Ix).

Combining (C.3) and (C.4) one obtains


(C.5)        y = (1 —         +       +
                      X)'31z1   XS2z2


where


(C.6)        n   =y   —
                          E*(ylx)   — (1 —            —               —           —
                                                                                      E*(z2x)}.
                                             X)1[z1       E*(zlIx)}       A2{z2

By construction, E(nlx) = 0, i.e., E(nx)                  0 as required. Note that the
conditional variance of n conditional on x is a function of x by construction,
even if the initial error terms v and w are conditionally homoskedastic.
                                    — 41




                                  FOOTNOTES




1. In this paper the permanent income hypothesis is taken to mean that
    households optimize their intertemporal utility function subject to the
    lifetime budget constraint.


2. See King (1983) for a survey of recent contributions.


3. This example is due to Larry Summers.


4. The survey also has data on the amount of money that is given to members
    of the family other than the head. This is not considered in the analysis
    of this paper. The expenditure data refer to the full cost of purchases
    even though full payment may not have been made at the date of purchase.


5. No data on education are available. This is characteristic of most
    surveys in Japan.


6. The reason for doing this is to treat homeowners and nonhomeowners
    symmetrically. This paper will work with changes in expenditures.
   Although the survey does not report imputed rents for homeowners, this
   will disappear when expenditure changes are taken.


7. One case reported about 3.8 million yen for "other expenses" in period
   1. This was a clear outlier. (The next highest value was about 1.2
   million yen.) Four cases reported temporary income for period 1 in excess
   of 10 million yen. If these four cases are included, the sample standard
   deviation of temporary income in period 1 nearly quadruples, although the
   results to be reported in this paper are not changed in any important way
   (except for the results on temporary income). Another case reported
   temporary income in excess of 10 million yen in period 2. The remaining
   seventh case reported expected normal income for period 5 of 19,890
   thousand yen. Since its actual normal income in periods 1,2,3 and 4 is
   1,980 thousand yen, I concluded that the number was wrong by one decimal
   point.
                                     — 42 —




8.   For the commodity—specific number of equivalent adults, see Deaton and
     Muelbauer (1980).


9. The Annual Report on the Survey of Family Consumption (The Economic
     Planning Agency) reports quarterly time—seri.es data from 1977:Q2 on
     average expenditures on the ten commodity groups. I estimated the
     multiplicative model of seasonality using this time—series data and then
     used the resulting seasonality factor to perform seasonal adjustment on
     the present data set.


10. If the real interest rate is equal to the rubjective discount rate and if
     the instantaneous utility function is quadratic, then change in
     consumption is white noise, as Hall (1978) has shown. If, in addition,
     the first—order coefficients in the quadratic utility function is subject
     to taste shocks, then change in consumption is a white noise process plus
     a moving average of taste shocks, This was pointed out to me by Robert
     Flood.


11. The Family Income and Expenditure Survey, compiled by the Prime
     Minister's Office of Japan, is a diary survey on monthly expenditures on
     over several hundred commodity groups. Since one—sixth of the sample is
     replaced by new households every month, it is possible to create a six—
     month panel of monthly expenditures. A forthcoming study done at the
     Economic Planning Agency contains calculation of the autocorrelation
     coefficients for monthly expenditure changes. The first order auto—
     correlation coefficient for food is close to —0.4 on average.


12. This VAR model is estimated on family size—unadjusted data because I
     thought the interpretation of the VAR coefficients became more
     straightforward. The coefficients estimated on family size—adjusted data
     are virtually identical. The significance of the lag coefficients is
     determined by heteroskedasticity—robust standard errors. See section 4
     for more details on how to calculate them. Four additional variables ——
     AGE, AGE2, FSZ4 — FSZ3 and (FSZ4 — FSZ3)2 —— are also included on the
     right—hand side of the equations, but their estimated coefficients are not
     reported in Table 5. The lagged expenditure coefficients in the YT
                                           — 43 —




    ("temporary"    income) equation are large in absolute value. This is due to
    seasonality in YT. If seasonally adjusted data on expenditures and income
    are used, the coefficients become must smaller in absolute value.


13. To economize notation, bequests are not considered, although it is
    straightforward to do so.


14. So the omission of leisure in our model does not seem to cause any
    serious problem. Anyway, there are to data on labor supply in the present
    data set.


15. This is pointed Out in Chamberlain (1982). Suppose, for example, there
    is a totally unexpected income tax reform in period t that slashes the
    marginal tax rates for the rich. The forecast error YDt —             will be
                                                                     YD
   positive for the rich and negative for the poor. So the correlation
    between YD —             and YDt_l across households, which equals
                       YD
                        N
                  —1                   e
           plim N
           N÷
                        L
                       i=1
                              (YDI _YD)YD,_i

    (where N is the sample size and i indexes households), is positive. The
    mean of forecast errors can also differ from zero, because everyone can be
   wrong   in   the same direction at any given point in time. The household
    subscript i has been dropped in the text.


16. The intercept term also depends on the after—tax real rate                  Since
    interest income is virtually tax—free in Japan, it is reasonable to assume
    that r,+i is the same across households.


17. In what follows, I will ignore taste shocks. The implication of taste
    shocks for parameter estimtes will be discussed in the last paragraph of
    section 5.


18. Unexpected expenditure changes in other commodities, cft —           c(Z
    could also be used as instruments in estimating the equation for commodity
   j, but they are almost uncrorrelated with actual expenditure changes on
    commodity j and so no significant efficiency gain will be accomplished.
                                         — 44 —




 19.     The time—series estimates in Table 11 assume that the real rates are
        constant over time.


20. Brown (1952)'s statement of the habit persistence hypothesis is as
        follows:    ...the lag effect in consumer demand was produced by the
        consumption habits which people formed as a result of past consumption.
       The habits, customs, standards, and levels associated with real consump-
       tion previously enjoyed become 'impressed' on the human physcological and
       psychological systems and this produces an inertia or 'hysteresis' in
       consumer behavior." Brown summarizes his hypothesis in his equation 4:      C
       = a0 + a1Y + a9C1 + u, where Y is current income and C_1 is lagged con—
       sumpt ion.


21.     Changes from period 3 to period 4 are considered because actual changes
       from period 4 to period 5 are unobservable.


22. The lag coefficients for food expenditures in Table 12 are considerably
    larger than those in Tables 7 and 9. This is probably due to multipli-
       cative   seasonality. The dependent variable in Table 12 is expenditure
       change from the fourth quarter to the first quarter of the following
       year. The first lag is expenditure change from the third to the fourth
       quarter, which is strongly negatively correlated with the dependent
       variable because of the high level of expenditures In the fourth quarter.
       The use of the data that are adjusted for multiplicative seasonality did
       produce smaller point estimates for the lag coefficients for food. There
       are, however, costs associated with the use of seasonally adjusted data.
       The formula (3.3) that links expenditures to cnsumpution should be in non—
       seasonally adjusted data. It does not seem sensible to suppose the
       equation (3.15) for liquidity constrained households holds on seasonally
       adjusted data. Anyway, since there is not much seasonality in expendi-
       tures in the first and second quarters of the year, the results in Tables
       7—9 are robust to multiplicative seasonality.


23. If expected and unexpected income changes rather than actual and
      unexpected income changes are used, then the expected income change
      coefficient will be .08 and the unexpected income change coefficient will
                                       — 45 —



     be .37.


 24. See (A.4) in Appendix A for a derivation.




                                  REFERENCES


BROWN, T. M. "Habit Persistence and Lags in Consumer Behaviour." Econometrica
    20 (July 1952): 355—371.


CHAMBERLAIN, GARY, "Panel Data." in:     The Handbook of Econometrics, M.
    Intrilligator and Z. Grillichs ed.


DEATON, ANGUS, and MUELLBAUER, JOHN. Economics and Consumer Behavior,
    Cambridge University Press, 1980.


HALL, ROBERT E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income
    Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 86
    (December 1978): 971—987.


HALL, ROBERT E., and MISHIKIN, FREDERIC S. "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
    Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data On Households." Econometrica
    50 (March 1982): 461—481.


KING, MERVIN. "The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent Contributions."
   National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1247, December
   1983.
                            TABLE 1

             MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF LEVELS
                    A. Family Size-Unadjusted


  Variable        1981:02     1981:03     1981:Q4      1982:01


   Cl              212.6      217.5        240.7        215.7
                   (83.7)      (84.2)      (96.6)       (86.6)
  C2               65.9         64.7        74,3         74.3
                   (44.2)      (43.0)      (47.6)       (44.0)
  C3               52.1        S0.7        70.8          S3.0
                  (73.5)      (78.5)      (73.5)        (61.1)
  C4               58.9        59.6        64.1          41.5
                 (165.9)     (179.1)     (139.8)       (119.4)
  CS               33.5        52.6        41.2          34.1
                  (50.6)      (66.4)      (52.9)        (51.7)
  06               26.6        26.8        28.3          25.6
                  (31.3)      (38.4)      (33,1)        (24.4)
  C7               60.8        48.4        51.8          64.9
                 (110.0)      (77.2)      (83.0)       (132.1)
  C8               21.0        21.9        24.2          22.2
                  (38.7)      (31.9)      (40.0)        (39.3)
  C9               52.8        55.9        74.6          57.2
                 (114.5)      (80.3)      (98.5)        (72.2)
  ClO              76.9        78.9        88.3          70.3
                  (73,5)      (76.7)      (81.3)        (60.8)
  YN              681.S       688.4       693.8         686.9
                 (276.6)     (291.2)     (292.9)       (282.9)
  YT              202.7       214.1       446.8          63.1
                 (337,3)     (244.6)     (366.4)       (121.8)


NOTE. —— Standard
                  deviations are in parentheses. The number-s    for-
expenditures and income are stated in thousands of 1980 yen.
                                 TABLE 1 (Continued)

                            B. FAMILY SIZE—ADJUSTED


  Variable             1981:Q2      1981:Q3      1981:Q4   1982:Q1

   Cl                  157.5         160.7       177,6      159.2
                       (58.1)        (56.6)      (64.8)     (59.7)
  C2                    56.1          55.1        63.2       63.3
                       (37.6)        (36.2)      (39.9)     (37.2)
  C3                    42.6          41.3        57.8       43.0
                       (60.2)        (63.8)      (60.9)     (4.9.5)
  04                    51.5          51.8        56.4       36.3
                       142.1)       (151.0)     (123.4)    (102.2)
  CS                    30.0          47.0        36.8       30.5
                       (46.2)        (59.7)      (47.7)    (47.2)
  06                    21.1          21.3        22.4      20.3
                       (23.9)        (31.3)      (26.4)    (19.0)
  C?                    41.6          33.0        35.0      43.6
                       (78.0)        (57.2)      (58.5)    (88.4)
  Cs                    19.7          20.5        22.7      20.6
                       (37.1)        (30,3)      (38.6)    (36.1)
  C9                 52.9             S6.0        74.8      57.3
                   (104.1)           (80.6)      (98,3)    (72.S)
  010                   69.7          71.7        80.0      63.8
                       (65.9)        (70.5)      (72.7)    (55.1)

NOTE. —— Standard deviations are in parentheses. The numbers
                                                               for
expenditures are stated in thousands of 1980 yen and are per tijo
equivalent   adults.
                               TABLE 2

       ESTIMATES OF THE MULTIPLICATIVE MODEL OF FAMILY SIZE

 Independent           Family Size Dummies
 Variable,                                                     Sarnle
 Log of:         F3     F4     F5                        R2
                                     F6    F7     F8+          Size


  Cl            .232   .326   .423   .530 .644   .659   .146   8,040
  C2            .112   .221   .69    .225 .264   .454   .018   8,027
  03            .125   .230   .328   .385 .392   .512   .017   7,841
  04            .133   .092   .241   .215 .251   .434   .004   4,849
  05            .097   .081   .218   .255 .258   .233   .006   7,163
  C6            .150   .286   .326   .392 .315   .189   .024   7,993
  C7            .190   .443   .533   .553 .481   .245   .021   5.830
  C8           —.001 —.029    .171   .348 .173   .355   .009   7,353
  09           —.009 —.062    .005   .205 .254   .444   .007   7,918
 010            .109   .069   .175   .168 .224   .418   .005   8,019

NOTE. -— Cases ith the zero for the dependent variable are deleted
in calculating regression coefficients. Intercept terms are not
reported. F8+ is the dummy variable for family of size 8 or more.
                              TABLE 3

            MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF CHANGES


  Variable (X)
                     X2—X1              X3—X2          X4—X3


    Cl               3.20               16.91      —18.45
                   (35.3)           (35.5)         (40.7)
    C2              —1.05                8.15            .06
                   (27.7)           (27.5)         (27.1)
                    —1.29            16.44         —14.81
                   (64.4)           (62.2)         (57.8)
    C4                .29                4.58      —20.01
                  (191.5)          (178.5)        (152.7)
    C5              17.00           —10.24             —6.27
                   (63.7)           (58.7)         (56.5)
    C6                .21             1.08          —2.10
                   (32.6)           (33.9)         (23.4)
    C7              —8.59               2.00         8,53
                   (50.9)           (43.8)         (74.4)
    CS                .77               2.18           —2.04
                   (40.7)           (40.8)         (46.5)
    C9               3.05               18.84      —17.47
                  (118.0)          (103.0)        (101.2)
    ClO              2.04               8.27       -1.6.16
                   (65.9)           (70.6)         (61.9)
    YN               6.85             5.41          —6.82
                  (117.1)          (104.0)        (102.6)
    YT              11.35           232.69        —383.69
                  (421.0)          (362.5)        (350.5)

NOTE. —— Standard deviations are in parentheses. Expenditures
                                                              are
family size—adjusted. Income is not family size—adjusted.
                           TABLE 4

            SAMPLE AUT000RRELATION OF CHANGES


           Seasonally Unadjusted     Seasonally Adjusted
Variable
             autocorrelatjon           autocorrelatjon
             first      second         first      second
             order      order          order      order

ci          _.264***   —. 131***                    —, 122***
            _,472***                  _.401***
C2                     —    034       _.326***      —.034
            _539***                   —.   504***
C3          _.425***   _.13O**                      —.   1O4**
            _435***                   _.267***
Ca                         .002       _.576**        .021
            _.484***                  _.368***
C5          _593***    —.   1S7***    _.405***      —.   171***
            _.318***                  _.381***
C6                         .010       —.   675**     .010
            _493***                   —.   462***
C7          _.432***       .O85***                   *   130
            _.297***                  —.   335***
C8            357***   —.010          _353***       —.005
                                           474***
C9          _345***    —.O38                        —.032
            _,634***                  _493***
do                         .057       _.501***      _,050*
                                      _465***
YN                     _.065**        _335***
              333***                  _,328***
YT          _,580***       .112***    _.736*        -.073
            _.732***                  _.087***
NOTE TO TABLE 4. —— Two first—order autocorrelation coefficients
are calculated. The numbers -that first appear in the column for
first—order autocorrelatjon are the correlation coefficient beteen
X3—X2 and        and the numbers that appear below them are the
correlation coefficient of X4—X3 and X3—X2 (X = C1,C2,...,YN,YT).
Expenditures are family size—adjusted.
*
**
     Significant at the 5 percent level.
      Significant at the 1 percent level.
       Significant at the .1 percent level.
                                                                         TABLE 5

                                                  NELVE—VARIABLE VECTOR AUTOREGRESSION MODEL
                                                  A. PARAMETER ESTIMATES AND SU!'O1ARY STATISTICS



Dependent        Cl      02        C3        C4        05        C6        C7        C8       C9      010     YN       YT       R2    S.E.R.
Variable

      —                            .000      .011      .007      .024
Cl4       C1 .6O3** —.018                                                  .012     _.O33*    .010   —.010    .002    —.007    .32    44.0
                —.281    .023     —.025     —.000     —.010      .039      .019      .041    —.005    .015    .020    —.007
      —         —.002   .,599**   —.039     —.002     —.007      .002     —.005
C24       C23                                                                        .032*    .001   —.023    .010     .009*   .36    25.6
                —.009   —.209      .002     —.003      .011      .004     —.002      .041     .008   —.017    .007     .OO1
C34   —         —.029    .003     _,553**   —.002     —.008      .031*     .120*     .065    —.018
          C33                                                                                        —.027    .046*   _.020*   .35    56.4
                 .010   —.038     —.343      .005      .024     —.112      .085     —.060    —.038    .018    .080    —.010
      —         —.122   —.086     —.045     _•573**   —.054      .281      .103
C44       C43                                                                       —.116     .051    .023   —.018    —.028    .33   143.2
                —.047   —.095     —.026     —.295     —.124      .333     —.038     —.081     .091    .010    .016    —.016
CS4   —          .036   —.050     —.004      .004     _.631**    .022      .025     —.011    —.014   —.020    .003
          C53                                                                                                         —.005    .32    51.0
                 .025   —.038     —.036     —.003     —.499      .020      .038     —.002.   —.002    .004    .015    —.005
C64 — C63        .000   —.001      .006      .003      .024     _.570**    .008     —.011     .000   —.002    .002    —.003    .39    22.5
                 .011   —.022      .009      .002      .014     —.355      .013     —.010    —.003    .003    .001    —.001
      —          .065    .141     —.115w —.007        —.085
C74       C73                                                    .026     _.587** —.010       .003    .016    .008     .036    .13   104.3
                 .033    .114     —.102      .015     —.011     —.002     —.044   —.021       .008    .059    .011     .002
C84 — C83       —.006    .002      .030      .003      .011      .028     —.003     _.677*! —.019    —.005   —.006     .005    .32    40.3
                —.026    .038      .026      .006      .006      .022     —.019     —.289   —.004    —.001   —.044     .002
      —          .003    .087      .042      .032     —.041      .008
094       C93                                                             —.125      .033    _.723** .015    —.036    _.013** .49     72.1
                 .031    .061  .036          .013     —.015      .030     —.010      .021    —.245  —.010     .011    —.019
                 .040   _.094* •Q34*         .000     —.047     .O67*      .006     —.019    —.005   _.643** —.006    —.006    .43
C104—C103                                                                                                                             51,8
                —.014    .071     —.007     —.010      .010      .009     —.020      .020     .008   —.368    .017     .003
YN4 — YN3        .064    .075      .035     —.011      .090     —.053      .001     _.2O6*    .058   —.020   _.390** .017** .18       93.0
                 .010    .115     —.026     —.009      .089     —.049      .013     —.078     .023   —.025   —.172  —.010
      —         —.179   _.403*    —.151      .104** .113*       —.045      .488**    .040    —.095   —.129    .004    _955**   .71   189.9
YT        YT3
                —.128   —.179     —.267      .009  —.133         .030      .228      .030    —.079   —.129   —.013    —.359

NOTE. —— For each dependent variable, the upper line contains the coefficients of first lags and the lower line contains
the coefficients of second logs.  For exampl.e,.the coefficient of YN2—YN1 in the equation for C14—C13 is .020. The                     last
column under the label "S.E.R." reports the standard error of the regression, numel.y the sample standard deviation ot the
residuals.
*   Two lags   as a whole significant at the 5 percent level.
** Two     lags as a whole significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                       TABLE   5   (Continued)
          B.    CONTEMPORANEOUS CORRELATION OF THE RESIDUALS OF THE VECTOR
                                                                           AUTOREGRESSION MODEL


               C2         C3          C4        C5        C6         C7         C8      C9       ClO      YN        YT

Cl             .005     -.005         .034     .045*     .023       .O56*      .055    .031     O35      .165**     .077**
C2                                             .002     -.023        .033      .006    .015     .031    -.019      .006
C3                                   .O74**    .044*     •Q59**      .062**            .131** —.015      .O61**     077**
C4                                            -.000     —.001        .065**    .014    .081** -.021      .035      .131**
C5                                                      -.026      -.020      -.013   -.002     .055*    .056*     .050*
C6                                                .                  .020      .028    .025     .018     .058**    .042
C7
                                                                              -.022   -.011     .031     .034      .029
C8
                                                                                       .1034*   .031    —.008      .103**
C9
                                                                                                .017     .046*     .131**
dO                                                                                                       .051*     .122**
YN
                                                                                                                  —.016

* Significant         at the 5 percent level.
     Significant at       the   1   percent level.
                                  TABLE 6

          CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS OF UNEXPECTED CHANGES UITH
                  LAGGED UNEXPECTED AND ACTUAL CHANGES



                          Correlation Coefficient of X4—X iith:
Variable (X)
                         X3-X       X2—X          X3—x2      X2-Xl

    Cl                             _.126***                 —. 129***

    C2              —.019                       —.030       —. 152***

    C3              —.038            .004         .007      —.049
                     .O92***         .004         .0113     —.   101***
    CS              —.010            .000                       .005

                                                  .026      —    030
    C6              —.O5O          _.068**

    C7              —.019          —.027          .050*     — .066

    C8              —.   11Q**     —.002         _.094***   —.013

    C9               • 132***        .062**       .034      —.028

    C1O             —.010          —.005         _.050*     —.016

    YN              _.056*                       _.087***   —. 134***

    YT              _,O69**          .095***     —.043          .095***


NOTE. ——    Expenditures    are family size—adjusted.
*
    Significant at the 5 percent level.
     Significant at the 1 percent level.
      Significant at the .1 percent level.
                              TABLE 7

          PARAMETR ESTIMATES FOR EQUATION (5.7) LJITH 2. = 0

          A. Generalized Two—Stage Least Squares Estimates


 Commodity                                              -
 Group (j)           ii           J2                            R



  Cl               .275         .249           .099            .16
                  (.035)       (.037)         (.024)
  C2               .506         .303           .174            .28
                  (.062)       (.049)         (.035)
  C3              .963          .944          1.252            .16
                 (.118)        (.192)         (.328)
  C4             1.056         1.085          1.149            .18
                 (.055)        (.097)         (.108)
  C5             1.224         1.257          1.133            .20
                 (.374)        (.388)         (.356)
  C6              .617          .613           .530            .11
                 (.134)        (.136)         (.135)
  C7              .867          .632           .361            .33
                 (.107)        (.151)         (.207)
  C8              .866          .974          .883             .15
                 (.111)        (.212)        (.224)
  C9             1.041          .911          .962             .10
                 (.127)        (.152)        (.134)
  do              .561          .426          .408             .16
                 (.080)        (.086)        (.077)

NOTE. —— The instruments for lagged changes in expenditures
                                                            are
the associated unexpected changes. Heteroskedasticity—rubust
standard errors are in parentheses. The R2 is calculated from the
second—stage regression.
                          TABLE     (Continued)

               B. Ordinary Least Squares Estimates


 Commod ity
 Group (j)
                   p.
                    J1              p.2
                                     J
                                                    p.-,
                                                     Jj
                                                             R
  Cl              .207             .187            .069      .15
                 (.029)           (.031)          (.020)

  C2              .410             .263            .121      .34
                 (.049)           (.035)          (.029)

  C3              .452             .257            .216      .29
                 (.108)           (.135)          (.070)

  Cu.             .612             .316            .194      .33
                 (.067)           (.057)          (.039)

 CS               .670             .374            .231      .43
                 (.144)           (.106)          (.106)

 C6               .259             .178            .125      .10
                  .06a)           (.050)          (.034)

 C?               .780             .295            .132      .65
                 (.054)           (.096)          (.061)

 CS               .549             .396            .125      .34
                 (.059)           (.055)          (.051)

 C9               .565             .356            .200      .26
                 (.103)           (.097)          (.070)

 ClO              .385             .2411           .188      .26
                 (.072)           (.052)          (.033)

NOTE. —— Heteroskedasticity—r-obust standard errors are in
parentheses.
                             TABLE 8

                         ALD STATISTICS



  Commodity Group                    Lald Statistic   P Valuet

Cl (food)                                 36.3         .109
C2 (rents, fuel and utilities)            40.3         .048
C3 (cloths and household textiles)        17.6         .915
C4 (dur-ab]es)                            48.5        .007
CS (recreation)                           12.5        .992
C6 (cultural expenses)                    24.6        .599
C7 (education)                            27.0        .466
C8 (medical expenses)                     22.7        .702
C9 (social expenses)                      26.2        .508
ClO (other)                               34.4        .157

    degreees of freedom is 27.
                                 TABLE 9

                PARAMETR ESTIMATES FOR EQUATION (5.7)
                BY GENERALIZED TUO—SRAGE LEAST SQUARES


 Comodity              p.           p.
 Group (j)                                                          a.
                        Ji           J2              p,3
                                                      J




  Cl                  .310         .277             .106          .110
                     (.042)       (.041)           (.026)        (.039)
  02                  .572         .343             .196          .012
                     (.076)       (.058)           (.041)        (.015)
  C3                 1.084        1.064            1.415         —.158
                     (.145)       (.226)           (.385)        (.136)
  04                 1.190        1.224            1.297          .440
                     (.085)       (.122)           (.141)        (.248)
  C5                 1.370        1.376            1,297          .228
                     (.417)       (.431)           (.395)        (.149)
  06                  .697         .693             .599          .004
                     (.157)       (.160)           (.157)        (.018)
  07                  .981         .713             .410          .087
                     (.134)       (.178)           (.235)        (.071)
  CS                  .968        1.087             .997          .079
                     (.133)       (.241)           (.254)        (.061)
  09                 1.177        1.035            1.094          .133
                     (.159)       (.183)           (.164)        ( .104."

  010                 .633         .481             .460          .067
                     (.095)       (.100)           (.090)        (.065)



        1   = sum   of EDY.4 coefficients over j         .116
                             J
                                                        (.045)


NOTE. —— Heteroskedasticity—rous standard errors are in
parentheses.
                                TABLE 10

         CORRELATION OF FAMILY SIZE—ADJUSTED EXPECTED CHANGE IN
           DISPOSABLE INCOME UITH LAGGED EXPENDITURES CHAGES



                     Cor-relatjon Coefficient of EDYD. with:
 Commodity
 Group (j)
                      X2X1             X3—X.2             X.4—X.3
                                                           -I




    Cl                 .O62**               .021          —.025
    C2                                      .
                                                1r)***
                                                .LLIL..         •
                                                                    r-
                                                                    L)L. I



    C3                 —. 126***            .056*               .016
    C4                                      .024          —.016
    C5                 —.000               —.029                .028
    C6                 —.005               —.023                .036

    C7                                      .011          —.013
    C8                  .052*              —.025                .053*

    C9                 —.016                .035          —.043
    do                 —.08i                .O54*

NOTE. ——
         EDY.4 (j=1,2,.,,1O) is family size—adjusted expected
disposable income change and is defined formally in (3,16).
* Significant at the 5 percent level.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.
    Significant at the .1 percent level.
                              TABLE 11

 AGGREGATE TIME—SERIES ESTIMATE OF THIRD—ORDER AUTOREGRESSIONS
                      ON EXPENDITURES CHANGES


 Commodity Group in the                               p           p
 National Income Acounts                  1               2           3



Food, beverages and tobacco              .245         .210        .032
                                     (   .161)    (   .164)   (   .160)

Rents, fuel and utilitiest               .313         443         •377
                                     (   .151)    (   .140)   (   .146)

Clothes and footi..iares                 .390         .306        .054
                                     (   .169)    (   .177)   (   .171)

Durables                             — .033           .171        .030
                                     ( .161)      (   .158)   (   .163)

Recreation and education                 .177         .396        .061
                                     (   .146)    (   .140)   (   .149)

Medical care                             .438         .246        .161
                                     (   .155)    C   .166)   C   .157)
           .•




is x seasonal dummies —       lxi
NOTE. —— Standard errors are in parenthese5. The estimated model
                                   —        —
                                          p2x_2      i.ihere
expenditures change from quarter t—1 to quarter t. The data on
                                                                      x
expenditures are in real and per capita terms. The sample period
is 1971:Q1 — 1982:Q2.
tRents here include imputed rents.
                               TABLE 12

                PARAMEIR ESTIMATES FOR EQUATION (6.3)
                BY GENERALIZED TUO—SRAGE LEAST SQUARES


                                  Coefficient of:

Commodity         c. — c.      c. — c..,            ADY.       UDY.
Group (j)               j2                                        j3


  Cl               —.636        —.315               .0090      .0166
                   (.048)       (.071)          (.0036)       (.0135)
  C2               —.680        —.280           —.0069         .0130
                   (.076)       (.054)          (.0023)       (.0060)
  C3               —.824       —1.027            .0209         .0053
                   (.125)       (.228)          (.0093)       (.0177)
  C4              —1.027       —1.044            .0399        .0565
                   (.078)       (.107)          (.0198)       (.0455)
  C5               —.927        —.836               .0081      .0048
                   (.064)       (.062)          (.0045)       (.0114)
  C6               —.880        —.746            .0031         .0031
                   (.081)       (.123)          (.0022)       (.0057)
  C7               —.762        —.368           —.0075         .0770
                   (.197)       (.250)          (.0068)       (.0306)
  C8              —1.042        —.954           —.0022         .0256
                   (.187)       (.213)          (.0032)       (.0164)
  C9               —.912        —.844           —.0020         .0798
                   (.051)       (.082)          (.0069)       (.0296)
  dO               —.751        —.614            .0129         .0101
                   (.082)       (.073)          (.0054)       (.0146)


        sum of ADY.3 coefficients over j   =        .0753
                                                (.0255)
        sum of UDY.3 coefficients over J   =                   .2916
                                                              (.0855

NOTE.   —— Heteroskedasticity—robust standard errors are in
parentheses. The instruments for lagged expenditures changes are
their associated unexpected changes. See equations (6.2) and
(6.4) in the text for the deiiniticn of ADY. and UDY
                                               j3
