                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FIRMS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

                                         Andrew B. Bernard
                                         J. Bradford Jensen
                                         Stephen J. Redding
                                           Peter K. Schott

                                        Working Paper 13054
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13054


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




Bernard, Jensen, and Schott thank the National Science Foundation (SES-0241474, SES-0552029
and SES-0550190) and Redding thanks Princeton University and the Centre for Economic Performance
(CEP) for research support. We are grateful to Jim Davis of the Census Bureau for timely disclosure
of our data analysis and to Jim Tybout, Jim Hines and the JEP editorial board for extremely helpful
comments and suggestions. The research in this paper was conducted while Bernard, Jensen and Schott
were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center,
New York Research Data Center, and Center for Economic Studies. We thank the NSF for infrastructure
grants that support Census Research Data Centers (SES-0550190 and ITR-0427889). Research results
and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census
Bureau, the NBER, or any other institution to which the authors are affiliated.

© 2007 by Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms in International Trade
Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 13054
April 2007
JEL No. F1,F2,L1,L2,L6

                                            ABSTRACT

Despite the fact that importing and exporting are extremely rare firm activities, economists generally
devote little attention to the role of firms when discussing international trade. This paper summarizes
key differences between trading and non-trading firms, demonstrates how these differences present
a challenge to standard trade models and shows how recent "heterogeneous-firm" models of international
trade address these challenges. We then make use of transaction-level U.S. trade data to introduce
a number of new stylized facts about firms and trade. These facts reveal that the extensive margins
of trade -- that is, the number of products firms trade as well as the number of countries with which
they trade -- are central to understanding the well-known role of distance in dampening aggregate trade
flows.

Andrew B. Bernard                                  Stephen J. Redding
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth               London School of Economics
100 Tuck Hall                                      Department of Economics
Hanover, NH 03755                                  Houghton Street
and NBER                                           London WC2A 2AE, England
Andrew.B.Bernard@dartmouth.edu                     s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk

J. Bradford Jensen                                 Peter K. Schott
Peterson Institute for International Economics     Yale School of Management
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW                      135 Prospect Street
Washington, DC 20036                               New Haven, CT 06520-8200
jbjensen@petersoninstitute.org                     and NBER
                                                   peter.schott@yale.edu
                                  Firms in International Trade


        In discussing the origins and implications of international trade, economists
emphasize comparative advantage, increasing returns to scale and consumer love of variety
but pay relatively little attention to the firms that actually drive trade flows. Yet engaging in
international trade is an exceedingly rare activity: of the 5.5 million firms operating in the
United States in 2000, just 4 percent were exporters. Among these exporting firms, the top 10
percent accounted for 96 percent of total U.S. exports.
        Since the mid-1990s, a large number of empirical studies have provided a wealth of
information about the important role that firms play in mediating countries’ imports and
exports. This research, based on micro datasets that track countries’ production and trade at
the firm level, demonstrates that trading firms differ substantially from firms that solely serve
the domestic market. Across a wide range of countries and industries, exporters have been
shown to be larger, more productive, more skill- and capital-intensive, and to pay higher
wages than non-trading firms. Furthermore, these differences exist even before exporting
begins. A large literature documenting these findings has emerged, beginning with Bernard
and Jensen (1995).
        The ex ante productivity advantage of exporters suggests self-selection: exporters are
more productive, not as a result of exporting, but because only the most productive firms are
able to overcome the costs of entering export markets. This sort of microeconomic
heterogeneity can influence macroeconomic outcomes. When trade policy barriers fall or
transportation costs decline, high-productivity exporting firms survive and grow, while
lower-productivity non-exporting firms are more likely to fail. This reallocation of economic
activity across firms raises aggregate productivity and provides a non-traditional source of
welfare gains from trade.
        We highlight the challenges new empirical research poses for traditional models and
discuss how these challenges have shifted the focus of the international trade field from
countries and industries towards firms and products. We show how observed differences
between trading and non-trading firms have led to the development of a series of
heterogeneous-firm models, and that these models offer new insights into the causes and
consequences of international trade. Table 1 summarizes key stylized facts about
international trade as well as the ability of various models to explain them. These models are
discussed throughout the paper.
        We also make use of recently available transaction-level U.S. trade data to introduce
new stylized facts about firms’ participation in international markets. These data show that
the extensive margins of trade – that is, the number of products firms trade as well as the
number of countries they trade with – are central to understanding the well-known role of
distance in dampening aggregate trade flows. We conclude with suggestions for further
theoretical and empirical research.

Empirical Challenges to Old and New Trade Theory
        Traditional or “old” theories of international trade explain the flow of goods between
countries in terms of comparative advantage (differences in opportunity costs of production).
Comparative advantage can arise because of productivity differences (“Ricardian”
comparative advantage) or because of a combination of cross-industry differences in factor
intensity and cross-country differences in factor abundance (“Heckscher-Ohlin” comparative
advantage). In either case, as summarized in Table 1, a key implication of old trade theory is


                                                2
“inter-industry trade”: that is, countries will export one set of industries and import another.
Endowment-driven “old” trade theory models also provide a mechanism through which
international trade can influence relative factor rewards (and hence income distribution), as
specialization across industries that differ in factor intensity changes the relative demand for
the various factors of production.
        A large share of international trade, however, takes place between relatively similar
trading partners, apparently within industries (Grubel and Lloyd, 1975). Germany and the
United States, for example, exchange automobiles. This fact and others led to the creation of
“new” trade models by Paul Krugman (1980), Elhanan Helpman (1981) and William Ethier
(1982). In these models, a combination of economies of scale and consumer preferences for
variety lead otherwise identical firms to “specialize” in distinct horizontal varieties, spurring
two-way or “intra-industry” trade between countries. In contrast to old trade theories, where
the welfare gains arise from the differences in opportunity costs of production across
industries and countries, “new” trade theories have welfare gains accruing from the wider set
of varieties that trade makes available to consumers.
        In a seminal contribution, Helpman and Krugman (1985) integrated old and new trade
theory by embedding horizontal product differentiation and increasing returns to scale in a
model featuring endowment-based comparative advantage. This “integrated” framework soon
became a standard paradigm for analysis in the field. When modified to allow for technology
differences, factor price inequality and trade costs, this integrated framework provides a
reasonably successful explanation of aggregate international trade patterns, as Helpman
(1999) discussed in this journal.
        Both old and new trade theory typically assume a representative firm, at least within
each industry. This assumption facilitates the general equilibrium analysis that is core to
international trade, but it is inconsistent with the substantial variation in productivity, capital
intensity and skill intensity observed across firms within narrowly defined industries.2
        Of course, the mere existence of heterogeneity is not necessarily a problem for
theories of international trade. The assumption of a representative firm could be a convenient,
if not perfectly realistic, simplification. However, as we will show, the interaction of firm
characteristics and the export orientation of the firm introduces a channel for international
trade to influence aggregate productivity.

        Firm Exporting is Relatively Rare
        Exporting is a relatively rare firm activity. Of the 5.5 million firms operating in the
United States in 2000, just 4 percent engaged in exporting. Even within the smaller set of
U.S. firms active in industries more predisposed to exporting – like those in the
manufacturing, mining or agricultural sectors that produce tradable goods – only 15 percent
were exporters.
        Table 2 illustrates this point more broadly with data from the 2002 U.S. Census of
Manufactures. The second column of the table summarizes the distribution of manufacturing
firms across three-digit NAICS industries, while the third column reports the share of firms in
each industry that export. These columns reveal that the overall share of U.S. manufacturing
firms that export is relatively small, at 18 percent.3 However, the share of firms that export

2
  Micro datasets vary in terms of the amount of information available on firms and plants within firms. Unless
otherwise noted, our discussion and empirical analysis focuses on firms as the relevant unit of analysis. Only
recently have researchers begun to examine how production within firms is allocated across plants and how this
is influenced by international trade (Bernard and Jensen, 2007).
3
  Similar results are observed at the plant-level. See Appendix Table A1. In the period since the early 1970s,
there is a rise in the percentage of firms and plants that export, consistent with the multilateral and regional trade
liberalization that has occurred.


                                                          3
within each industry category ranges rather widely. Thirty-eight percent of Computer and
Electronic Products firms export, for example, while the share among Apparel firms is just 8
percent.
        The fourth column of Table 2 shows that exporting firms ship a relatively small share
of their total shipments abroad. Here, too, substantial variation exists across industries,
ranging from a high of 21 percent in Computers to a low of 7 percent in Beverages. Across
all firms, the share is 14 percent.
        The information in Table 2 is consistent with old and new trade theories in some
ways, but not in others. For example, exporting is more likely and export intensity is higher
in more skill-intensive sectors like Computers than in more labor-intensive sectors like
Apparel. This aspect of the data accords with endowment-driven old trade theory: that is, a
relatively skill-abundant country like the United States should be relatively more likely to
export in skill-intensive industries in which it possesses comparative advantage. However,
while old trade theory can explain why a country is a net importer in one set of industries and
a net exporter in another set, it cannot explain why some firms export and others produce
solely for the domestic market, or how the firm-level decision to export interacts with
comparative advantage.
        Although Table 2 shows that exporting is a relatively rare activity, it also shows that
exporting occurs in all manufacturing industries. This pervasiveness is consistent with new
trade theory's emphasis on variety-motivated trade, although it is not clear in new trade
models why a few firms in an industry would export but most would not. Similarly, the
presence of exporters in comparative disadvantage industries where the United States is a net
importer overall is consistent with the spirit of Helpman and Krugman's (1985) “integrated”
old and new trade framework, but again this framework does not explain why only some
firms export or why the fraction of firms exporting varies with comparative advantage.

        Exporters are Different
        Firms that export look very different from non-exporters along a number of
dimensions. We highlight these differences by reporting U.S. manufacturing exporters’
“export premia” for 2002 in Table 3. Each row of the table summarizes the average percent
difference between exporters and non-exporters for a particular firm characteristic.4
        For example, the first column of the table reports the results of a series of bivariate
ordinary least squares regressions. The dependent variables are employment, shipments,
value-added per worker, and the other variables noted in the first column, all in logs. The
explanatory variable is a dummy variable indicating whether the firm is involved in exporting
or not. Since the dependent variable data are in logarithms, the coefficients can be interpreted
as percentages. In other words, exporting firms have 119 percent more employment, 148
percent higher shipments, 26 percent higher value-added per worker, and so on.5
        The second column repeats these regressions, but now includes industry fixed effects
in the explanatory variables to control for differences in firm characteristics across industries.
Because export participation is correlated with industry characteristics, controlling for
industry effects typically reduces these coefficients. However, exporters remain different
from non-exporters even in the same detailed industry. Exporters are significantly larger than
non-exporters, by approximately 97 percent for employment and 108 per cent for shipments;
they are more productive by roughly 11 per cent for value-added per worker and 3 per cent
for total factor productivity; they also pay higher wages by around 6 percent. Finally,

4
  Similar premia are observed at the plant level. See Appendix Table A2.
5
  Since the differences between exporters and non-exporters are often large, the log approximation can
understate considerably the size of these differences. Taking exponents of the coefficients in Table 2, exporting
firms have 229 percent more employment.


                                                        4
exporters are relatively more capital- and skill- intensive than non-exporters by
approximately 12 and 11 percent, respectively. These findings are emblematic of what is
typically found in this literature.
         The observed differences between exporters and non-exporters are not driven solely
by size. When we control for firm size as measured by log employment as well as industry
effects in column 3, the differences between exporters and non-exporters within the same
industry on all other economic outcomes continue to be statistically significant at the 1
percent level.
         The finding that exporters are systematically more productive than non-exporters
raises the question of whether higher-productivity firms self-select into export markets, or
whether exporting causes productivity growth through some form of “learning by exporting.”
Results from virtually every study across industries and countries confirm that high
productivity precedes entry into export markets. These findings are suggestive of the
presence of sunk entry costs into export markets that only the most productive firms find it
profitable to incur, as emphasized in Roberts and Tybout (1997).6 Most studies also find
little or no evidence of improved productivity as a result of beginning to export; for example,
the work of Bernard and Jensen (1999) on U.S. firms and the work of Clerides, Lach and
Tybout (1998) on firms in Mexico, Colombia and Morroco find no differential growth in firm
productivity among exporters versus non-exporters. However, some recent research on low-
income countries finds productivity improvement after entry. Van Biesebroeck (2005), for
example, reports evidence that exporting raises productivity for sub-Saharan African
manufacturing firms.
         In contrast to the scarcity of studies finding improved firm productivity following
entry into export markets, an abundance of evidence indicates that firms entering export
markets grow substantially faster in employment and output than non-exporters. The
combination of higher initial productivity and faster growth after commencing exporting
points to an important role for trade liberalization in enhancing aggregate productivity
through reallocation across firms, which will be examined further in the next section.
         While much of the existing empirical literature has concentrated on differences in
productivity and size between exporters and non-exporters, Table 3 also shows that exporters
and non-exporters also display marked differences in factor intensity. The finding that U.S.
exporters are more capital- and skill-intensive suggests that “old” trade theory concepts of
comparative advantage may be at work within industries. Specifically, if the intensity with
which firms use inputs reflects the characteristics of the goods they produce, then firms
which are more capital- and skill-intensive are producing goods that are more consistent with
U.S. comparative advantage (Bernard, Jensen and Schott, 2006b).
         Harder to explain in terms of old trade theory concepts of comparative advantage is
the finding that exporters are also more capital- and skill-intensive in developing countries,
which are likely to be abundant in unskilled labor (Alvarez and Lopez, 2005). If exporting
firms in labor-abundant developing countries were specializing in goods consistent with
comparative advantage, they would be labor-intensive rather than capital- and skill-intensive.

      How Trade Liberalization Raises Industry Productivity
      In old trade theory, the welfare gains from trade are due to specialization according to
comparative advantage. In new trade theory, the welfare gains from trade accrue from a
combination of economies of scale and the expansion of product varieties available to
consumers. Empirical analyses of trade liberalization at the firm level, however, provide

6
 Recent estimates suggest that these sunk costs may be sizable. Das, Roberts and Tybout (2006) estimate values
of over $300,000 for Columbian manufacturing plants during 1981-91.


                                                      5
evidence for an additional source of welfare gains: that is, aggregate productivity growth
driven by the contraction and exit of low-productivity firms and the expansion and entry into
export markets of high-productivity firms. This reallocation of resources from low- to high-
productivity establishments raises average industry productivity. These welfare gains may be
magnified if the increase in product market competition induced by trade liberalization leads
to lower mark-ups of price over marginal cost. In this case, the fall in mark-ups and rise in
average productivity both contribute to lower prices and higher real incomes.
         In an influential paper, Pavcnik (2002) finds that roughly two-thirds of the 19 percent
increase in aggregate productivity following Chile's trade liberalization of the late 1970s and
early 1980s is due to the relatively greater survival and growth of high-productivity plants.
Similar findings emerge from a large number of studies of trade liberalization reforms in
developing countries, as surveyed in Tybout (2003). The within-industry reallocations of
resources found by these studies dominate the across-industry reallocations of resources
emphasized by old theories of comparative advantage. Therefore, in the labor market, the net
changes in employment between industries implied by comparative advantage are small
relative to the gross changes in employment caused by simultaneous job creation and
destruction within industries.
         One concern is that the link from increased trade to the relative expansion of higher-
productivity firms in developing-country results might not be driven solely by changes in
trade policy, since trade liberalization is often part of a broader package of economic reforms.
However, similar patterns of productivity gains from the expansion of high-productivity
exporting firms have been found in response to reductions in trade barriers in both Canada
(Trefler, 2004) and the United States (Bernard, Jensen and Schott, 2006a).
         For example, Trefler (2004) finds effects of Canadian tariff reductions on industry
productivity that are roughly twice as large as those on plant productivity, implying market
share reallocations favouring high-productivity plants. The resource reallocation effects of
reductions in U.S. trade costs are examined by Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006a). They
consider a number of dependent variables including the probability of plant death. Their key
explanatory variable is a measure of trade costs, including both tariff rates and shipping costs
at the industry level. Controlling for a number of other plant characteristics, they find that
plant death is more likely to occur as trade costs fall, and that reductions in trade costs have
the greatest impact on plant death for the lowest-productivity plants.
         The relationship between trade liberalization and aggregate productivity growth is not
limited to the relative growth and expansion of high-productivity firms. In Pavcnik (2002),
one-third of the increase in aggregate productivity following the Chilean liberalization was
due to within-plant productivity gains, potentially from the reallocation of resources across
activities within plants. Qualitatively similar evidence is reported by Trefler (2004), who
finds that the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement raised the labor productivity of Canadian
manufacturing plants by 7.4 percent or by an annual compound growth rate of 0.93 percent.
         Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006a) also find evidence supporting a link between
falling trade costs and within-plant productivity growth in U.S. data. One of their
specifications uses plants’ total factor productivity as the dependent variable. The key
explanatory variable is again the changes in industry trade costs described above. In their
preferred specification (column 3 of Table 6 of their paper), changes in industry-level trade
costs are negatively and significantly associated with plant-level productivity growth, with a
one standard deviation fall in trade costs (a drop of 1 percentage point) implying a
productivity increase of 2.3 percent.
         Standard trade models emphasizing comparative advantage and the proliferation of
product variety have little to say about firm or aggregate productivity growth. However, a
growing body of evidence shows that trade liberalization causes relatively faster output and


                                               6
employment growth among high-productivity exporting firms within an industry. A smaller
body of results suggests a less pronounced but still important effect of trade liberalization on
firm productivity.

        Heterogeneous-Firm Trade Theories
        Empirical challenges to old and new trade theory have led to the development of
richer theoretical models emphasizing the importance of firm heterogeneity in generating
international trade and inducing aggregate productivity growth.7 These models provide
natural explanations for some of the empirical challenges noted above, and their analysis
currently occupies a large portion of international trade research. One framework, developed
by Bernard et al. (2003), introduces stochastic firm productivity into the multi-country
Ricardian model of Eaton and Kortum (2002). A second class of models initiated by Melitz
(2003) introduces firm heterogeneity into Krugman’s (1980) model of intra-industry trade.
The Melitz framework has proved to be particularly tractable and has stimulated a great deal
of analysis into the implications of firm heterogeneity for a wide range of issues in
international trade.
        In the Melitz (2003) model, a competitive fringe of potential firms can enter an
industry by paying a fixed entry cost, which is thereafter sunk. Potential entrants face
uncertainty concerning their productivity in the industry. Once the sunk entry cost is paid, a
firm draws its productivity from a fixed distribution. Productivity remains fixed thereafter,
but firms face a constant exogenous probability of death. Firms produce horizontally
differentiated varieties within the industry under conditions of monopolistic competition. The
existence of fixed production costs implies that firms drawing a productivity level below
some lower threshold (the “zero-profit productivity cutoff”) would make negative profits if
they produced, and therefore these firms choose to exit the industry. Fixed and variable costs
of exporting ensure that, of the active firms in an industry, only those who draw a
productivity above a higher threshold (the “export productivity cutoff”) find it profitable to
export in equilibrium. There is a steady-state mass of firms active in the industry, which
implies that the mass of new firms who enter and draw a productivity level above the zero-
profit productivity cutoff equals the mass of existing firms that die.
        In this model, reductions in world-wide barriers to trade increase profits that existing
exporters can earn in foreign markets and reduce the export productivity cutoff above which
firms export. Labor demand within the industry rises, due both to expansion by existing
exporters and to new firms beginning to export. This increase in labor demand bids up factor
prices and reduces the profits of non-exporters. This reduction in profits in the domestic
market induces some low-productivity firms who were previously marginal to exit the
industry. As low-productivity firms exit, and as output and employment are reallocated
towards higher-productivity firms, average industry productivity rises.
        Heterogeneous-firm models address a number of the empirical challenges facing old
and new trade theory. They capture the interaction between firm heterogeneity and
international trade, with the productivity advantage of exporters explained by the self-
selection of the most productive firms into exporting. The shift in resources from low- to
high-productivity firms generates improvements in aggregate productivity. During this shift,
exporters grow more rapidly than non-exporters in terms of size and employment. The
models feature simultaneous job creation and job destruction within industries as low-
productivity firms exit and high-productivity firms expand. In the models of Bernard et al.
(2003) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2005), the mark-up of price over marginal cost is

7
 A related literature has concentrated on contracting issues and the international boundaries of the firm. See
Helpman (2006) for a recent survey.


                                                        7
endogenous and decreases as import competition intensifies following reductions in trade
costs.
         Heterogeneous firms are integrated into the standard trade paradigm of Helpman and
Krugman (1985) in Bernard, Redding and Schott (2007). The resulting framework explains
why some countries export more in certain industries than in others (endowment-driven
comparative advantage); why nonetheless two-way trade is observed within industries (firm-
level horizontal product differentiation combined with increasing returns to scale); and why,
within industries engaged in these two forms of trade, some firms export and others do not
(self-selection driven by trade costs). Consistent with the empirical findings reported in Table
2, the fraction of exporting firms and the share of exports in firm shipments varies
systematically across industries and countries with comparative advantage.
         Although trade liberalization in this framework induces within-industry reallocation
and raises aggregate productivity in all industries, productivity growth is stronger in the
comparative advantage industry. The greater export opportunities in that industry lead to a
larger increase in factor demand than in the comparative disadvantage industry, which bids
up the relative price of the factor used intensively in the comparative advantage industry, and
so leads to greater exit by low-productivity firms than in the comparative disadvantage
industry. This differential productivity growth across industries gives rises to differences in
average industry productivity that magnify factor-abundance-based comparative advantage,
and so provide an additional source of welfare gains from trade.
         Trade liberalization in this framework not only generates aggregate welfare gains but
also has implications for the distribution of income across factors. Increases in average
industry productivity arising from trade liberalization drive down goods prices and therefore
raise the real income of all factors. If productivity increases are strong enough, the real
income of a country’s scarce factor may even rise during trade liberalization (a contradiction
of the well-known Stolper-Samuelson theorem). More generally, the productivity gains
induced by the behavior of heterogeneous firms dampen the decline of the real income of the
scarce factor that occurs in more neoclassical settings.

New Transaction-Level Data on Firms and Trade

        Recently available transaction-level trade data permit examination of a number of
new dimensions of international trade, including the concentration and scarcity of firms’
exports, the range of products that firms export, and the variety of destinations to which
firms’ exports are shipped. In this section we analyze the Linked-Longitudinal Firm Trade
Transaction Database (LFTTD) that is based on data collected by the U.S. Census Bureau and
the U.S. Customs Bureau. This dataset captures all U.S. international trade transactions
between 1992 and 2000. For each flow of goods across a U.S. border, this dataset records the
product classification(s) of the shipment, the value and quantity shipped, the date of the
shipment, the destination or source country, the transport mode used to ship the goods, and
the identity of the U.S. firm engaging in the trade. Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (forthcoming)
provide a more detailed description of the LFTTD and its construction.
        We use these data to distinguish between the firms' extensive margins – that is, the
number of products that firms trade and their number of export destinations – and their
intensive margin – that is, the value they trade per product per country. We show that
adjustment along the extensive margins is central to understanding the well-known “gravity
model” of international trade, which emphasizes the role of distance in dampening trade
flows between countries. More generally, we find that while some aspects of the LFTTD
illuminate directions in which recent theories of heterogeneous firms and trade can be
extended, others pose additional challenges that have yet to be explored.


                                               8
        Trade is Concentrated
        International trade is extremely concentrated across firms. In 2000, the top 1 percent
of trading firms by value (that is, by the sum of imports plus exports) accounted for over 80
percent of the value of total trade, while the top 10 percent of trading firms accounted for
over 95 percent of the value of total trade (Bernard, Jensen and Schott, forthcoming, Table 3).
As a point of comparison, the employment shares of the top 1 and 10 percent of trading firms
were 14 and 24 percent respectively.
        Existing theories of heterogeneous firms and trade can explain this high concentration
in two ways. The first possibility is that an extremely unequal distribution of productivity
across firms leads to an accordingly unequal distribution of trade. The second possibility is
based on a very high elasticity of substitution between firm varieties, so that small differences
in productivity and prices lead to large differences in sales, as low-priced varieties are easily
substitutable for high-priced varieties.
        Alternative explanations for the concentration of trade involve relatively simple
extensions of existing heterogeneous firm models. First, there may be economies of scale in
overseas distribution and marketing that favor the concentration of trade among a small
number of producers. Second, if there are sunk costs specific to individual destinations, and if
destinations vary in terms of their profitability, relatively more productive exporters will
export to more destinations. This expansion along the extensive margin of the number of
destinations served leads to more inequality in export values than if the number of
destinations per firm were constant. Third, if there are sunk costs specific to individual
products, and if products vary in terms of their profitability for a firm, relatively more
productive exporters will also export a wider range of products. This expansion along another
extensive margin of the number of products will also magnify the inequality in export values.
We present empirical evidence below on the importance of these two extensive margin
expansions for individual firms and aggregate trade.

        Trade is Even Scarcer Than Thought
        Observed international trade flows are small relative to the levels predicted by both
old and new trade theory. In old trade theory, the amount of trade predicted by cross-country
differences in factor endowments is a good deal greater than observed values of trade, as
Trefler (1995) points out in his analysis of the “mystery of the missing trade.” In standard
new trade theory models, all varieties are traded in equilibrium, a prediction that is at odds
with the large number of zero bilateral trade flows observed in both aggregated and
disaggregated trade data.8 The absence of trade flows can be explained by old trade theory in
terms of prohibitive trade costs and complete specialization. But these explanations are not
fully persuasive and do not explain why, when positive trade occurs, some firms export while
others do not.
        The examination of firm-level data deepens the mystery of the missing trade. The
average share of exports in firm output is well below the level predicted by standard new
trade theory models. With no trade costs and identical and homothetic preferences, these
models predict that the share of exports in firm output equals the share of the rest of the world
in world GDP, a value substantially higher than those reported in Table 2. Similarly, the
number of destination countries served by the average exporting firm is small. Table 4 shows
that 64 percent of U.S. manufacturing firms that export do so to a single destination country

8
 As long as the demand for varieties is sufficiently strong (as with constant elasticity of substitution
preferences), all varieties are traded in new trade theory models for any finite value of trade costs. For empirical
evidence on the large number of zeros in bilateral trade flows, see Schott (2004) and Helpman, Melitz and
Rubinstein (2007).


                                                         9
in 2000 (first column, top panel), though these exports represent just 3.3 percent of aggregate
export value (first column, middle panel). By contrast, firms exporting to five or more
destinations account for just 13.7 percent of exporters (fifth column, top panel), but 92.9
percent of export value (fifth column, middle panel). In recent work, Eaton, Kortum and
Kramarz (2006) exploit variation in the number of destination countries served by French
firms to estimate destination-specific fixed costs of exporting within a structural model of
heterogeneous firms and trade.
        Another message from Table 4 is the importance of multi-product exporters in overall
U.S. exports. In 2000, 42.2 percent of firms exported a single product abroad (first row, top
panel). Here, too, however, these exporters represented a small share of aggregate exports,
just 0.4 percent (first row, middle panel). Firms exporting five or more products accounted
for 25.9 percent of firms but 98 percent of export value (fifth row of top and middle panels,
respectively).
        These results provide support for some of the explanations for the concentration of
trade advanced above. They reveal that the very small share of firms that dominate U.S.
exports are large in part because they ship many products to many destinations. Indeed,
across exporting firms in 2000, we find a positive and statistically significant correlation
between the number of products that firms export and the number of countries they export to
(correlation coefficient of 0.81, significant at the 1 percent level).
        Neither old nor new trade theory includes consideration of these extensive margins of
firm participation in export markets. Yet adjustment along these margins explains much of
the variation in aggregate trade patterns. Furthermore, a firm’s decision of the number of
export destinations to serve and the number of products to export is systematically correlated
with the characteristics of the firm, so that firm heterogeneity is again important for
understanding aggregate trade outcomes. From Table 4, we see that firms that export to five
or more destinations have employment levels five times larger than firms that export to a
single destination (69.2 divided by 14.2 in the third panel), have export values that are 30
times greater (92.9 divided by 3.3 in the second panel), and hence have exports per worker
that are around six times greater.

        Multi-Product Firms and Exporting
        One implication of Table 4 is that, when firms export, they typically export multiple
products. Thus, in the year 2000, firms that export more than one ten-digit Harmonized
System (HS) product comprise 58 percent of exporting firms and account for more than 99
percent of export value. Since firm output equals the number of products (the extensive
margin) times average output per product (the intensive margin), the differences in size
between exporters and non-exporters noted earlier can be broken down into these two
margins.
        The first column of Table 5 reports the results of two regressions using the 1997
Census of Manufactures. As in Table 3 earlier, the dependent variables are listed in the left-
hand column. These variables are the number of five-digit SIC products that firms produced
and total firm shipments divided by the number of products produced. The explanatory
variable is a dummy variable indicating whether the firm is an exporter. Since the dependent
variables are measured in logs, the coefficient on the explanatory variable can be interpreted
as a percentage difference between exporter and non-exporters. Thus, manufacturing firms
that export in 1997 produce 23 percent more five-digit SIC products and ship 125 percent
more per product.
        The second column of Table 5 adds industry fixed effects to the explanatory variables.
Manufacturing firms that export now produce an average of 27 percent more products than



                                              10
non-exporters in the same industry, while their average shipments per product are more than
73 percent larger.
        Existing trade theories yield few clear predictions for the determinants of how many
products a firm will produce and export. In standard old trade theory models, which are based
on the assumptions of constant returns to scale and perfect competition, firm boundaries and
number of products are indeterminate. New trade theories typically assume that firms
produce only a single, horizontally differentiated variety. Similarly, most models of
heterogeneous firms and trade assume that each firm produces a single variety.
        More recently, theoretical research has begun to explore models in which
heterogeneous firms produce multi-products. These models find that trade liberalization
induces endogenous changes in firm scope; for example, leading firms to drop marginal
products to focus on their “core competencies.”9
        As noted earlier, empirical studies of trade liberalization demonstrate the importance
of firm entry and exit in spurring a reallocation of economic resources across firms as trade
barriers fall. However, because surviving firms can enter and exit individual product markets,
this focus on the creation and destruction of firms may understate the true extent of
reallocation following trade liberalization.
        Evidence supporting the significance of within-firm reallocation in driving aggregate
output growth is provided by Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006a), who find that net product
adding and dropping by surviving firms accounts for roughly one-third of aggregate U.S.
manufacturing growth between 1972 and 1997, a contribution that dwarfs that of firm entry
and exit. Together with the positive correlations observed between the number of products
firms export, exports per product and total exports of the firm, these findings suggest that
more attention should be paid to the interaction of international trade and firm scope.

        Gravity Reconsidered
        The “gravity equation” for bilateral trade flows is one of the most successful
empirical relationships in international economics. Early research on the gravity equation
supposed that the aggregate value of trade between a pair of countries was proportional to the
product of their incomes and inversely related to the distance between them. Subsequent
research has considered a wide range of other variables that may influence bilateral trade and
developed micro-foundations. The micro-founded formulations of the gravity equation
control not only for bilateral frictions between trade partners but also multilateral frictions
with all trade partners.
        Despite this extensive body of research, empirical and theoretical work with a gravity
equation typically concentrates on the aggregate value of trade and ignores the roles of firms
and products. In this section, we use a basic gravity equation to examine whether the effect of
distance on bilateral trade operates through the extensive margin (the number of firms and the
number of products) or the intensive firm (value per product per firm).
        We decompose the aggregate value of U.S. exports to a particular destination into
three factors: the contribution of the number of firms exporting to the destination; the number
of products exported to the destination; and the average value of exports per product per firm.
This last term, the average value of exports per product per firm, will depend on both the
prices charged for the products and the quantities shipped.
To examine whether the effect of distance on bilateral trade flows operates through firm
participation, the number of products exported or the average value of a product exported by


9
 In a series of recent working papers, Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006b), Eckel and Neary (2006) and
Nocke and Yeaple (2006) provide theoretical analyses of multiple-product trading firms.


                                                    11
a firm, we estimate gravity equations for the aggregate value of exports and each of these
three components.
        In gravity equations, it is typical to have data on many different pairs of trading
partners and include both exporter and importer income in the regression. But since our data
are for a single exporting country (the United States), exporter income is captured in the
regression constant and only importer income is included in the regression. Thus, our
explanatory variables in these regressions are a constant term, the log of the distance from the
U.S. to the destination and the log of the importer’s GDP, along with an error term. Our
dependent variables are the log of the aggregate value of exports and the log of each of its
three components: the number of firms exporting to a destination, the number of products
exported to that destination, and average exports per product per firm. Estimation is by
ordinary least squares.
        Table 6 reports the results. Since the dependent and explanatory variables are in
logarithms, the estimated coefficients correspond to elasticities. Aggregate exports are the
dependent variable in the first column, and the coefficients confirm that that trade is
increasing in destination GDP and sharply decreasing in distance. The next three columns
provide estimates for the extensive and intensive margins of adjustment. Since the three
remaining columns combine to make up aggregate exports, by the properties of ordinary least
squares, the sums of the coefficients across the three components equal those for the
aggregate value of exports.
        Both the number of exporting firms and the number of exported products are sharply
decreasing in the distance to the destination country and increasing in importer income. In
contrast, the average export value is increasing in distance and decreasing in importer
income. The elasticities on the two extensive margins – number of firms and number of
products – are larger in absolute value than for the intensive margin of average export value,
particularly for the coefficient on importer income.10
        This pattern of estimated coefficients contrasts starkly with the predictions of new
trade theories. In these models, consumer love of variety implies that all varieties are traded
in equilibrium, and so as trade costs increase with distance, all of the adjustment in the
aggregate value of trade occurs through the intensive margin. Recent theories of
heterogeneous firms and trade, on the other hand, do provide a theoretical rationale for the
relationship between firm export participation and distance: as trade costs increase with
distance, lower-productivity firms no longer find it profitable to serve export markets. These
theories also explain the relationship between firm export participation and income: as the
size of the foreign market increases, firms of lower productivity find it profitable to incur the
fixed costs of exporting. However, as noted above, these theories yield few predictions for
the number of products exported per firm due to the embedded assumption that firms produce
only a single differentiated variety.
        Our findings suggest that aggregate trade relationships are heavily influenced by
extensive-margin adjustments both in terms of the number of destinations and the number of
exported products. The finding that the intensive margin – the average value of exports per
product per firm – is increasing in distance and decreasing in importer income is at first sight
puzzling. One potential explanation involves the idea that costs of exporting depend on
quantity or weight rather than value (for example, the costs of exporting depend on the
number of bottles of wine rather than the quality of their contents). In this case, increases in
distance or reductions in importer income may lead to a change in the composition of exports
towards higher-value commodities, for which it is profitable to incur the fixed and variable

10
  Hummels and Hillberry (2005), using data on commodity shipments across localities within the United States,
also find that the extensive margin accounts for much of the impact of distance on trade.


                                                     12
trade costs of servicing the remote and small foreign market. The differences in value-to-
weight ratio across commodities may in turn be explained by differences in their quality, an
idea to which we will return below. If the change in composition towards higher-value
commodities is sufficiently large, the average value of exports per product per firm may be
increasing in distance and decreasing in importer income.11

        Importing and Exporting
        The empirical literature on firms in international trade has been concerned almost
exclusively with exporting, largely due to limitations in datasets based on censuses of
domestic production or manufacturing. As a result, the new theories of heterogeneous firms
and trade were developed to explain facts about firm export behavior and yield few
predictions (if any) for firm import behavior. In most models, consumers purchase imports
directly from foreign firms and no intermediate inputs exist – that is, firms themselves do not
import.
        With the development of transactions-level trade data, information on direct firm
imports is now available.12 The data on firm imports display many of the same features as
those on firm exports. As summarized in Table 7, firm importing is relatively rarer than firm
exporting, though it also varies systematically across industries. Looking across industries,
there is a strong correlation (0.87) between industries with high shares of importing firms and
those with high shares of exporters. Forty-one percent of exporting firms also import while
79 percent of importers also export. We also find that the share of export-only firms is
positively and significantly correlated with industry skill intensity, while the share of import-
only firms is negatively but not significantly correlated with industry skill intensity.
        In Table 8 we compare the characteristics of exporting and importing firms. The firm
characteristics data are from the Census of Manufactures, the identification of exporting and
importing comes from the customs-documents-based LFTTD. Again, we use illustrative
regressions. The variables listed on the left are the dependent variables in these regressions.
In the first column, the regression includes a dummy variable for whether the firm is an
exporter or not, along with variables controlling for industry fixed effects and for size of
employment. (Of course, the first row omits the size of employment control variable.) The
second column carries out a parallel set of regressions, except that in this case a dummy
variable for whether the firm is an importer replaces the exporter variable. The final column
instead includes a dummy variable for firms that are both exporters and importers.
        Firms that are exporters share a variety of positive attributes with firms that are
importers. They are both bigger, more productive, pay higher wages and are more skill- and
capital-intensive than non-exporters and non-importers. Again, these results suggest that firm
characteristics are systematically related to participation in international trade, whether
importing and exporting. Reductions in trade costs are likely to benefit the largest, most
productive, most skill- and capital-intensive firms in any given sector, both because they
export and because they import.
        One possible explanation for the presence of importing in all manufacturing
industries, for the correlation between importing and exporting, and hence for the similarity
of importer and exporter premia, is the “international fragmentation of production,” where
stages of production are spread across national boundaries. This practice is also referred as
“offshoring” or “slicing the value-added chain.” If some stages of production are undertaken
abroad, while others occur at home, firms will both import and export, since components and

11
   These ideas relate to the so-called “Alchian-Allen hypothesis” that goods exported are on average of higher
quality than those sold domestically (Hummels and Skiba, 2004).
12
   Firms may also import indirectly by purchasing inputs that have been imported by domestic wholesalers.
Indirect importing is not observed in the LFTTD.


                                                       13
final products are shipped between countries. Moreover, as a firm's volume of production
increases, the level of activity at each stage of production rises, giving rise to a positive
correlation between firm imports and exports.13
        In the same way that the aggregate value of exports to a destination can be
decomposed into the number of firms, the number of products and average exports per
product per firm, the aggregate value of imports from a source can be similarly decomposed.
We assess the importance of the extensive margins of the number firms and number of
products for understanding variation in aggregate imports by estimating gravity equation
regressions for aggregate imports and each of its components, as reported in Table 9.
Following the pattern established earlier in Table 6, the first column uses aggregate imports
as the dependent variable, while the explanatory variables include a constant term, the log
GDP of the source country and the log distance to the source country. The remaining three
columns break down aggregate imports into its three components, and run separate
regressions for each.
        As with exports, the aggregate value of imports is decreasing in distance and
increasing in source country income. Similarly, the extensive margins of the number of firms
and number of products again dominate the intensive margin of average value per product per
firm, with the difference particularly apparent for source country income. While the number
of firms and the number of products are decreasing in distance and increasing in source
country income, the average value per product per firm is again increasing in distance
(though the coefficient is not statistically significant for imports) and decreasing in source
country income, again suggesting the potential importance of product quality considerations.
One notable feature of the results is that the magnitude of the coefficients on distance is quite
different for imports and exports.

        Vertical Differentiation
        Much of the research on new and heterogeneous-firm theories of international trade
has emphasized the horizontal differentiation of varieties. But analysis of U.S. imports
reveals that a substantial number of import products originate in countries with very
dissimilar relative endowments. This fact holds for narrowly-defined products, such as those
of the ten-digit Harmonized System (HS) classification, of which there are roughly 10,000
categories (for example, men's cotton shirts).
        This fact is at first sight consistent with the idea that countries export unique
horizontal varieties. However, the data also show that prices within product categories vary
substantially and systematically across countries, with imports from capital- and skill-
abundant countries generally commanding much higher prices than imports from labor-
abundant countries (for example, Schott, 2004; Hummels and Klenow, 2005; Hallak, 2006;
Hallak and Schott, 2006). For example, Schott (2004) finds that across all U.S.
manufacturing imports in 1994, the median ratio of high to low unit values was 24. This price
variation suggests the importance of vertical differentiation, with higher prices reflecting in
part higher product quality.
        The relationship between export prices and exporter relative endowments echoes a
key implication of old trade theory, albeit one working at a much more disaggregate level
within narrow products rather than across broad industries. These findings are consistent with
the idea that developed countries use their endowment advantage to produce high unit-value,
high-quality varieties even within narrow product categories.


13
  For further discussion of the decision whether to offshore stages of production, see the literature on
contracting and the boundaries of the firm reviewed in Helpman (2006).


                                                        14
        Product quality was first emphasized in international trade by Linder (1961), who
argued that wealthy countries have both a higher taste for quality and, given their firms’
proximity to relatively wealthy customers, a comparative advantage in producing it. Product
quality is also central to theories of product cycles following Vernon (1966), where the most
advanced products are produced by developed economies until they are successfully copied
and taken over by developing economies, where production costs are lower. Recent empirical
research using firm-level data suggests that countries' movement through product cycles may
take place within continuing firms. Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006b), for example, find
that U.S. manufacturing plants in industries with relatively high exposure to low-wage
country imports systematically switch into industries facing less exposure. They also show
that plants’ survival within industries is associated positively with plants’ capital intensity.
These results suggest that U.S. manufacturing firms escape competition with low-wage
countries by upgrading their mix of products to one that is more consistent with U.S.
comparative advantage.

Conclusions and Future Prospects

        Research in both theoretical and empirical international trade increasingly focuses on
firms and products in addition to their traditional focus on countries and industries. This shift
in emphasis is driven by a wealth of evidence indicating that firms that trade differ
substantially from those that do not, and that these differences have important consequences
for evaluating the gains from trade and their distribution across factors of production. Some
of these consequences complement traditional insights; others are new. Though the most
recent theories of international trade have made substantial progress in explaining patterns of
trade and productivity growth by incorporating the behavior of heterogeneous firms, much
remains unexplained.
        Relatively little theoretical research examines how firms determine the range of
products they will export and import or the breadth of countries they will export to or import
from – or how any of these margins are influenced by globalization. Yet these margins of
trade appear to be central to understanding the role of distance in dampening aggregate trade
flows and the empirical success of the gravity equation. Further progress in this area is will
likely require explicit consideration of the boundaries of the firm, including the decisions
about whether to insource or outsource stages of production, and whether such insourcing or
outsourcing takes place within or across national boundaries. Specialization and reallocation
within the firm may turn out to play an important role in enhancing productivity and realizing
welfare gains from trade. As the conversation between empirical and theoretical research
progresses, our understanding of the micro-foundations of international trade will no doubt
deepen.




                                               15
References

Alvarez, Roberto, and Ricardo A. López, (2005) "Exporting and Performance: Evidence from
Chilean Plants", Canadian Journal of Economics, 38(4), 1384-1400.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1995) "Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US
Manufacturing: 1976-87", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 67-
112.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1999) "Exceptional Exporter Performance:
Cause, Effect, or Both?", Journal of International Economics, 47(1), 1-25.

Bernard, Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen, (2007) "Firm Structure, Multinationals, and
Manufacturing Plant Deaths", Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 1-11.

Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel S. Kortum, (2003)
"Plants and Productivity in International Trade", American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268-
1290.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott, (forthcoming) "Importers,
Exporters and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods", in T. Dunne,
J.B. Jensen and M.J. Roberts (eds.), Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data
(University of Chicago Press, forthcoming)

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott, (2006a) "Trade Costs, Firms
and Productivity", Journal of Monetary Economics 53(5).

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott, (2006b) "Survival of the Best
Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing
Plants", Journal of International Economics 68, 219-237.

Bernard, Andrew B., Redding, Stephen J and Peter K. Schott (2006a) "Multi-product Firms
and Product Switching", NBER Working Paper, #12293.

Bernard, Andrew B., Redding, Stephen J and Peter K. Schott (2006b) "Multi-product Firms
and Trade Liberalization", NBER Working Paper, 12782.

Bernard, Andrew B., Redding, Stephen J. and Peter K. Schott (2007) "Comparative
Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms", Review of Economic Studies, 74, 31-66.

Caves, D., Christensen, L. and Diewert, E. (1982) "The Economic Theory of Index Numbers
and the Measurement of Input, Output and Productivity", Econometrica, 50, 6, 1393-1414.

Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach, and James Tybout, (1998) "Is Learning by Exporting
Important? Micro-dynamic Evidence from Columbia, Mexico and Morocco", Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113, 903-47.

Das, Sanghamitra, Mark Roberts and James Tybout (2006) "Market Entry Costs, Producer
Heterogeneity and Export Dynamics", Econometrica, forthcoming.



                                             16
Eaton, Jonathan and Kortum, Samuel (2002) "Technology, Geography, and Trade,"
Econometrica, 70(5), 1741-1779.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz (2006) "An Anatomy of International
Trade: Evidence from French Firms", University of Minnesota, mimeograph.

Eckel, Carsten and Neary, Peter (2006) "Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in
the Global Economy", CEPR Discussion Paper, 5941.

Ethier, William J., (1982), ’National and International Returns to Scale in the Modem Theory
of International Trade,’ American Economic Review, 72,389-405.

Grubel, Herbert G. and Peter J. Lloyd (1975) Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and
Measurement of International Trade in Differentiated Products, London.

Hallak, Juan Carlos (2006) "Product Quality and the Direction of Trade", Journal of
International Economics, 68 (1), 238-265.

Hallak, Juan Carlos and Peter K. Schott (2006) "Estimating Cross-Country Differences in
Product Quality", Yale University, mimeograph.

Helpman, Elhanan, (1981) "International Trade in the Presence of Product Differentiation,
Economies of Scale, and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin-Heckscher-Ohlin model,"
Journal of International Economics, 11, 305-340.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman, (1985) Market Structure and Foreign Trade:
Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition and the International Economy, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Helpman, Elhanan (1999) "The Structure of Foreign Trade", Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 13(2), 121-44.

Helpman, Elhanan (2006) "Trade, FDI and the Organization of Firms", Journal of Economic
Literature, XLIV, 589-630.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Yona Rubinstein (2007) "Estimating Trade Flows:
Trading Partners and Trading Volumes", Harvard University, mimeograph.

Hummels, David and Hillberry, Russell (2005) "Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: A
Decomposition Using Micro-Data", NBER Working Paper, #11339.

Hummels, David and Peter Klenow (2005) "The Variety and Quality of a Nation's Exports",
American Economic Review, 95, 704-723.

Hummels, David and Skiba, Alexander (2004) "Shipping the Good Apples Out: An
Empirical Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture," Journal of Political Economy, 112,
1384-1402.

Krugman, Paul (1980) "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade",
American Economic Review, 70, 950-59.


                                             17
Linder, Staffan Burenstam (1961) An Essay on Trade and Transformation, New York: Wiley
& Sons.

Melitz, M. (2003) "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity", Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725.

Melitz, M and Ottaviano, G (2005) "Market Size, Trade, and Productivity," NBER Working
Paper, #11393.

Nocke, Volker and Yeaple, Stephen (2006) "Globalization and Endogenous Firm Scope”,
NBER Working Paper, 12322.

Pavcnik, Nina (2002) "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence
from Chilean Plants", Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245-76.

Roberts, Mark J. and James Tybout, (1997) "The Decision to Export in Colombia: An
Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs", American Economic Review, 87(4), 545-64.

Schott, Peter K. (2004) "Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in
International Trade", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 647-678.

Trefler, D. (1995) "The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries," American
Economic Review , 85(5), 1029-46.

Trefler, Daniel (2004) "The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement",
American Economic Review, 94, 870-895.

Tybout, J (2003) "Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on the `New' Trade Theories", Chapter 13,
in (eds) E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, Handbook of International Trade, Basil
Blackwell: Oxford.

Van Biesebroeck, Johannes (2005) "Exporting Raises Productivity in Sub-Saharan African
Manufacturing Firms", Journal of International Economics, 67 (2), 373-391.

Vernon, Raymond (1966) "International Investment and International Trade in the Product
Cycle", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, 190-207.




                                            18
Table 1: Trade Theories and Their Ability to Explain Stylized Facts about Trade
                                                                                         Theory
                                                                                                                              "Integrated"
                                              "Old" Trade        "New" Trade                            Heterogeneous        Heterogeneous
                                                Theory             Theory         Integrated Model          Firms                 Firms

                                             Ricardo (1817),                                              Melitz (2003),
                                                                                    Helpman and                              Bernard, Redding
Stylized Facts                              Heckscher (1919),   Krugman (1980)                            Bernard et al.
                                                                                   Krugman (1985)                            and Schott (2007)
                                              Ohlin (1933)                                                   (2003)

Trade

Inter-industry Trade                              Yes                 No                  Yes                  No                   Yes



Intra-industry Trade                               No                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes


Exporters and non-exporters within
                                                   No                 No                  No                   Yes                  Yes
industries

Trade and Productivity

Exporters are more productive than
                                                   No                 No                  No                   Yes                  Yes
non-exporters within industries


Trade liberalization raises industry
                                                   No                 No                  No                   Yes                  Yes
productivity through reallocation

Trade and Labor Markets

Net changes in employment across
                                                  Yes                 No                  Yes                  No                   Yes
industries following trade liberalization

Simultaneous gross job creation and
destruction within industries following            No                 No                  No                   Yes                  Yes
trade liberalization

Trade liberalization affects relative
                                                  Yes                 No                  Yes                  No                   Yes
factor rewards (income distribution)

Notes: inter-industry trade occurs when a country exports in one set of industries and imports in another set of industries; intra-industry
trade occurs when there is two-way exporting and importing within the same industry.




                                                                      19
Table 2: Exporting By U.S. Manufacturing Firms, 2002
                                                                            Mean Exports
                                                            Percent of     as a Percent of
                                           Percent of       Firms that          Total
NAICS Industry                                Firms           Export          Shipments
311 Food Manufacturing                         6.8              12                15
312 Beverage and Tobacco Product               0.7              23                 7
313 Textile Mills                              1.0              25                13
314 Textile Product Mills                      1.9              12                12
315 Apparel Manufacturing                      3.2               8                14
316 Leather and Allied Product                 0.4              24                13
321 Wood Product Manufacturing                 5.5               8                19
322 Paper Manufacturing                        1.4              24                 9
323 Printing and Related Support              11.9               5                14
324 Petroleum and Coal Products                0.4              18                12
325 Chemical Manufacturing                     3.1              36                14
326 Plastics and Rubber Products               4.4              28                10
327 Nonmetallic Mineral Product                4.0               9                12
331 Primary Metal Manufacturing                1.5              30                10
332 Fabricated Metal Product                  19.9              14                12
333 Machinery Manufacturing                    9.0              33                16
334 Computer and Electronic Product            4.5              38                21
335 Electrical Equipment, Appliance,           1.7              38                13
336 Transportation Equipment                   3.4              28                13
337 Furniture and Related Product              6.4               7                10
339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing                9.1               2                15
Aggregate Manufacturing                        100              18                14
Notes: Data are from the 2002 U.S. Census of Manufactures. Column 2 summarizes the
distribution of manufacturing firms across three-digit NAICS manufacturing industries.
Column 3 reports the share of firms in each industry that export. The final column reports
mean exports as a percent of total shipments across all firms that export in the noted
industry.




                                                20
Table 3: Exporter Premia in U.S. Manufacturing, 2002
                                                      Exporter Premia
                                         (1)                (2)                (3)
Log Employment                          1.19               0.97                 .
Log Shipments                           1.48               1.08               0.08
Log Value Added per Worker              0.26               0.11               0.10
Log TFP                                 0.02               0.03               0.05
Log Wage                                0.17               0.06               0.06
Log Capital per Worker                  0.32               0.12               0.04
Log Skill per Worker                    0.19               0.11                   0.19
                                                                            Industry Fixed
                                                        Industry Fixed
Additional Covariates                   None                                  Effects, Log
                                                            Effects
                                                                             Employment
Notes: Notes: Data are for 2002 and are from the U.S. Census of Manufactures. All
results are from bivariate OLS regressions of firm characteristic in first column on a
dummy variable indicating firm's export status. Columns two and three include industry
fixed effects and industry fixed effects plus log firm employment, respectively, as
additional controls. Total factor productivity (TFP) is computed as in Caves et al (1982).
Capital and skill per worker are capital stock and non-production workers per total
employment, respectively. All results are significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                 21
Table 4
Distribution of Exporters and Export Value by Number of Products and Export
Destinations, 2000
               Share of Exporting Firms
 Number of               Number of Countries
  Products     1        2     3      4      5+     All
     1       40.4      1.2   0.3    0.1    0.2    42.2
     2       10.4      4.7   0.8    0.3    0.4    16.4
     3        4.7      2.3   1.3    0.4    0.5     9.3
     4        2.5      1.3   1.0    0.6    0.7     6.2
     5+       6.0      3.0   2.7    2.3    11.9   25.9
     All     64.0     12.6   6.1    3.6    13.7    100


                   Share of Export Value
 Number of               Number of Countries
  Products     1        2     3      4      5+     All
     1       0.20     0.06   0.02   0.02   0.07    0.4
     2       0.19     0.12   0.04   0.03   0.15    0.5
     3       0.19     0.07   0.05   0.03   0.19    0.5
     4       0.12     0.08   0.08   0.04   0.27    0.6
     5+      2.63     1.23   1.02   0.89   92.2   98.0
     All      3.3      1.5   1.2    1.0    92.9    100


                    Share of Employment
 Number of               Number of Countries
  Products     1        2     3      4      5+     All
     1        7.0      0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0     7.1
     2        1.9      2.6   0.1    0.0    0.0     4.6
     3        1.3      1.0   0.8    0.0    0.2     3.3
     4        0.5      0.4   0.3    0.2    0.2     1.6
     5+       3.5      2.6   4.3    4.1    68.8   83.3
     All       14.2    6.7    5.5   4.3    69.2 100
 Notes: Data are from the 2000 LFTTD. Table displays
 the joint distribution of U.S. manufacturing firms that
 export (top panel), their export value (middle panel)
 and their employment (bottom panel), according to the
 number of products firms export (rows) and their
 number of export destinations (columns). Products are
 defined as ten-digit Harmonized System categories.




                                                  22
Table 5
The Intensive and Extensive Margins of Exporters, 2002

                                            Exporter Premia
                                          (1)                (2)
 Log Number of Products                  0.23               0.27
 Log Mean Shipments/Product              1.25               0.73
                                                      Industry Fixed
 Additional Covariates                  None
                                                          Effects
 Notes: Notes: Data are for 1997 and are from the U.S. Census of
 Manufactures. All results are from bivariate OLS regressions of firm
 characteristic in first column on a dummy variable indicating firm's
 export status. Column two includes four-digit SIC industry fixed
 effects. First dependent variable is the number of five-digit SIC
 products produced by the firm in 1997. Second dependent variable is
 total firm shipments divided by the number of products. All results are
 significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                  23
Table 6: Gravity and Aggregate U.S. Exports, 2000
                                                          Number of       Export Value
                     Total Export      Number of          Exported       per Product per
                        Value        Exporting Firms       Products            Firm
 GDPct                  0.98 ***          0.71 ***           0.52 ***         -0.25 ***
                        0.04              0.04               0.03              0.04
 Distancect             -1.36 ***         -1.14 ***         -1.06 ***          0.84 ***
                         0.17              0.16              0.15              0.19
 Observations             175              175               175               175
  2
 R                      0.82              0.74              0.64               0.25
 Notes: Data are from the 2000 LFFTD. Each column reports the results of a country-
 level OLS regression of dependent variable noted at the top of each column on the
 covariates noted in the first column. Results for constant are suppressed. Standard
 errors are noted below each coefficient. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance
 at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. Products are defined as ten-digit
 Harmonized System categories.




                                                  24
Table 7
Exporting and Importing by U.S. Manufacturing Firms, 1997



                                                             Percent of        Percent of       Percent of
                                           Percent of All    Firms that        Firms that       Firms that
NAICS Industry                                Firms             Export           Import       Import & Export
311 Food Manufacturing                           7                17                10               7
312 Beverage and Tobacco Product                 1                28                19              13
313 Textile Mills                                1                47                31              24
314 Textile Product Mills                        2                19                13               9
315 Apparel Manufacturing                        6                16                15               9
316 Leather and Allied Product                   0                43                43              30
321 Wood Product Manufacturing                   5                15                 5               3
322 Paper Manufacturing                          1                42                18              15
323 Printing and Related Support                 13               10                 3               2
324 Petroleum and Coal Products                  0                32                17              14
325 Chemical Manufacturing                       3                56                30              26
326 Plastics and Rubber Products                 5                42                20              16
327 Nonmetallic Mineral Product                  4                16                11               7
331 Primary Metal Manufacturing                  1                51                23              21
332 Fabricated Metal Product                     20               21                 8               6
333 Machinery Manufacturing                      9                47                22              19
334 Computer and Electronic Product              4                65                40              37
335 Electrical Equipment, Appliance,             2                58                35              30
336 Transportation Equipment                     3                40                22              18
337 Furniture and Related Product                6                13                 8               5
339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing                  7                31                19              15
Aggregate Manufacturing                         100               27                14              11
Notes: Data are for 1997 and are for firms that appear in both the U.S. Census of Manufacturers and the
LFTTD. Column 2 summarizes the distribution of manufacturing firms across three-digit NAICS industries.
Remaining columns report the percent of firms in each industry that export, import and do both.




                                                   25
Table 8
Trading Premia in U.S. Manufacturing, 1997

                                     Exporter                       Exporter &
                                     Premia       Importer Premia Importer Premia
Log Employment                         1.50              1.40             1.75
Log Shipments                          0.29              0.26             0.31
Log Value Added per Worker             0.23              0.23             0.25
Log TFP                                0.07              0.12             0.07
Log Wage                               0.29              0.23             0.33
Log Capital per Worker                 0.17              0.13             0.20
Log Skill per Worker                       0.04              0.06        0.03
Notes: Data are for 1997 and are for firms that appear in both the U.S. Census of
Manufacturers and the LFTTD. All results are from bivariate OLS regressions of
firm characteristic in first column on dummy variable noted at the top of each
column as well as industry fixed effects and firm employment as additional
controls. Employment regressions omit firm employment as a covariate. Total
factor productivity (TFP) is computed as in Caves et al (1982). Capital and skill per
worker are capital stock and non-production workers per total employment,
respectively. All results are significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                 26
Table 9: Gravity and Aggregate U.S. Imports, 2000
                                                          Number of       Import Value
                     Total Import      Number of           Imported      per Product per
                        Value        Importing Firms       Products            Firm
 GDPct                  1.14 ***          0.82 ***           0.71 ***         -0.39 ***
                        0.06              0.03               0.03              0.05
 Distancect             -0.73 ***         -0.43 ***         -0.61 ***          0.31
                         0.27              0.15              0.15              0.24
 Observations             175              175               175               175
  2
 R                      0.69              0.78              0.74                0.25
 Notes: Data are from the 2000 LFFTD. Each column reports the results of a country-
 level OLS regression of dependent variable noted at the top of each column on the
 covariates noted in the first column. Results for constant are suppressed. Standard
 errors are noted below each coefficient. *, ** and *** represent statistical significance
 at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. Products are defined as ten-digit
 Harmonized System categories.




                                                  27
Appendix Table A1: Exporting By U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 2002
                                                                             Mean Exports
                                                             Percent of     as a Percent of
                                            Percent of       Plants that         Total
NAICS Industry                                Plants           Export         Shipments
311 Food Manufacturing                          7.5              15               15
312 Beverage and Tobacco Product                0.8              21                9
313 Textile Mills                               1.1              27               14
314 Textile Product Mills                       1.7              14               11
315 Apparel Manufacturing                       2.7               8               14
316 Leather and Allied Product                  0.3              24               15
321 Wood Product Manufacturing                  5.2              10               17
322 Paper Manufacturing                         2.1              28                9
323 Printing and Related Support               10.1               6               13
324 Petroleum and Coal Products                 1.0              12               13
325 Chemical Manufacturing                      4.5              35               16
326 Plastics and Rubber Products                5.3              30               11
327 Nonmetallic Mineral Product                 5.8               9               13
331 Primary Metal Manufacturing                 1.8              33               11
332 Fabricated Metal Product                   17.8              16               12
333 Machinery Manufacturing                     8.7              36               16
334 Computer and Electronic Product             4.6              40               23
335 Electrical Equipment, Appliance,            1.9              41               13
336 Transportation Equipment                    3.8              34               14
337 Furniture and Related Product               5.4               8                9
339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing                 7.8              19               15
Aggregate Manufacturing                        100               20               15
Notes: Data are from the 2002 U.S. Census of Manufactures. Column 2 summarizes the
distribution of manufacturing plants across three-digit NAICS manufacturing industries.
Column 3 reports the share of plants in each industry that export. The final column reports
mean exports as a percent of total shipments across all plants that export in the noted
industry.




                                                28
Appendix Table A2: Plant-Level Exporter Premia in US Manufacturing, 2002
                                                      Exporter Premia
                                         (1)                (2)                (3)
Log Employment                          1.20               0.91                 .
Log Shipments                           1.53               1.05               0.11
Log Value Added per Worker              0.28               0.14               0.13
Log TFP                                 0.02               0.03               0.04
Log Wage                                0.18               0.07               0.06
Log Capital per Worker                  0.41               0.20               0.13
Log Skill per Worker                    0.13               0.08                   0.17
                                                                            Industry Fixed
                                                        Industry Fixed
Additional Covariates                   None                                  Effects, Log
                                                            Effects
                                                                             Employment
Notes: Notes: Data are for 2002 and are from the U.S. Census of Manufactures. All
results are from bivariate OLS regressions of plant characteristic in first column on a
dummy variable indicating plant's export status. Columns two and three include industry
fixed effects and industry fixed effects plus log plant employment, respectively, as
additional controls. Total factor productivity (TFP) is computed as in Caves et al (1982).
Capital and skill per worker are capital stock and non-production workers per total
employment, respectively. All results are significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                 29
