NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGING PROGRESSIVITY AS A MEANS OF RISK PROTECTION IN INVESTMENT-BASED
SOCIAL SECURITY
Andrew A. Samwick
Working Paper 13059
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13059

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007

I thank Mike Hurd and conference participants at the NBER Program on Aging's 2006 Conference
on Retirement Research for helpful comments. This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security
Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1-03 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as
part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely
those of the author and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government,
or the NBER. Any errors are my own.
© 2007 by Andrew A. Samwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Changing Progressivity as a Means of Risk Protection in Investment-Based Social Security
Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 13059
April 2007
JEL No. D31,H55,J26
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes changes in the progressivity of the Social Security benefit formula as a means
of lessening the risk inherent in investment-based Social Security reform. Focusing on a single cohort
of workers, it simulates the distribution of benefits subject to both earnings and financial risks in a
reformed system in which solvency has been restored and traditional benefits have been augmented
by personal retirement accounts (PRAs). The simulations show that some investment in equities is
desirable in all cases. However, switching from the current benefit formula to the maximally progressive
formula -- a flat benefit independent of earnings -- improves the welfare of the the bottom 30 percent
of the earnings distribution even if they reduce their PRA investments in equity to zero. An additional
30 percent of earners can lessen their equity investments without loss of welfare under the maximally
progressive formula. Intermediate approaches in which traditional benefit replacement rates for lower
earnings are reduced by less than those for higher earnings allow about half of the equity risk to be
eliminated for the lowest earnings decile. Sensitivity tests show that these patterns are robust to different
assumptions about risk aversion, the equity premium, and the size of the personal retirement accounts
established by the reform.
Andrew A. Samwick
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
andrew.samwick@dartmouth.edu

I. Introduction
Around the globe, traditional pay-as-you-go Social Security systems are facing
financial challenges due to demographic changes. With fertility rates at or below
replacement levels in developed countries and life expectancy in retirement projected to
continue increasing, the ratio of beneficiaries to workers will rise over the coming
decades, increasing annual costs relative to income. The imminent retirement of the
Baby Boom generation in many developed countries has focused attention on the need
for reform.1
Over the past decade and more, many analysts have proposed that at least some of
the financial shortfalls be eliminated through the prefunding of future benefits, in order to
ameliorate the increase in pay-as-you-go tax rates on future generations of workers that
would otherwise be required.2 Prefunding can more readily take place in a system of
decentralized Personal Retirement Accounts (PRAs) than in the Social Security Trust
Fund, particularly when it is desired to exploit the risk-return tradeoff inherent in the
equity premium and to separate the incremental saving due to higher Social Security
taxes from the rest of the federal government’s budget.3
The possibility that Social Security benefits paid from personal accounts would be
subject to financial risk due to stock return volatility, in turn, has focused attention on
ways limit the risk in investment-based Social Security reform. Financial risk is of
particular concern with respect to low-income beneficiaries, for whom Social Security
1

The Social Security Trustees Report 2006 projects an increase in the number of beneficiaries per hundred
workers from 30 in 2005 to 49 in 2040 to 53 in 2080 (Table IV.B2). For an international description of the
demographic challenge, see World Bank (1994).
2
The Office of the Chief Actuary at the Social Security Administration has formally analyzed over two
dozen proposals. See the memoranda at http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/solvency/ .
3
See Samwick (1999, 2004) for further discussion of the role of PRAs in prefunding future entitlement
benefits.

benefits make up a disproportionate share of their retirement income. Two principal
methods of limiting financial risk have been explored in the recent literature. The first is
to offer a guarantee to workers that benefits will not fall below a particular threshold
(e.g., 90 percent of scheduled benefits). Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001a,b) demonstrate
that such guarantees can be implemented via long-term options on a stock market index
in a manner similar to conventional portfolio insurance. The second method is to follow
popular financial planning strategies that reduce the portfolio allocation in equities as a
worker approaches retirement. Poterba, Rauh, Venti, and Wise (2006) explore the
efficacy of using such “life cycle” strategies in this context.
These two mechanisms share the feature that they introduce bonds (preferably as
inflation-indexed securities) into the portfolio in order to lessen the exposure to equity
risk. However, in doing so, these mechanisms give up the equity premium and thus lose
one very important rationale for including PRAs in the reform. In contrast, the analysis
below considers an alternative approach based on modifications to the traditional benefit
to protect low-earning workers while leaving all workers free to choose their own PRA
portfolios. Such an approach may prove to be useful, particularly because any
restrictions on the portfolio allocations in the PRAs beyond the determination of which
investment choices will be offered are likely to be untenable as the accounts become
larger and more popular.
The most direct way to make sure that low-earning workers do not fall into
poverty in old age is to increase the progressivity of the benefit formula in the scaleddown version of the traditional system that remains after reform. Doing so would lessen
the need to provide insurance against possibly low returns in the PRAs, because low-

2

income retirees would depend less on the PRAs to stay out of poverty. To be sure, there
have been discussions of progressive reductions in the traditional benefits as part of a
plan to close the financial gap while protecting low-earning workers. This paper adds to
the literature by quantifying the effect of such changes to the traditional benefit formula
on the need to invest PRAs in equity rather than bonds to achieve a given level of
welfare.
This paper illustrates the link between progressivity and risk using a stylized
framework based on simulations of earnings trajectories and portfolio returns. The
simulations are based on the projected experience of a cohort of workers corresponding
roughly to those born in 1973. To calibrate the simulations, traditional retirement
benefits are reduced by 40 percent, an amount comparable to what is projected to be
required to restore annual balance to the system in the long term.4 The simulations pair
reductions in the traditional benefits of this magnitude with PRAs funded by
contributions of 2 percent of covered earnings each year. The main comparisons are
between the utility-maximizing portfolio allocations to equities across the new
configurations of the traditional benefit that are more versus less progressive.
The key finding is that under baseline parameters, the most progressive traditional
benefit—a flat benefit independent of earnings—allows the bottom 30 percent of the
earnings distribution to achieve a higher expected utility than under the proportional
reductions to the current benefit formula even if they reduce their PRA investments in

4

In 2080, the latest year of the projections in the Social Security Trustees Report 2006 (Table IV.B1), the
annual gap is 5.38 percentage points of taxable payroll, compared to a cost rate (excluding disability
insurance benefits) of 16.27 percentage points of taxable payroll. Thus, the required reduction is
5.38/16.27 = 33 percent. However, this figure assumes that all benefits—including those of current
retirees—can be cut by this amount. The need to protect benefits already in payment would lead to a
higher cut to benefits yet to be paid.

3

equity to zero. An additional 30 percent of earners can lessen their equity investments to
some degree without loss of welfare relative to those available under the proportionally
scaled-back current formula. Under more realistic and less extreme changes to the
traditional benefit, such as that proposed by Liebman, MacGuineas, and Samwick (2005),
about half of the equity risk can be eliminated for the lowest earnings decile, and some
equity risk can be eliminated for the bottom six deciles. The optimal allocation to
equities in the PRA is not particularly sensitive to the progressivity of the reductions in
the traditional benefits—in most simulations, the share in equities increases slightly for
low earners and decreases slightly for high earners with more progressive reductions in
the traditional benefits.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II lays out the
simulation framework for both the traditional benefits and the new system of PRAs.
Section III discusses the combinations of PRA asset allocations and reductions in the
traditional benefits that will be analyzed. Section IV derives the certainty equivalent
measure of expected utility that will be used in the comparisons. Section V presents the
baseline results, and Section VI includes sensitivity tests and a comparison to life cycle
investment strategies. Section VII concludes.

II. The Simulation Framework
The model used in the analysis focuses on a cohort of workers who should expect
to have their traditional benefits reduced at some point when the Social Security system is
restored to solvency. Specifically, the analysis simulates the experience of the birth
cohort of 1973, who will reach their normal retirement age in 2040, just as the Social

4

Security trust fund is presently projected to be exhausted. Trust Fund exhaustion will
necessitate changes to the system, even if they have not been made before that time. The
analysis assumes, counterfactually, that the workers have been in the new system since
they entered the workforce.
The distribution of earnings at an initial age is assumed to be lognormal, allowing
its parameters to be estimated from the mean and median of a sample of data. Kunkel
(1996) reports the mean and quartiles of the distribution of earnings by age group for the
years 1980-1993 based on a detailed sample of Social Security records. The population
of 30 year olds in this analysis is approximated by the 25 – 34 year old cohort in
Kunkel’s data, and parameters of the lognormal are estimated for each year of Kunkel’s
sample.5 These parameters are averaged across all the sample years, and the resulting
distribution is scaled up by the growth in the average wage index in Social Security
through 2003, the last year for which an estimate of that index is currently available in
SSA (2006). To allow for the analysis of the distributional consequences of changes to
the Social Security benefit formula, the lognormal distribution is approximated by ten
workers who fall at the midpoints of the deciles of that distribution.
For each such worker, earnings evolve over the life cycle due to deterministic
changes in expected earnings and stochastic shocks to earnings around expected earnings.
The results of the analyses below are the distributions of simulated benefits, where
simulations are conducted with 5,000 independent replicates for each of the ten workers
representing the deciles of the initial distribution of earnings. The processes for the

5

The median and mean of a lognormal distribution are given by exp(µ) and exp(µ + 0.5*σ2), respectively,
where exp( ) denotes the exponential function and µ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the
underlying normal distribution. The median therefore identifies µ and the ratio identifies σ. The estimated
parameters for the group discussed in the text are {10.2056, 0.5271}.

5

growth in expected earnings are assumed to be identical for all replicates of all workers.
Expected earnings grow each year due to the growth in the national average wage,
approximated here by the average real growth rate of Social Security covered wages
during the 1952-2003 period, or 1.1 percent per year. Expected earnings also follow an
age-earnings profile, reflecting changes in individual productivity and hours worked over
the life cycle. Each worker is assumed to face the age-earnings profile for the least
educated group of workers analyzed by Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994).6
Stochastic deviations from expected earnings follow an AR(1) process with a correlation
coefficient of ρ = 0.95 and a standard deviation of 15 percent.7 Given these parameters,
annual earnings are backcasted from the initial distribution at age 30 (deterministically, at
the average rate of earnings growth) to age 21 and then forecasted to age 67.8
The Social Security benefit formula depends on the growth in the national average
wage in two places: to determine the maximum taxable earnings on which payroll taxes
are paid and to index each year of earnings for the growth of aggregate earnings during a
worker’s career. Since the framework focuses on the deciles of a single age cohort, the
growth in the national average wage is approximated by the growth rate of this cohort’s
average earnings over its career. Maximum taxable earnings subject to the payroll tax are
projected forward and backward from 2003 (age 30) using this growth rate. With these
few assumptions, it is possible to get a reasonable approximation of Social Security
benefits by applying the benefit formula to the simulated earnings profiles.
6

This profile is approximated by having real earnings grow at annual rates of 2.5 percent between ages 21
and 30, 1.7 percent between 31 and 40, 0.5 percent between 41 and 50, and -1.3 percent through age 67.
This growth is in addition to the growth in the national average wage.
7
See Topel and Ward (1992) for other, comparable estimates of the wage process.
8
Largely because the sample is constructed around a single deterministic age-earnings profile and is
assumed to be fully employed each year, it understates the cross-sectional variation in annual earnings each
year. For example, the ratio of the 75th to the 25th percentiles of the earnings distribution at age 50 (or the
age group 45-54) in the simulation is 2.59, compared to 3.30 in Kunkel’s (1996) sample.

6

In each of the policy scenarios, the traditional benefit is reduced by 40 percent in
the aggregate and is augmented by the benefits payable from a PRA. PRA contributions
are 2 or 3 percent of earnings (depending on the scenario) up to the maximum taxable
earnings level. Asset returns are based on the annual total returns in Table 2-5 of
Ibboston Associates (2006) for the years 1926 – 2005. Asset classes include large stocks,
small stocks, long-term corporate bonds, long-term government bonds, intermediate-term
government bonds, and Treasury bills. These returns are further combined in to an equity
portfolio (75 percent large stocks and 25 percent small stocks), the corporate bond
portfolio, and a government bond portfolio (one third in each of the long-term,
intermediate-term, and bills). Each age (e.g., 45) in each of the 5,000 replicates is
assigned a random year of returns (e.g., 1973) from this 80-year span. Each of the ten
workers, corresponding to the deciles of the initial distribution of earnings, therefore
receives the same sequence of return-years. Portfolio allocations are as specified for each
scenario. At retirement, PRA balances are converted to inflation-indexed annuities at a
real interest rate of 3 percent, matching the long-term bond return in the Trustees Report.9

III. Combining Personal Accounts with a Smaller Traditional Benefit
Several approaches to reducing traditional pay-as-you-go benefits are considered,
all of which reduce aggregate payouts by 40 percent (because all are designed to restore
solvency to the same degree). They differ in the extent to which they protect the benefits
of low-earners, whose total retirement incomes are more vulnerable to the financial risk

9

The annuity factor is derived from the period life table from 2002, available at
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/STATS/table4c6.html. A dollar of PRA balance translates into $1/13.15 in
annual inflation-indexed benefits. The denominator in this figure is the average of the two factors for men
(12.3) and women (14.0), respectively.

7

that may come from PRAs. At one extreme is a proportional reduction in the traditional
benefits, in which the entire benefit formula is scaled down by 40 percent. This approach
leaves the progressivity of the traditional benefit unchanged and is referred to as the
Proportional Reduction. At the other extreme, the most progressive way to reduce
traditional benefits is to pay each beneficiary the same amount, regardless of earnings. In
this case, Social Security would play a flat benefit equal to the mean benefit in the system
(scaled down by 40 percent). This method is referred to as the Uniform Benefit below.
Between these two extremes lie other possible approaches. One possibility is to
use a weighted average of the two extremes. The simulations below consider a Half and
Half benefit formula which combines the Proportional Reduction and Uniform Benefit
and then divides the total by two. Another approach is to reduce benefits progressively
based on features of the current benefit formula. For example, in the reform plan
presented by Liebman, MacGuineas, and Samwick (2005), the replacement rates are
lowered by 25 percent below the first bend point in the formula (from 90 to 67.5 percent)
and 50 percent above the first and second bend points (from 32 and 15 percent to 16 and
7.5 percent).10
In a reformed system, PRAs are added to the traditional benefits to help maintain
total retirement replacement rates. The asset allocation decision in PRAs in this
framework is simply a question of equity relative to bonds. The simulations below
consider time-invariant allocations to equity ranging from 0 to 100, effectively assuming

10

See SSA (2006) for a description of the Social Security benefit formula. See Goss and Wade (2005) for
an evaluation of the Liebman, MacGuineas, and Samwick (2005) plan. Both documents can be found at
http://www.nonpartisanssplan.com for reference.

8

annual rebalancing to meet this allocation target.11 For purposes of comparison, three
“life cycle” strategies are also simulated, in which the allocation to stocks averages 50
percent but declines linearly with age at rates of 1.0, 1.5, or 2.0 percentage points per
year.
When it evaluates Social Security reform plans, the Office of the Chief Actuary at
the Social Security Administration assigns mean returns by asset type. In recent
evaluations, such as Goss and Wade (2005), mean returns have been assumed to be 6.2
percent for equity, 3.2 percent for corporate bonds, and 2.7 for government bonds, net of
both inflation and a modest 30 basis point administrative cost. The baseline simulations
utilize these assumptions. To capture the volatility around the mean, the historical
variation in asset returns from 1926 – 2005 reported by Ibbotson Associates (2006) is
utilized. Standard deviations are 22.2 percent for equity, 9.2 percent for corporate bonds,
and 6.6 percent for government bonds. All simulations preserve these standard
deviations but change the mean returns (by the difference between the specified mean
return and the mean of the historical data), allowing for potentially lower equity
premiums going forward than what SSA’s Office of the Actuary has assumed.12

11

In reality, a worker might choose to vary the allocation to equities over time as a response to realizations
of both earnings and investment returns. The assumption of constant allocations throughout the life-cycle
greatly simplifies the analysis, in order to focus on the main tradeoff of progressivity in the benefit formula
against the need for low-earning workers to exploit the equity premium. The extension to a dynamic
programming that solves for the optimal portfolio is a subject for future work.
12
Social Security reform proposals that include PRAs often stipulate that the balance can be bequeathed.
Bequests are not modeled in this analysis, but this is not an important omission. Allowing for bequests
would simply raise the required contribution rate to the PRA to ensure that the 2 or 3 percentage points
specified in the simulations go to fund the annuities.

9

IV. Evaluating Risk in Retirement Benefits
In the main simulations, workers are assumed to have constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) utility functions, defined over total retirement benefits, b, with risk
aversion coefficient γ:
u (b ) =

b1−γ
1− γ

Expected utility for the worker representing each decile of the initial wage
distribution is calculated as the average value of u(b) across 5,000 independently drawn
replicates. It therefore encompasses the uncertainty in both portfolio returns and
earnings, while also allowing for comparisons across different deciles in the initial
earnings distribution.13 As a basis for comparison across configurations of the traditional
benefit formula and the PRA asset allocation rules, we can calculate the certainty
equivalent benefit:

bCE = [(1 − γ )E (u (b ))]

1 (1−γ )

[ ( )] (

= E b1−γ

1 1−γ )

The certainty equivalent is the retirement benefit that, if received with certainty,
would make the individual equally well off as facing the uncertain benefit distribution.
For a risk averse individual, the certainty equivalent will be less than the expected benefit
level, E(b). A higher certainty equivalent indicates a higher expected utility, and
differences in certainty equivalents correspond to risk premiums measured in dollar
terms.
13

Defining the deciles with respect to initial earnings is appropriate in the current framework in which
workers are assumed to adopt a single, time-invariant allocation to equities in their PRAs. An alternative
approach to doing distributional analysis would use a measure of average lifetime earnings to assign
workers to deciles. For example, some workers in the lowest initial earnings decile receive a number of
very positive earnings draws and wind up higher in the distribution of lifetime earnings. For comparison,
assigning workers to deciles based on their average indexed monthly earnings yields an allocation to
deciles with a correlation of 0.83 with the deciles of the initial earnings distribution.

10

By construction, the aggregate expected benefits from the traditional system are
identical across all policy scenarios, conditional on the earnings realizations. This is not
true within each decile, as some benefit formulas are designed to be more progressive
than others and thus provide differential expected benefits to different deciles. Other
differences in certainty equivalents across the policy scenarios reflect different exposure
to risk, whether through the traditional benefit formula or the PRA investment portfolio,
or different expected benefits through the PRA investment portfolio.

V. Trading off Progressivity and Risk

Figure 1 illustrates the impact of the benefit formula and the equity share of the
PRA portfolio on expected benefits. The graph shows the relationship between expected
benefits and the equity share in the PRA portfolio for the highest and lowest earnings
deciles under three different benefit formulas: Proportional Reduction, Progressive, and
Uniform Benefit. The curves for the top decile earner go in that order, and the curves for
the bottom decile go in the reverse order. The Proportional Reduction is most generous
for the top decile and least generous for the bottom decile. The Uniform Benefit is the
opposite—most generous for the bottom decile and least generous for the top decile. The
Progressive benefit reduction actually tracks the Proportional Reduction fairly closely.
The Half and Half benefit formula (not shown) would fall exactly between the
Proportional Reduction and Uniform Benefit.14 Because the risk premium on equities is
positive, expected benefits increase in all cases with the portfolio share in equities. For
14

For the bottom decile, the reductions in the average traditional benefit relative to current law are 40, 37.6,
32.2, and 24.3 percent for the Proportional, Progressive, Half and Half, and Uniform Benefit formulas,
repectively. For the top decile, the corresponding reductions are 40, 41.7, 45.6, and 51.1 percent.
Appendix Table 1 contains the mean benefits by earnings decile for each traditional benefit formula and for
2% PRAs with investments ranging from 0 to 100 percent equity, in 25-percentage-point increments.

11

workers in the bottom (top) decile, increases in the equity share in the PRA portfolio and
increases (decreases) in the progressivity of the traditional benefit formula are two
different ways to increase the expected benefit level.
Figure 2 shows the impact of benefit risk on the expected utility of portfolio
choices in the PRA. The horizontal axis shows the portfolio share of the PRAs invested
in equities, and the vertical axis shows the dollar amount of the expected benefits or
expected utility (expressed as a certainty equivalent). The highest curve shows the
expected benefits from a traditional benefit based on the current formula, reduced by 40
percent to restore solvency, combined with a PRA funded by contributions of 2 percent
of taxable payroll per year. (This is the same curve as the top curve in Figure 1.) The
graph is for the highest decile of the earnings distribution. Expected benefits increase
slightly faster than linearly with the equity share of the portfolio. With a coefficient of
relative risk aversion of 1, the certainty equivalent is increasing with the equity share in
the portfolio, though the increase occurs at a decreasing rate. The optimal equity share is
therefore 100. As the coefficients of relative risk aversion increase to 3 and 5 in the next
two curves, the optimal equity share falls to 80 percent and 60 percent, respectively.15
Figures 3 – 6 and Table 1 combine the elements of the first two figures to
compare certainty equivalents by earnings decile and equity portfolio share for each of
the four possible formulas for the traditional benefit. Figure 3 shows the results for the
lowest earnings decile in the baseline case: PRAs funded by contributions of 2 percent of
taxable payroll, a coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to 3, and real rates of return
15

The extent of risk aversion can be illustrated by considering how much an individual would pay to avoid
a specified risk. Consider a 50-50 chance of having wealth increase or decrease by 25 percent. An
individual with a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3 would pay about 9.1 percent of his wealth to
avoid this risk. An investor with log utility (a coefficient of 1) would pay only 3.2 percent, while an
investor with a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 5 would pay 13.5 percent.

12

on asset classes—equity, corporate bonds, and government bonds—having the values
assumed by Goss and Wade (2005) in the Social Security Administration’s official
scoring of reform proposals: 6.2, 3.2, and 2.7 percent, respectively.
The four curves in Figure 3 correspond to the certainty equivalents as a function
of the PRA portfolio share in equity for the Proportional Reduction, Progressive, Half
and Half, and Uniform Benefit formulas. In all cases, the highest certainty equivalent
occurs at a portfolio share of 100 percent in equities, where the curves intersect the right
vertical axis. The differing degree of progressivity across the benefit formulas means that
the formulas differ in the level of the certainty equivalents at this optimal portfolio share,
with the most progressive benefit formula having the highest certainty equivalent. With a
more progressive traditional benefit, a worker could choose to reduce the equity share—
and with it, the volatility of the PRA benefit—while still surpassing the expected utility
afforded by a less progressive benefit formula. For example, with the Uniform Benefit
and the Half and Half benefit formula, a worker could allocate none of the PRA portfolio
to equity and still have a higher certainty equivalent than with the Proportional Reduction
benefit formula and a 100 percent allocation to equity. This can be seen in Figure 3 in
the greater height of the Uniform Benefit and Half and Half curves on the left vertical
axis than the Proportional Reduction achieves on the right vertical axis. For the
Progressive formula, an equity share as low as 50 percent is enough to exceed the
certainty equivalent generated by the Proportional Reduction and its optimal 100 percent
equity share.
These comparisons are summarized in Table 1. The first panel shows the
maximum certainty equivalents for each benefit formula (in the columns) and each decile

13

of the earnings distribution (in the rows), where the maximum is chosen over equity
shares that are multiples of 5 between 0 and 100. The second panel shows, for each
earnings decile and benefit formula, the equity share that gives that maximum certainty
equivalent. Finally, the bottom panel shows, for all benefit formulas that are not the
Proportional Reduction, the lowest equity share (again, in multiples of 5), that will
surpass the maximum certainty equivalent available under the Proportional Reduction.
This panel will only have rows for earnings deciles in which this is possible. For
example, a Uniform Benefit with an equity share of zero surpasses a Proportional
Reduction with any equity share (including the maximum, at 100 percent) for the lowest
three earnings deciles.
Figure 4 shows the same relationships for the earnings decile that is fourth from
the bottom (roughly the 35th percentile). The curves are in the same order as in Figure 3,
and the maximum certainty equivalents continue to occur at portfolio allocations of 100
percent equity. However, the vertical distances between the curves have narrowed, since
benefit formulas that have the same average payout but differ in progressivity will
redistribute relatively less to the fourth decile than they do to the bottom decile. The
maximum certainty equivalent for the Proportional Reduction formula can now be
surpassed with equity allocations as low as 30 percent, 50 percent, and 75 percent for the
Uniform Benefit, Half and Half, and Progressive benefit formulas, respectively. The
bottom panel of Table 1 shows that there is some potential for reducing the required
exposure to equity by having a more progressive benefit formula for each of the bottom
six deciles, though the potential shrinks at higher deciles.

14

Figure 5 shows the same curves for the seventh decile (roughly the 65th
percentile) of the earnings distribution. The ordering of the curves has now switched,
with the Proportional Reduction offering the highest certainty equivalents for each
possible equity share, followed by the Progressive, Half and Half, and Uniform Benefit
formulas. This is not surprising, as the redistribution toward the lower earning deciles
must be paid for by those in higher earning deciles if the reforms have the same aggregate
payouts but differ in their progressivity. The optimal equity allocations have fallen
slightly, to 95 percent in equity for the Proportional Reduction and Progressive formulas
and to 90 percent in equity for the Half and Half and Uniform Benefit formulas. All of
the curves are quite close together, indicating very little scope for trading off exposure to
equity by switching benefit formulas. Figure 6 shows the curves for the top decile of the
earnings distribution. The curves retain the same ordering from Figure 5, but the gaps
between the different formulas are now much wider. The optimal share in equity also
falls to 75 percent for all four of the benefit formulas.
Figure 7 suggests why the progressivity of the benefit formula is such a powerful
tool in comparison to the equity share of the PRA portfolio in affecting workers in the
lower earnings deciles. The figure shows the cumulative distribution functions for the
four different benefit formulas, holding constant the equity share of the PRA portfolio at
50 percent, for the bottom earnings decile. For any given benefit level, the height of the
curve shows the probability of the specified benefit formula generating a benefit level
that is at or below the given level. For curves that do not cross, the curve that is
everywhere the lowest represents the most preferred benefit formula. As noted above, for
this low-earning worker, that is the Uniform Benefit. Indeed, for this benefit formula, all

15

of the variation in benefit levels is due to the variation in asset returns in different
scenarios. Moving right to left on the graph, the other benefit formulas lower average
benefits and add successively more earnings risk into the benefit distributions. The
differences in the lowest benefit amounts across formulas (measured by the horizontal
distance between the curves near the horizontal axis) are quite large. These differences
also persist fairly high into the distribution of benefits, disappearing only at the highest
benefit levels. Given risk averse workers, the level and likelihood of very low outcomes
are of particular concern.
Figure 8 shows the variation in this decile’s benefit distributions holding the
benefit formula fixed (at Proportional Reduction) while varying the equity share in the
portfolio from 0 to 100 percent in increments of 25 percentage points. At the very lowest
benefit levels, the differences across the portfolio allocations are quite small in
comparison to those shown in Figure 7. (The scales on the axes are identical across the
figures.) Low benefit outcomes are primarily due to the factor held constant across the
curves—the traditional benefit formula—rather than the factor varying across the
curves—the equity share in the PRA portfolio. To the extent that there are differences,
both the “All Equity” and “Zero Equity” portfolios have lower minimum benefits than
more balanced portfolios. At the low end of the earnings distribution, reducing the equity
share from 100 percent does not even generate a lower likelihood of very bad outcomes.
These figures establish the main results of the analysis. Given the assumed
average returns on equities and bonds and their historical variation, workers with CRRA
utility and a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3 typically choose high equity shares
in their PRA portfolios, regardless of the formula used to compute the traditional benefit.

16

However, switching from a proportional reduction in the traditional benefits to any of the
three more progressive benefit formulas increases the traditional benefits going to the
bottom six deciles of the earnings distribution. This increase in traditional benefits gives
the worker room to lower the equity share in the PRA portfolio while still achieving the
same certainty equivalent available with the optimal equity share in the PRA under the
proportionally reduced benefit. In the case of the maximally progressive benefit formula,
in which the traditional benefit is a uniform benefit unrelated to the worker’s earnings,
the equity share could fall to zero for the lowest three deciles. Higher deciles or less
extreme changes to the progressivity of the benefit formula result in somewhat smaller
possible reductions in equity exposure.

VI. Sensitivity Tests

In this section, the robustness of the main results is assessed by varying the degree
of risk aversion, the constancy of the coefficient of relative risk aversion, the equity
premium, and the size of the PRAs measured by the annual contributions as a percentage
of earnings. More risk aversion, declining relative risk aversion, a lower equity premium,
and larger PRAs generally reduce the optimal portfolio allocations in equities and slightly
compress the differences in the allocations across configurations of the traditional benefit
that achieve the same certainty equivalent. This section concludes with a discussion of
life cycle portfolio strategies.

17

Risk Aversion
The baseline choice of the coefficient of risk aversion is consistent with
assumptions found in the literature on insurance and risk. Table 2 repeats the analysis of
Table 1 for a higher coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to 5. The first consequence
of higher relative risk aversion is that all of the certainty equivalents in the top panel of
Table 2 are lower than their counterparts in Table 1. Consistent with Figure 2, a worker
with higher risk aversion would pay a greater risk premium to avoid a given risk. The
next panel of Table 2 shows that the workers seek to avoid this risk by reducing their
equity shares in the PRA portfolio.16 For example, with the Proportional Reduction,
optimal equity shares are 95 percent in the lowest earnings decile, falling to 60 percent by
the highest earnings decile.
As shown in the bottom panel of the table, changes in the progressivity of the
traditional benefit allow for reductions in equity exposure in the PRA portfolio that are
comparable to those for the less risk averse workers in Table 1. For example, it is still the
case that the bottom six earnings deciles have room to lower their equity exposure with
more progressive traditional benefit formulas. In addition, the allowable percentage point
reductions in the equity shares are similar. For example, with a Uniform Benefit, the
bottom four deciles can now eliminate their equity exposure entirely. With the
Progressive benefit formula, the equity share for the bottom earnings decile can fall from
95 to 25 percent without a loss in expected utility. Thus, the main results are robust to a
higher coefficient of relative risk aversion.

16

In other words, the certainty equivalents would be even lower if the workers were constrained to hold the
equity shares at the levels in the middle panel of Table 1.

18

Declining Relative Risk Aversion
The results in the middle panels of Tables 1 and 2 show that the optimal
allocation to equity declines at higher earnings deciles. This pattern arises due to the
maintained assumption in the simulations that workers have no other sources of
retirement income apart from the traditional benefit and the PRA. Because even the
current Social Security formula is progressive, workers in lower earnings deciles have a
greater proportion of their retirement benefits insulated from investment risk. With a
homothetic expected utility function, this enables lower earning workers to take on more
equity risk in their PRA portfolios.17
This pattern is counterfactual—in reality, investment allocations to equity rise
dramatically with earnings.18 One way to make the simulations more consistent with
observed investment behavior is to modify the expected utility function to exhibit
declining, rather than constant, relative risk aversion. The simplest such modification to
make is to introduce a “subsistence level” of retirement benefit into the utility function,
via the parameter k in:
u (b ) =

(b − k )1−γ
1− γ

Note that k = 0 corresponds to CRRA utility and that with k greater than zero,
utility is not defined for retirement benefit levels below k. For retirement benefit levels
above k, utility is measured relative to the subsistence level. Since low-earning deciles
have benefits closest to this subsistence level, they will lower their equity allocations
17

This assumption also generates the tendency for more progressive benefit formulas to have higher
optimal allocations to equity for the bottom earnings deciles and lower optimal allocations to equity for the
top earnings deciles. Greater progressivity results in more non-PRA benefits at low earnings deciles and
less non-PRA benefits, relative to lifetime earnings, at high earnings deciles.
18
See, for example, the tabulations in Bucks, Kennickell, and Moore (2006) or the multivariate estimates in
Poterba and Samwick (2003), both based on data from the Surveys of Consumer Finances.

19

relative to the CRRA case. The certainty equivalent for this DRRA expected utility
function is given by:
bCE = k + [(1 − γ )E (u (b ))]

1 (1−γ )

[(

= k + E (b − k )

1−γ

)] (

1 1−γ )

Tables 3 and 4 repeat the analyses in Tables 1 and 2 using this DRRA expected
utility function. The subsistence level is assumed to be $10,000, which is close to the
minimum benefit for the lowest earning decile shown in Figure 7. The top panels of the
tables show that the certainty equivalents are lower when expected utility exhibits
declining rather than constant relative risk aversion.19 The middle panels of the tables
show that optimal equity allocations are also lower with declining relative risk aversion.
However, comparisons of the changes in the optimal equity allocations by
earnings decile and across traditional benefit formulas relative to the CRRA case are not
straightforward. For example, with γ = 3, equity shares with a Proportional Reduction in
the traditional benefit fall from 75 to 65 percent over the earnings deciles, compared to a
decline from 100 to 80 percent in the CRRA case, indicating less sensitivity to earnings
decile. However, with a Uniform Benefit, they fall from 95 to 60 percent over the
earnings deciles, compared to a decline from 100 to 75 percent in the CRRA case,
indicating more sensitivity to earnings decile. Similar results hold for the higher risk
aversion in Table 4 and in the differences across columns in the respective cases.
Nonetheless, the bottom panels of the tables show that changing from a
Proportional Reduction to a more progressive benefit formula can lessen equity exposure
by as much or more than in the CRRA case. For example, with γ = 3, the bottom six

19

The degree of relative risk aversion for any expected utility function is given by –b*u’’( )/u’( ). For the
DRRA utility function, this expression is γ*b/(b – k), which is equal to the constant γ for k = 0. When k >
0, this expression declines toward γ as b increases.

20

deciles can again have their equity exposure reduced. With a Uniform Benefit, the
bottom four deciles can reduce equity exposure to zero without falling behind the
Proportional Reduction. The sixth decile can lower its equity share from 70 to 35
percent, compared to a reduction from 95 to 80 percent in the CRRA case shown in Table
1. With the Progressive formula, the bottom decile can reduce its equity exposure down
to zero and the sixth decile can reduce its equity share from 75 to 55 percent (compared
to a reduction from 95 to 90 percent in the CRRA case). The results in Table 4 at higher
risk aversion levels are even more pronounced. Thus, the main results shown in the
previous section are robust to and strengthened by a switch to an expected utility function
that exhibits declining rather than constant relative risk aversion.

Lower Equity Premium
The sustainability of the premium that has existed to investments in equities
historically has been the subject of considerable debate. Particularly in the case of
financial market returns, past performance may be an unreliable guide to future
outcomes. For example, if over the past 30 years, systematic risk in the stock market fell,
then the appropriate rate of return to assume going forward would be lower. However,
during this period of time that risk fell, the reduction in risk would have generated
abnormally high returns to equity. These high holding period returns would have arisen
precisely because future ex ante returns had fallen and would thus be a poor guide to
forecasting those future returns.20

20

For a discussion of the issues associated with choosing a real return on stocks for the long term, see the
papers by John Campbell, Peter Diamond, and John Shoven in Social Security Advisory Board (2001).

21

In light of such considerations, Table 5 reports the results of simulations in which
the expected return on equities is lowered from 6.2 percent to 4.7 percent. PRA
contributions remain 2 percent of earnings per year, and the comparisons are shown for a
CRRA utility function with a relative risk aversion coefficient of 3. As expected, the 150
basis point reduction in the equity premium lowers the certainty equivalents for all
earnings deciles and benefit formulas, shown in the top panel. The lower equity premium
also shifts the optimal portfolio allocations to equity lower. For the Proportional
Reduction, equity shares range from 85 to 55 percent, compared to 100 to 80 percent in
Table 1. For the Uniform Benefit, equity shares range from 95 to 50 percent, compared
to 100 to 75 percent in Table 1.
With a lower equity premium, there is greater scope for changes in the
progressivity of the benefit formula to substitute for higher equity allocations. The
bottom panel of Table 5 shows that with a Uniform Benefit, the bottom four deciles can
reduce their equity shares to zero to keep pace with the optimal allocations of 75 to 85
percent in the Proportional Reduction case. The sixth decile can reduce its equity share
to 45 percent from 65 percent. In Table 1, with the higher equity premium, this decile
could reduce its equity share only to 80 percent from 95 percent. Possible reductions in
equity exposure for other benefit formulas are smaller than with the Uniform Benefit
formula but similarly larger than their counterparts with the higher equity premium in
Table 1. Thus, the main results in the previous section are robust and even strengthened
in the presence of a lower equity premium.

22

Larger Personal Retirement Accounts
Compared to the investment-based reform plans that have been proposed (see
footnote 2), a PRA funded by only a 2 percent contribution is fairly small. The ability of
progressivity in the traditional benefit to offset financial risk in the PRAs depends on the
relative size of the two benefits. To investigate this dependence and extend the analysis
to cover more of the range of proposed reforms, Table 6 presents the results of
simulations in which the annual PRA contribution is increased from 2 to 3 percent of
earnings. The certainty equivalents in the top panel are all naturally higher than their
counterparts in Table 1, since the additional 1-percent contributions are not accounted for
by reduced consumption elsewhere in this framework. The middle panel of the table
shows that optimal equity allocations are slightly lower with the larger PRAs. As the
PRAs get larger relative to the traditional benefit, workers seek to mitigate their risk
exposure through lower allocations to equity.
The bottom panel shows that the ability to offset equity exposure through more
progressive traditional benefit formulas can be slightly lower or higher, depending on the
earnings decile and benefit formula. With a Uniform Benefit, the bottom two deciles can
reduce their equity shares to zero to keep pace with the optimal allocations of 95 to 100
percent in the Proportional Reduction case. In Table 1, with the smaller PRAs, the
bottom three deciles could eliminate all equity exposure. The sixth decile can reduce its
equity share to 65 percent from 85 percent, compared to a reduction to 80 percent from
95 percent in Table 1. For the Progressive benefit formula, reductions in equity exposure
relative to the Proportional Reduction formula are comparable to those in Table 1.

23

Life Cycle Portfolios
As noted above, prior studies have analyzed the use of life cycle investment
strategies to mitigate financial risk in PRAs. Figure 9 compares a portfolio with an ageinvariant allocation of 50 percent to equity with three life cycle strategies that shift from
equity to bonds as retirement approaches. The first starts at a 95 percent equity share and
decreases 2 percentage points per year, reaching 5 percent on the eve of retirement. The
second starts at an 83.75 percent equity share and decreases 1.5 percentage points per
year, reaching 16.25 percent on the eve of retirement. The third starts at a 72.5 percent
equity share and decreases by 1 percentage point per year, reaching 27.5 percent on the
eve of retirement. All three strategies are centered on a 50 percent equity share, based on
the simple average of the allocation rules by age. The figure pertains to the lowest
earnings decile and shows the cumulative distribution functions for each of the four
investment options.
There are two important features of the graph. First, the curves all lie virtually on
top of each other. There cannot be much of an improvement in expected utility by
switching to a life cycle strategy if such a strategy results in a distribution of benefits that
is so similar to the age-invariant portfolio allocation. Second, the life cycle strategies lie
above the age-invariant portfolio for all but the very lowest percentiles of the
distributions, the more so the greater the decline in the equity allocation with age. The
reason is that the life cycle strategies do not have the same expected benefits as the ageinvariant portfolio, because the life cycle strategies focus the high-equity allocations on
the early years, when many years of contributions are yet to be made.

24

Thus, life cycle strategies may be desirable, but this is so in the current context
primarily because they serve to reduce the overall level of equity exposure. This may be
a desirable goal—for example, if the equity premium is low enough or volatility of
returns is high enough—but it can be achieved more straightforwardly with a simple
reduction in the age-invariant portfolio share in equities given the parameters used in the
simulations above.

VII. Conclusions

Policy makers seeking to design investment-based Social Security reform
proposals have wrestled with the issue of how much financial risk is appropriate for
individuals to bear. Suggested methods of alleviating risk have focused on strategies that
amount to requiring more bonds relative to equity in the Personal Retirement Accounts,
whether through the purchase of guarantees or life cycle investment strategies. It is
worth emphasizing that most of the simulations in this paper suggest fairly high optimal
allocations to equities, particularly by those in the lowest deciles of the earnings
distribution. Direct restrictions on equity holding in PRAs are likely to prove unpopular,
particularly among those whose opportunities are most broadened by the chance to invest
their mandatory contributions in equities. This paper suggests another possibility for
alleviating the consequences of financial risk; namely, increasing the progressivity of the
traditional benefit. Doing so insulates workers in the lower part of the benefit
distribution against possibly adverse shocks to financial returns without constraining
them to not invest in equities.

25

The main simulations in the paper compare proportional reductions in traditional
benefits with more progressive reductions. The key finding is that under baseline
parameters, the most progressive traditional benefit—a flat benefit independent of
earnings—allows the allocation to equities to be reduced to zero for the lowest three
earnings deciles relative to the optimal allocation when the traditional benefits are
reduced proportionately based on the current formula. The next three deciles are able to
achieve some reduction in equity exposure as well. Under less extreme changes to the
traditional benefit, such as that proposed by Liebman, MacGuineas, and Samwick (2005),
the allocation to equities can be decreased by half for the lowest earnings decile and by
smaller fractions for an additional five deciles. Sensitivity tests show that optimal
allocations to equities typically decrease with higher risk aversion, declining risk
aversion, a lower equity premium, or larger accounts, but the general pattern of results
persists and in some cases allows for greater equity reduction through higher
progressivity in the traditional benefit formula.
The results in this paper suggest two avenues for further research. First, the
present analysis used a very stylized model of the initial earnings distribution and its
evolution over time to simulate the distribution of future benefits. Actual data and more
sophisticated time-series estimates could be incorporated. Second, the present analysis
focused on time-invariant portfolio allocations in the PRAs, which were further assumed
to be the worker’s only source of investment wealth. While the latter might be a
reasonable approximation for the lowest earning households, higher earning households
are likely to have existing holdings of equities that make the portfolio allocation decision
in the PRA less consequential. Extending the current framework to allow for optimal,

26

age-dependent portfolio allocations and for saving in accounts other than the PRAs would
provide better estimates of the extent to which greater progressivity can protect low
earners from investment risk and of the size of the welfare costs paid by higher earners
for providing this protection.

27

References

The Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability
Insurance Trust Funds (2006). Annual Report. Washington: U.S. Government Printing
Office. [Cited as “Social Security Trustees Report 2006.”]
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/TR/TR06/tr06.pdf
Bucks, Brian K., Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore (2006). “Recent Changes in
U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances,”
Federal Reserve Bulletin, Vol. 92 (February 2006): A1-A38.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/2004/bull0206.pdf
Feldstein, Martin S. and Elena Ranguelova (2001a). “Accumulated Pension Collars: A
Market Approach to Reducing The Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform,” in
James M. Poterba (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy 2000. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Feldstein, Martin S. and Elena Ranguelova (2001b). “Individual Risk in an InvestmentBased Social Security System,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4 (September):
1116-25.
Goss, Stephen C. and Alice H. Wade (2005). “Estimated Financial Effects of ‘A
Nonpartisan Approach to Reforming Social Security – A Proposal Developed by Jeffrey
Liebman, Maya MacGuineas and Andrew Samwick.’” Manuscript, Social Security
Administration, November 17.
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/solvency/Liebman_20051117.pdf
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan S. Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (1994). “The Importance
of Precautionary Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving,” Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 40, 59 – 125.
Ibbotson Associates (2006). Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation Yearbook 2006. Chicago:
Ibbotson Associates.
Kunkel, Jeffrey L. (1996). “Frequency Distribution of Wage Earners by Wage Level,”
Actuarial Note, No. 135. Washington: Social Security Administration, Office of the
Actuary, July. http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/NOTES/pdf_notes/note135.pdf
Liebman, Jeffrey, Maya MacGuineas, and Andrew Samwick (2005). “Nonpartisan Social
Security Reform Plan,” Manuscript, Harvard University, December.
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/jeffreyliebman/lms_nonpartisan_plan_description.pdf
Poterba, James, Joshua Rauh, Steven Venti, and David Wise (2006). “Lifecycle Asset
Allocation Strategies and the Distribution of 401(k) Retirement Wealth,” National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 11974, January.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11974

28

Poterba, James and Andrew A. Samwick (2003). “Taxation and Household Portfolio
Composition: U.S. Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s,” Journal of Public Economics,
Vol. 87 (January): 5-38.
Samwick, Andrew A. (1999). “Social Security Reform in the United States.” National
Tax Journal, 52 (December), 819 – 842.
Samwick, Andrew A. (2004). “Social Security Reform: The United States in 2002.” in
Einar Overbye and Peter A. Kemp (eds.) Pensions: Challenges and Reform. Aldershot:
Ashgate Publishing Limited, 53-69.
Social Security Administration, Office of Policy (2006). Annual Statistical Supplement to
the Social Security Bulletin, 2005. Washington: Social Security Administration,
February. [Cited as SSA (2006)]
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2005/
Social Security Advisory Board (2001). “Estimating the Real Rate of Return on Stocks
Over the Long Term,” August.
http://www.ssab.gov/Publications/Financing/estimated%20rate%20of%20return.pdf
Topel, Robert H. and Michael P. Ward (1992). “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young
Men,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 2. (May): 439-479.
World Bank (1994). Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and
Promote Growth. New York: Oxford University Press.

29

Table 1: Optimal Portfolio Shares in Equity, Baseline Case
Highest Certainty Equivalent
Progressive
Half and Half
16948
18288
18817
19819
20194
20934
21466
21968
22700
22974
23950
24011
25333
25170
27035
26606
29268
28509
33381
32029

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Proportional
16362
18373
19862
21236
22571
23914
25395
27212
29587
33956

Uniform
20151
21185
21925
22621
23307
24044
24888
25946
27375
30058

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal Equity Share of PRA Portfolio
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
95
95
95
95
95
90
90
90
90
85
85
85
80
80
80

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6

Lowest Equity Share with Higher Expected Utility than Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
Uniform
50
0
0
60
15
0
70
35
0
75
50
30
80
65
50
90
80
80

Uniform
100
100
100
100
100
95
90
85
85
75

Notes:
1) PRAs are funded by 2 percent contributions.
2) Equity returns average 6.2 percent (net of inflation and administrative costs).
3) Utility is Constant Relative Risk Aversion, with a coefficient of 3.

30

Table 2: Optimal Portfolio Shares in Equity, Higher Risk Aversion
Highest Certainty Equivalent
Progressive
Half and Half
16419
17801
18059
19124
19298
20111
20447
21032
21578
21934
22706
22858
23952
23885
25515
25179
27519
26869
31297
30054

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Proportional
15808
17582
18927
20173
21405
22622
23966
25648
27787
31823

Uniform
19705
20547
21168
21762
22349
22982
23703
24630
25866
28223

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal Equity Share of PRA Portfolio
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
95
95
100
85
85
90
85
85
85
80
80
80
75
75
75
75
75
75
70
70
70
70
70
70
65
65
65
60
60
60

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6

Lowest Equity Share with Higher Expected Utility than Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
Uniform
25
0
0
35
0
0
45
10
0
50
25
0
55
35
20
60
50
45

Uniform
100
90
85
80
75
75
70
65
60
55

Notes:
1) PRAs are funded by 2 percent contributions.
2) Equity returns average 6.2 percent (net of inflation and administrative costs).
3) Utility is Constant Relative Risk Aversion, with a coefficient of 5.

31

Table 3: Optimal Portfolio Shares in Equity, Declining Relative Risk Aversion
Highest Certainty Equivalent
Progressive
Half and Half
15946
17516
17605
18842
18894
19856
20101
20809
21320
21760
22510
22724
23862
23819
25555
25206
27711
27014
31796
30454

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Proportional
15199
17010
18423
19746
21094
22386
23858
25691
28002
32366

Uniform
19558
20398
21028
21634
22240
22893
23648
24626
25941
28472

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal Equity Share of PRA Portfolio
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
75
80
90
75
75
80
75
75
80
75
75
75
75
75
75
70
70
75
70
70
70
70
70
70
70
70
65
65
65
60

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6

Lowest Equity Share with Higher Expected Utility than Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
Uniform
0
0
0
20
0
0
30
0
0
40
15
0
50
30
15
55
45
35

Uniform
95
85
80
80
75
70
70
65
65
60

Notes:
1) PRAs are funded by 2 percent contributions.
2) Equity returns average 6.2 percent (net of inflation and administrative costs).
3) Utility is Declining Relative Risk Aversion, with a coefficient of 3
and susbsitence level of 10000.

32

Table 4: Optimal Portfolio Shares in Equity, Higher and Declining Relative Risk Aversion
Highest Certainty Equivalent
Progressive
Half and Half
15356
17018
16791
18166
17913
19053
18986
19891
20120
20749
21154
21585
22414
22564
24010
23827
25889
25377
29705
28529

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Proportional
14533
16100
17324
18510
19783
20898
22305
24063
26088
30199

Uniform
19109
19822
20358
20872
21391
21939
22577
23418
24524
26748

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal Equity Share of PRA Portfolio
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
55
60
65
50
55
60
55
55
60
50
55
55
55
55
55
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
45
45
45

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Lowest Equity Share with Higher Expected Utility than Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
Uniform
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
15
0
0
25
0
0
30
10
0
40
30
30

Uniform
75
65
60
60
55
50
50
45
45
40

Notes:
1) PRAs are funded by 2 percent contributions.
2) Equity returns average 6.2 percent (net of inflation and administrative costs).
3) Utility is Declining Relative Risk Aversion, with a coefficient of 5
and susbsitence level of 10000.

33

Table 5: Optimal Portfolio Shares in Equity, Lower Equity Returns
Highest Certainty Equivalent
Progressive
Half and Half
16045
17355
17694
18662
18916
19628
20040
20522
21146
21407
22255
22312
23490
23334
24994
24588
26972
26256
30639
29366

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Proportional
15473
17265
18596
19820
21023
22220
23549
25162
27275
31185

Uniform
19178
19984
20580
21147
21723
22340
23061
23963
25192
27510

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal Equity Share of PRA Portfolio
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
85
90
90
80
80
80
75
75
75
75
75
75
70
70
70
65
65
65
65
65
65
60
60
60
60
60
55
55
55
50

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6

Lowest Equity Share with Higher Expected Utility than Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
Uniform
0
0
0
15
0
0
25
0
0
35
5
0
45
25
5
55
50
45

Uniform
95
85
75
75
70
65
60
60
55
50

Notes:
1) PRAs are funded by 2 percent contributions.
2) Equity returns average 4.7 percent (net of inflation and administrative costs).
3) Utility is Constant Relative Risk Aversion, with a coefficient of 3.

34

Table 6: Optimal Portfolio Shares in Equity, Larger PRAs
Highest Certainty Equivalent
Progressive
Half and Half
18231
19608
20460
21500
22126
22898
23681
24213
25205
25503
26771
26854
28515
28371
30698
30279
33578
32824
38941
37579

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Proportional
17628
20000
21780
23440
25066
26725
28569
30872
33896
39522

Uniform
21522
22921
23936
24908
25874
26921
28118
29639
31702
35590

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Optimal Equity Share of PRA Portfolio
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
100
100
100
95
95
100
95
95
95
90
90
90
85
85
85
85
85
85
80
80
80
80
80
80
75
75
75
70
70
70

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6

Lowest Equity Share with Higher Expected Utility than Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
Uniform
50
0
0
60
25
0
65
35
10
70
50
30
70
60
45
80
70
65

Uniform
100
100
95
90
85
85
80
75
75
65

Notes:
1) PRAs are funded by 3 percent contributions.
2) Equity returns average 6.2 percent (net of inflation and administrative costs).
3) Utility is Constant Relative Risk Aversion, with a coefficient of 3.

35

Thousands

Figure 1: Expected Benefits by Benefit Formula and Equity Share
50
45
40

Expected Benefits

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

10

20

30

40

50
Equity Share

36

60

70

80

90

100

Thousands

Figure 2: Expected Benefits and Certainty Equivalents, Top Decile, Baseline Case
48
46

Certainty Equivalent

44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
0

10

20

Expected Benefits

30

40

50
60
Equity Share
RRA = 1

37

70
RRA = 3

80

90
RRA = 5

100

Thousands

Figure 3: Certainty Equivalents by Benefit Formulas and Equity Shares, Baseline Case, Decile 1
21

20

Certainty Equivalent

19

18

17

16

15

14
0

10

20

Proportional

30

40

50
60
Equity Share

Half and Half

38

70

Progressive

80

90
Uniform Benefit

100

Thousands

Figure 4: Certainty Equivalents by Benefit Formulas and Equity Shares, Baseline Case, Decile 4
24

23

Certainty Equivalent

22

21

20

19

18

17
0

10

20

Proportional

30

40

50
60
Equity Share

Half and Half

39

70

Progressive

80

90
Uniform Benefit

100

Thousands

Figure 5: Certainty Equivalents by Benefit Formulas and Equity Shares, Baseline Case, Decile 7
26

25

Certainty Equivalent

24

23

22

21

20

19
0

10

20

Proportional

30

40

50
60
Equity Share

Half and Half

40

70

Progressive

80

90
Uniform Benefit

100

Thousands

Figure 6: Certainty Equivalents by Benefit Formulas and Equity Shares, Baseline Case, Decile 10
35
34

Certainty Equivalent

33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
0

10

20

Proportional

30

40

50
60
Equity Share

Half and Half

41

70

Progressive

80

90
Uniform Benefit

100

Figure 7: CDFs for Benefits, 2% PRAs, 50% Equity Shares, Decile 1

Cumulative Distribution Function (Percentage)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10000

15000

20000

25000

Benefit Level
Proportional

Progressive

42

Half and Half

Uniform Benefit

30000

Figure 8: CDFs for Benefits, 2% PRAs, Proportional Reduction, Decile 1

Cumulative Distribution Function (Percentage)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

Benefit Level
No Equity

25% Equity

50% Equity

43

75% Equity

All Equity

Figure 9: CDFs for Benefits, Life Cycle Allocations, Baseline, Proportional Reduction, Decile 1

Cumulative Distribution Function (Percentage)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

Benefit Level
95 to 5 by 2.0

83.75 to 16.25 by 1.5

72.5 to 27.5 by 1.0

44

Constant 50% Equity

Appendix Table 1: Mean Benefits by Earnings Decile

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
All

Current Law
22033
23851
25127
26212
27227
28181
29177
30304
31726
34130
27797

Traditional Benefits
Proportional
Progressive
Half and Half
13220
13739
14949
14311
14666
15494
15076
15317
15877
15727
15870
16203
16336
16388
16507
16908
16874
16793
17506
17382
17092
18182
17956
17430
19036
18682
17857
20478
19907
18578
16678
16678
16678

Uniform
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678
16678

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
All

Real Annuities from 2% PRAs, Real Equity Returns Average 6.2%
No Equity
25% Equity
50% Equity
75% Equity
All Equity
2069
2532
3125
3884
4858
2840
3481
4307
5377
6769
3451
4226
5225
6516
8184
4015
4915
6075
7575
9524
4590
5621
6948
8659
10871
5234
6402
7896
9813
12278
5974
7321
9056
11298
14198
6901
8448
10435
12996
16302
8185
10021
12379
15426
19382
10498
12907
16008
20009
25171
5376
6587
8145
10155
12754

Decile
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
All

Real Annuities from 2% PRAs, Real Equity Returns Average 4.7%
No Equity
25% Equity
50% Equity
75% Equity
All Equity
2069
2303
2570
2875
3220
2840
3166
3544
3981
4489
3451
3844
4298
4822
5424
4015
4471
4996
5604
6306
4590
5113
5715
6409
7206
5234
5822
6493
7259
8132
5974
6658
7446
8355
9401
6901
7681
8576
9605
10786
8185
9106
10164
11383
12793
10498
11715
13113
14713
16541
5376
5988
6692
7500
8430

45

