                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHY DO PRIVATE ACQUIRERS PAY SO LITTLE COMPARED TO PUBLIC ACQUIRERS?

                                          Leonce Bargeron
                                       Frederik Schlingemann
                                           Rene M. Stulz
                                            Chad Zutter

                                        Working Paper 13061
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2007




Part of this research was conducted while Stulz was visiting the University of Southern California.
We thank seminar participants at the University of Pittsburgh for valuable comments. Manoj Kulchania
provided useful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Leonce Bargeron, Frederik Schlingemann, Rene M. Stulz, and Chad Zutter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Private Acquirers Pay So Little Compared to Public Acquirers?
Leonce Bargeron, Frederik Schlingemann, Rene M. Stulz, and Chad Zutter
NBER Working Paper No. 13061
April 2007
JEL No. G3

                                             ABSTRACT

We find that the announcement gain to target shareholders from acquisitions is significantly lower
if a private firm instead of a public firm makes the acquisition. Non-operating firms like private equity
funds make the majority of private bidder acquisitions. On average, target shareholders receive 55%
more if a public firm instead of a private equity fund makes the acquisition. There is no evidence that
the difference in premiums is driven by observable differences in targets. We find that target shareholder
gains depend critically on the managerial ownership of the bidder. In particular, there is no difference
in target shareholder gains between acquisitions made by public bidders with high managerial ownership
and by private bidders. Such evidence suggests that the differences in managerial incentives between
private and public firms have an important impact on target shareholder gains from acquisitions and
managers of firms with diffuse ownership may pay too much for acquisitions.

Leonce Bargeron                                     Rene M. Stulz
Katz Graduate School of Business                    Fisher College of Business
University of Pittsburgh                            The Ohio State University
372 Mervis Hall                                     806A Fisher Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                                2100 Neil Avenue
llbargeron@katz.pitt.edu                            Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                                    and NBER
Frederik Schlingemann                               stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh                            Chad Zutter
372 Mervis Hall                                     Katz Graduate School of Business
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                                University of Pittsburgh
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu                              372 Mervis Hall
                                                    Pittsburgh, PA 15260
                                                    czutter@pitt.edu
1. Introduction
    At least six so-called merger waves have taken place since the end of the nineteenth century

and much research has been done trying to understand them.1 The current merger wave started

approximately in 2002. It is associated in the press with the growing participation of private firms

in general and private equity firms specifically.2 Strikingly, in 2006, private equity firms bought

654 companies for a total of $375 billion.3

    Whereas the popular press has emphasized the relative importance and growing role that

private bidders play in the takeover market, academic research has devoted little attention to the

actions of these bidders. We know of no systematic evidence on whether the gains of target

shareholders differ when the acquirer is a private firm instead of a public firm.4 Yet, there is

much debate in the press about whether shareholders of acquired firms are being exploited by

private equity bidders with the help of the management of the acquired firm, which amounts to

saying that the acquisition premiums paid by private equity firms are too low.5 In this paper, we

provide evidence on how the premiums paid by private acquirers compare to the premiums paid

by public companies.

    Most acquisitions by private firms are paid for with cash. We construct a sample of

completed cash-only deals during the period 1990-2005 which consists of 407 deals by private

bidders and 885 deals by public bidders. The difference in premiums between these two types of

acquisitions is sizeable. In our sample from 1990 to 2005, the average gain for target shareholders
1
  Earlier M&A waves that have been identified in the literature are the 1895-1904 ‘horizontal merger’
wave, the 1925-1929 ‘vertical merger wave’, the 1965-1970 ‘conglomerate merger’ wave, and the 1981-
1987 wave which is mostly characterized by hostile takeovers, break-ups of large conglomerates, more
going-private deals, and the use of leverage to finance these deals. Finally, the merger wave during the
second half of the nineties is mostly characterized by deregulation, very large deals by public firms, the use
of a relatively high degree of equity financing, and some deals with extreme negative bidder returns (see
e.g., Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz, 2005). For a more detailed description of these waves, see e.g.,
Bruner (2004).
2
  See e.g., Newsweek, April 24, 2006.
3
  See “The enigma of private equity,” Newsweek, March 12, 2007, by Robert J. Samuelson.
4
  The literature has investigated going private transactions (see, for instance, DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and
Rice, 1984; Lehn and Poulsen, 1989; Kaplan,1989). The acquisitions we consider differ from going private
transactions in that the company making the acquisition is not a company created by large investors in the
company for the purpose of acquiring the shares they do not own to take it private.
5
  See, for instance, the article cited in footnote 3.


                                                      1
when the bidder is a public firm is 31.74% over the three days surrounding the announcement of

the acquisition. This is 43% higher than the gain for shareholders when a private firm acquires

their firm and 55% higher than the gain when a private equity fund is the acquirer. The average

gain for shareholders of the target when the acquirer is a private firm is 22.20% and when it is a

private equity fund it is only 20.47%.

    After documenting this dramatic difference in the gains of target shareholders between

acquisitions by public firms and by private firms, we investigate why such a difference exists.

The simplest explanation would be that public firms and private firms acquire different types of

firms. With such an explanation, target shareholders do not receive less if a private firm acquires

their firm than they would if a public firm makes the acquisition. The obvious issue is why then

private firms concentrate on making low premium acquisitions. One might argue that public firm

acquisitions generate more shareholder wealth because public firms are operating companies, so

that the typical acquisition by a public firm would have synergy gains. Though the majority of the

private acquirers are not operating companies, 39.6% of the private bidders in our sample are

operating companies. The private operating companies pay less for acquisitions than public

companies. Synergy gains cannot therefore be the explanation for the lower premiums paid by

private acquirers. In fact, the three-day target abnormal return for acquisitions by private

operating companies is not significantly different from the three-day target abnormal return for

acquisitions by private equity firms.

    We find that there are differences in target characteristics. In particular, private bidders tend

to acquire firms that have performed more poorly than the firms acquired by public bidders.

There is a vast literature that attempts to explain differences in target gains. It could be, therefore,

that the difference in premiums results from differences in target and deal characteristics.

However, we don’t find evidence that differences in target and deal characteristics commonly

used in the literature explain the difference in premiums between private and public bidder

acquisitions. In particular, using a number of different regression specifications, we find that the


                                                   2
difference in target shareholder returns between acquisitions by public firms and by private firms

systematically exceeds eight percent of the value of the target before the acquisition

announcement and is significant at the one percent level. More generally, we find no evidence

that target or deal characteristics can explain the differences in premiums between private and

public bidders.

    If target and deal characteristics cannot explain the difference in premiums, it must be that

bidders make different offers for similar firms depending on whether the bidder is private or

public. There is a long tradition in finance, starting with Berle and Means (1932), questioning

whether managers with low ownership in their firm make decisions that go against the interests of

shareholders. In the context of acquisitions this tradition emphasizes that managers may gain

from acquisitions that do not benefit shareholders. Particularly, managers may gain in prestige

from managing larger firms, receive more perks, be better compensated, and be safer from hostile

takeovers. We call this the managerial discretion theory of takeovers. It posits that there are

private benefits to acquisitions for managers, such that they pay more for target firms than

shareholders would. Consistent with this view, Harford and Li (2007) find for their sample that

managers of bidder firms are better off in three quarters of the cases where their shareholders are

worse off because of the acquisition. As managers’ stakes in the firm increase, we expect

managers to become less likely to make acquisitions that adversely impact shareholders.

    We find evidence that is consistent with the managerial discretion theory of takeovers. Our

approach is to see whether the difference in target returns still exists when we focus on public

bidders with highly concentrated managerial ownership. The difference in target shareholder

gains between acquisitions by private firms and by public firms falls as managerial ownership of

the public bidder increases. In fact, when we compare acquisitions by private firms to acquisitions

by public firms in which managerial ownership exceeds 20%, we find that there is no significant

difference in shareholder gains between the two types of acquisitions. Further evidence that the

bidding behavior of private firms differs from the bidding behavior of public firms is that private


                                                3
firms are much less reluctant to walk away from a deal than public firms. More precisely, we

find that while 36.2% of the offers by private firms are withdrawn, only 13.8% of the offers by

public firms are withdrawn.

    We investigate the hypothesis that target shareholders are somehow cheated in acquisitions

by private firms because target managers are willing to sell the firm at a low price. Such an

argument could make sense if the private firm acquirer can offer the promise of continued

employment to target managers and the possibility of a large payoff if they improve the firm

enough that it eventually goes public. With this hypothesis, however, we expect that the

difference in shareholder gains between the two types of acquisitions falls as the share ownership

of target managers increases because, as their stake increases, they lose more from a low

premium acquisition. We also expect the difference between the two types of acquisitions to fall

as the ownership of institutional shareholders increases because these shareholders have greater

ability and incentives to force management to seek improvements in the premium offered. We

find no evidence that the difference in target shareholder gains between acquisitions by public

bidders and by private bidders is related to target managerial ownership.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our sample of

acquisitions by private and public firms. In Section 3, we compare target gains for acquisitions by

private firms and by public firms. In that section, we also compare the target gains for

acquisitions by different types of private firms. In Section 4, we control for target and deal

characteristics. We examine the relation between the difference in premium and ownership

concentration at public firms in Section 5. In Section 6, we examine whether target managerial

incentives explain why target gains are less from private firm acquisitions. We conclude in

Section 7.




                                                4
2. The sample of acquisitions

           We collect our sample of acquisitions from the Securities Data Company’s (SDC) U.S.

Merger and Acquisition Database. To obtain a sample where offers are most comparable between

types of acquirers, we collect a sample of completed majority acquisitions for the period 1990-

2005 between U.S. public targets and U.S. bidders in which the acquirer owns 100% of the shares

of the target after the deal. We exclude all transactions without disclosed deal value or labeled as

either spin-offs, recaps, self-tenders, exchange offers, repurchases, minority stake purchases,

acquisitions of remaining interest, or privatizations. We further require each target firm to match

on the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) and Compustat databases and to have a

share code indicating a public firm (10, 11). Since most acquisitions made by private firms are for

cash, we restrict the sample to cash offers.6 Excluding non-operating targets results in a final

sample with 1,292 deals where 407 deals involve a private bidder and 885 deals involve a public

bidder according to SDC. Though all results reported in tables use this sample, we have also

estimated all regressions using broader samples. The sample we focus on seems to be the one

with the most conservative results. All our conclusions hold if we include failed offers, other

forms of payment, or offers for majority interests where the bidder ends up with less than 100%

of the target shares.

       Table 1 shows the distribution of the number (Panel A) and of the value (Panel B) of the

acquisitions through time. The fraction of acquisitions each year made by private companies does

not exhibit much of an increase over time. However, the dollar amount of the acquisitions by

private companies is extremely large in 2004 and 2005 compared to any other year. Similarly, the

fraction of the total value of acquisitions by private bidders is large in 2004 and 2005 compared

to other years in the sample. In these two years, the value of the acquisitions by private

companies is close to one-third of the total value of acquisitions. That fraction is less than 20% in

every other year.

6
    Using our sample criteria, we find only 28 acquisitions by private bidders that are not paid for with cash.


                                                        5
    Though we do not report the results in a table, we investigate the distribution of the

acquisitions in our sample across industries. We find that the fraction of public firm acquisitions

(39.44%) made in manufacturing industries is greater than the fraction of private firm acquisitions

(32.92%) made in such industries. The second most important group of industries for acquisitions

is the group of service industries (25.54% of public firm acquisitions and 27.52% of private firm

acquisitions). Among the other industries, acquisitions of financial firms are less prevalent for

private firms (12.53% of all private firm acquisitions) than for public firms (17.06%) but

acquisitions of firms in the retail industry are more prevalent for private firms (11.79%) than for

public firms (4.86%).

    We also investigate the distribution of acquisitions across types of private firms and report

the results in Panel C of Table 1. For that purpose, we search the Lexis-Nexis database for press

releases around the announcement period of each of the deals that according to SDC involves a

private bidder. We divide the acquirers into three groups: private equity firm acquisitions, private

operating company acquisitions, and investor group acquisitions. For an acquisition to be

classified as a private equity firm acquisition, we require that the acquisition is made either by a

private equity firm alone or by a consortium which involves at least one private equity firm. The

largest transaction in our sample is the acquisition of Sungard Datasystems for almost $12 billion

by a consortium which includes Blackstone and KKR. We therefore assign this acquisition to the

group of private equity firm acquisitions. The largest acquisition by a private operating company

is the acquisition of SFX Broadcasting by Capstar Partners, a company that is the largest radio

broadcaster in the U.S., for $1.927 billion. We define acquirers as groups of investors when the

acquirer is a group of private investors who are not making the acquisitions as part of a business

where they manage money for others. The largest acquisition by a group of investors is the

acquisition of Park Communications for $711 million. The acquisition took place through an

auction with five qualified bidders. The main acquiring investors, Donald Tomlin and Dr. Gary

Knapp, were the principals of an acquisition company, PAI. We find that 42.8% of all private


                                                 6
firm acquisitions are made by private equity firms; 39.6% of the private firm acquisitions are

made by private operating companies; finally, 17.7% of private firm acquisitions are made by

private bidder groups. Of the private group acquisitions 54.2% are management buyouts.



3. Gains to target shareholders for public firm acquisitions and private firm acquisitions

    We use the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) database to collect daily return

data for our sample of targets. We estimate the target abnormal returns surrounding the

acquisition announcements in our sample for each year using standard event study methods (see,

e.g., Brown and Warner, 1985). We compute market model abnormal returns using the CRSP

value-weighted index.7 Market model parameters are estimated from day -379 to day -127

relative to the announcement day as in Schwert (1996).

    The first row of Panel A of Table 2 shows the mean and median abnormal returns for the

three days surrounding the acquisition announcement (CAR3) for private and public bidders as

well as for the whole sample. We find that both the mean and the median abnormal returns are

much lower for acquisitions by private firms than for acquisitions by public firms. The difference

in means is 9.5%; the difference in medians is 6.7%. Another way to look at the difference is that

the mean abnormal return for target shareholders is 43.0% higher if the acquisition is by a public

firm than by a private firm. For medians, the difference is 36.3%. These differences are larger for

less restrictive samples.

    A legitimate concern is that three-day abnormal returns may understate the abnormal return

associated with private firm acquisitions compared to public firm acquisitions. In particular, it

could be that firms acquired by private acquirers are smaller and trade in a less efficient market,

such that the announcement return may understate the total impact of the acquisition. We show

estimates of average and median abnormal returns for five (CAR5) and eleven days (CAR11)


7
 We also run all regression models using market-adjusted returns, a no-intercept market model, and the
equally weighted CRSP index. The results are not affected by any of these alternatives.


                                                  7
around the acquisition announcement. These results are similar to the results obtained for the

three-day period around the announcement.

    We also calculate abnormal returns from the day before the announcement to the close of the

acquisition. We use size and book-to-market adjusted (FFRET) buy-and-hold returns.8 Table 2

shows that the target shareholder returns from announcement to the close of the acquisition are

significantly lower for acquisitions made by private firms than for acquisitions made by public

firms. The absolute value of this difference is similar to that of the announcement returns and is

economically large as well.

    To explore more completely whether information about the two types of acquisitions gets

incorporated in stock prices at different times, we investigate the pre-acquisition run-up during

the three months prior to the announcement (RUNUP) and the 12-month period starting 15

months prior to the announcement (ARET_12). It is immediately apparent that there is no

difference in abnormal returns before the acquisition announcement between the two types of

acquisitions.

    Across all the approaches we consider, target shareholders earn at least nine percentage

points of pre-announcement firm value less on average when a private firm acquires the target

than when a public firm does. Alternatively, target shareholders earn at least 37% more in the

deal if it is a deal with a public firm instead of with a private firm. These differences are similar

across all different measures of returns we use.

    We now turn to the differences across types of private acquirers. Given the interest in

acquisitions by private equity firms, such a comparison is important. Such a comparison also

helps in understanding why target shareholders gain less when a private company makes an

acquisition since private operating companies are more similar to public acquirers than private

equity companies are.

8
  The results are similar using a market-model, restricted market model (i.e., alpha=0), or market (i.e.,
alpha=0 and beta=1) adjustment. Size and book-to-market adjusted returns are calculated using the returns
on the 25 Fama French size and book-to-market portfolios.


                                                   8
    Panel B of Table 2 shows estimates of abnormal returns for acquisitions by different types of

private acquirers. The first column reproduces abnormal return estimates for private equity

acquirers. The average three-day abnormal return is 20.5%. This abnormal return is significantly

lower than for the public offers and is almost two percentage points less than the sample average

for private acquirers. Strikingly, target shareholders get 55% more if an offer is by a public firm

rather than by a private equity firm. Consequently, there is no sense in which private equity firms

pay more than other private firm acquirers. The next column shows that the average three-day

abnormal return for private operating companies making acquisitions is 24.6%. This abnormal

return is significantly lower than the announcement return for acquisitions by public firms. The

average announcement return for acquisitions by private bidder groups is similar to the

announcement return for acquisitions by private equity firms, but the median return is lower.

Again, these abnormal returns are significantly lower than the equivalent abnormal returns for

acquisitions by public firms. The results are similar for other measures of abnormal returns,

except for the returns to the close of the acquisition. Only the private equity acquisition returns to

completion are significantly lower than the returns of public firm acquisitions when measured at

both the mean and the median. Finally, there is no systematic difference between each of the

private bidder groups and public bidders during the preannouncement periods.

    It follows from the results in Panel B of Table 2 that the lack of synergies cannot explain the

lower announcement returns for acquisitions by private firms. Acquisitions by private operating

companies, which would have the opportunity to gain synergies in the same way as public

companies, still have lower target announcement returns than public acquirers. In Panel C of

Table 2 we report the differences in the return measures across the different private bidder types.

The three-day announcement return difference between private operating companies and private

equity companies is 4.1% and insignificant. The only significant difference in Panel C of Table 2

is the difference in the target abnormal return measured to the completion of the transaction




                                                  9
between private equity firms and private operating firms. The difference is -7.8% and has a p-

value of 0.056.

    To check the role of synergies further, we also estimate the abnormal return for acquisitions

of private firms that are within the industry of the target and for acquisitions of private firms that

are not within that industry. Though we do not report the results in a table, the within-industry

acquisitions have an insignificantly higher abnormal return of just 0.76 percentage points.



4. Can target characteristics explain the difference in abnormal returns?

    In this section, we investigate whether private acquirers seek to acquire different firms than

public acquirers and whether these differences explain the difference in abnormal returns. We

also consider differences in deal characteristics. We focus on target and deal characteristics that

the empirical and theoretical literatures have found important. We first explore these

characteristics at the univariate level in Section 4.1 and then continue with multivariate regression

analyses in Section 4.2.

4.1. Univariate comparisons of target and deal characteristics

    Panel A of Table 3 compares target characteristics for both types of acquisitions. The first

variable we consider is the market value of target equity 63 trading days prior to the

announcement. We compute this value from CRSP data. We find that public acquirers make

significantly larger acquisitions. There is evidence that target shareholders gain less when their

firm is larger (see e.g., Officer, 2003), so the fact that public firms make larger acquisitions could

explain why their acquisitions benefit target shareholders more. We consider next a measure of

leverage, namely the ratio of the book value of debt to the sum of the book value of debt and the

market value of equity. Firms acquired by private acquirers are substantially more levered than

firms acquired by public firms. To the extent that more highly levered firms have a weaker

bargaining position since they do not have the option to recapitalize to defend against the

takeover attempt, we expect private firm acquisitions to benefit target shareholders less. However,


                                                 10
it could also be that leverage facilitates more concentrated ownership of the target and hence

forces a successful acquirer to offer a greater premium (Stulz, 1988). Firms acquired by private

firms have a significantly lower Tobin’s q than firms acquired by public firms. When the target

Tobin’s q is lower because of managerial entrenchment and agency costs at the target firm, there

are more opportunities for the acquiring firm to create value through the acquisition and hence

this makes it possible for the bidder to pay more for the target.9 The difference is even stronger

when we compute an industry-adjusted q. We estimate this industry-adjusted q by subtracting the

yearly median q of firms in the same 2-digit SIC code. Firms acquired by private bidders have a

lower q relative to their industry median than firms acquired by public bidders. Younger firms

typically have a higher Tobin’s q, but there is no difference in target firm age (measured since

listing on CRSP) between the two types of acquirers, so that age seems an unlikely explanation

for the difference in Tobin’s q. The difference in q is symptomatic of the higher growth

opportunities of firms acquired by public bidders. We show data for the last three years of sales

growth and last three years of employment growth. These measures are often used as proxies for

growth opportunities. Firms acquired by public firms have greater sales growth and greater

employment growth than firms acquired by private firms. They also have higher R&D

expenditures, but there is no difference in the ratio of intangible assets to total assets. Finally, we

find evidence that firms taken over by private firms have greater operating cash flows divided by

total assets.10 Such evidence is consistent with the view that private equity firms can create value

by returning free cash flow to shareholders.

     Since targets acquired by private firms have lower q values than targets acquired by public

firms, we would expect these targets to have performed more poorly than targets acquired by

public firms. However, in Table 2, where we compare the stock market performance measures


9
  See Lang, Stulz, Walkling (1989).
10
   Operating cash flow is defined as in Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004): Sales – COGS – SGA –
changes in NWC. The fraction of operating cash flow over book assets is winsorized at the one percent
level in the regression analysis.


                                                  11
during the preannouncement period (RUNUP and RET_12), we find no difference. The lack of a

difference in stock market performance also suggests that it is unlikely that shareholders gain less

from acquisitions by private firms because the acquisition premium is already partly incorporated

in the stock price. We examine more directly if there is a difference in stock returns close to the

acquisition and find that there is none. As a final check of this possibility, we investigate whether

the asset liquidity measure of Schlingemann, Stulz, and Walkling (2002) differs between the two

types of acquisitions. This measure captures the intensity of the market for corporate control and

asset sales in an industry. If an industry has great asset liquidity, its values might be higher to

reflect possible future acquisition premiums. We find no difference in the measure of asset

liquidity between the two types of acquisitions.

    The stock return volatility of firms acquired by private firms is higher than the stock return

volatility of firms acquired by public firms, which suggests that there is greater uncertainty about

the value of targets acquired by private firms. This greater uncertainty might lead to lower

premiums if bidders act as if they are risk-averse. We also estimate the Amihud (2001) measure

of stock illiquidity, measured as the average ratio of the absolute daily return divided by dollar

daily volume. A higher value of that measure means that a stock’s market is less liquid. We find

that targets acquired by private firms have a much less liquid common stock than firms acquired

by public firms. Targets acquired by private firms have a similar number of segments as targets

acquired by public firms. The variable “FOCUS” is a dummy variable that takes a value one

when the target has only one segment and zero otherwise. There is no significant difference in the

fraction of focused firms between targets of public firm acquirers and targets of private firm

acquirers. A large fraction of targets trades on NASDAQ, but that fraction is the same across

private and public bidders.

    Panel B of Table 3 shows deal characteristics. All information is obtained from SDC, unless

otherwise noted. We find that the dollar value of the deals is significantly higher for public firm

acquisitions than for private firm acquisitions. Premiums with tender offers tend to be higher (see


                                                   12
e.g., Huang and Walkling, 1987). Public firms are more likely to be involved in tender offers than

private firms. We find that acquisitions by private firms are more likely to be diversifying

acquisitions than acquisitions by public firms (meaning that the target is in a different 2-digit SIC

code than the bidder). This finding is not surprising since so many of our acquisitions are by

private equity firms. In fact, when we only consider private operating bidders, we do not find a

difference in the proportion of diversifying transactions between private and public bidder deals.

Similarly, it is not surprising that more private firm acquisitions are management buyouts. Betton

and Eckbo (2000) provide evidence that premiums are lower for acquirers with toeholds. Private

firms are more likely to have a toehold than public firms. There is no difference in the proportion

of hostile offers across types of acquirers, which is not surprising given the low proportion of

hostile flagged transactions in recent acquisition samples. Targets of acquisitions by public firms

are more likely to use defensive tactics – in fact in our sample no target of a private firm uses

defensive tactics according to SDC. Bidder lockups are significantly more likely for public

acquisitions than for private ones. Burch (2001) finds that target lockups are associated with

higher target gains. We find that target lockups are slightly more likely for targets of public firm

acquirers. Officer (2003) shows that target termination fees result in significantly higher

premiums. We find that targets in public firm acquisitions are much more likely to have a

termination fee than targets in private firm acquisitions, so that this difference in the frequency of

termination fees might help explain the difference in shareholder gains. We use two measures of

competition, which differ from the competed flag in SDC. The first measure (COMPETE)

indicates if the offer we consider follows some other prior offer. Such an outcome is equally

likely for private firm acquisitions as it is for public firm acquisitions. The second measure

(INITBID) indicates if the announcement of the offer is followed by an offer by another firm,

while no previous bids took place. We find that such an outcome is weakly more likely for offers

made by private firms. Finally, in contrast to conventional wisdom we find that it takes almost a

month longer on average for a private acquisition to be completed than for a public one.


                                                 13
4.2. Regression analysis

    Our comparison of target and deal characteristics suggests that there are many reasons why

shareholders of targets acquired by private firms might fare worse than shareholders of targets

acquired by public firms. To investigate whether these differences in target and deal

characteristics can explain why public acquirers pay more than private acquirers, we estimate

multivariate regressions. In these regressions, we use abnormal returns as the dependent variable

and the target and deal characteristics as explanatory variables. We include an indicator variable

(PRIVATE) for acquisitions by private firms. If target and deal characteristics explain the

difference in abnormal returns, this indicator variable should be insignificantly different from

zero in our multiple regressions.

    Table 4 shows the regression estimates. We use two different dependent variables: the three-

day announcement abnormal return (CAR3) using the market model in regression models (1) –

(4) and the size and book-to-market adjusted buy-and-hold return to completion (FFRET) in

regression models (5) – (8). We first discuss the results for the regressions using the three-day

announcement abnormal return. Strikingly, the private bidder indicator variable has a magnitude

greater than 0.099 (in absolute value) across all four regressions with a p-value below one

percent. Consequently, our conclusion that shareholders of firms acquired by private acquirers

gain less than shareholders of firms acquired by public firms is robust to controlling for firm and

deal characteristics. We find that target shareholders realize smaller gains when their firm is

larger, has a higher Tobin’s q, has performed better in the recent past and over the past year, the

asset liquidity of the target’s industry is high, and the offer comes after a prior offer by another

firm. Both the asset liquidity variable and the competition variable capture the higher valuation of

the target resulting from an active market for corporate control. In addition, target shareholders

gain more when the acquisition is hostile and when it is a tender offer.

    When we turn to the regressions which use the size and book-to-market adjusted buy-and-

hold returns from announcement to close of the acquisition, we find that in all the regressions


                                                14
reported (as well as additional regressions not reported) the private bidder indicator variable has a

magnitude greater than 0.086 in absolute value with a p-value below one percent. All the

significant control variables in the regressions using the three-day abnormal return as the

dependent variable are also significant when we use the return to completion instead. The

difference in abnormal returns using announcement period returns and returns to the close of the

deal in the regressions is similar to the difference reported in the univariate comparisons.

    We also estimate regressions in which we allow the indicator variable to differ across the

three different types of private acquirers: private equity bidders, private operating bidders, and

private group bidders. Though we do not report the results in a table, the coefficient on each

dummy variable representing one of the three bidder types is significant at the five percent level

or better. While the coefficient on the private operating bidder type is lower than the coefficient

on both the private equity and private group indicators, the differences among any of the three

variables are insignificant. We also estimate the regressions of Table 4 with an additional dummy

variable for management buyouts. We find that the gains of target shareholders are not

significantly different for management buyouts compared to other acquisitions by private

acquirers.

    OLS regressions are vulnerable to departures from normality. To evaluate the strength of our

results, we also estimated median and robust regressions. These regressions put less weight on

extreme observations. These regressions (not reported) do not change our conclusions. However,

while the estimate of the difference in target returns between public and private bidders is lower

in these regressions at roughly five percent, it continues to be statistically significant with p-

values below one percent.




                                                 15
5. Bidder characteristics and the gains to target shareholders for public firm acquisitions

and private firm acquisitions

    So far we have shown an economically large and statistically significant difference in target

shareholder gains between acquisitions by private firms and acquisitions by public firms. Target

and deal characteristics do not explain this difference. We investigate next whether the lower

shareholder gains in acquisitions by private firms can be explained by differences in bidder

characteristics. In contrast to public acquirer deals, such an investigation is necessarily limited by

the fact that there is not much information available on private acquirers. Nevertheless, private

acquirers have concentrated ownership. If a private acquirer is a private operating company, it

cannot have diffuse ownership because its stock is not publicly listed. If a private acquirer is a

private equity firm it can have many investors, but decisions are made by a managing partner

whose high-powered incentives are closely aligned with those of investors. We therefore

investigate the hypothesis that private firms pay less for targets because their managers have

better incentives to maximize firm value than managers of diffusely held public corporations.

This difference in incentives makes it less likely that managers of private firms will make

acquisitions that benefit them at the expense of other shareholders in their company. In contrast,

managers of public companies may benefit from acquisitions even if these acquisitions do not

benefit shareholders. For instance, Bebchuck and Grinstein (2007) find that compensation of

managers increases as the firm they manage becomes larger, so that mergers that increase firm

size may increase managerial compensation even if they destroy shareholder wealth. As

previously mentioned, Harford and Li (2007) find that managers experience wealth increases in

most cases where acquisitions destroy shareholder wealth. Managers of public companies also

gain prestige and perks if they manage larger companies.

    If private firms pay less for acquisitions than public firms do because their ownership is more

concentrated, we would expect the difference in target shareholder gains between private and

public acquirers to be less when ownership of the public acquirer is more concentrated. To test


                                                 16
this hypothesis, we collect ownership data for the public bidders in our sample from Compact

Disclosure CD’s. We collect the ownership data from the CD that contains the most recent

information on ownership for officers and directors prior to the announcement date. As is

common in the literature, we call this ownership the firm’s managerial ownership. We then

estimate our abnormal announcement return regressions using different samples of public firms to

estimate the coefficient on the private firm indicator variable. The samples of public firms differ

by their level of managerial ownership.

    As we compare the target shareholder gains associated with private firm acquisitions to the

shareholder gains of public firm acquisitions in Panel A of Table 5, we find that the difference in

shareholder gains falls as the managerial ownership of public firms increases. The results are

striking. We investigate the sub-samples with public bidder managerial ownership greater than or

equal to 5%, 10%, 15%, 25%, and 50%. We reproduce regressions using model (4) of Table 4,

which is the model with the highest adjusted R-square using the announcement abnormal return

as the dependent variable. The estimate of the difference in abnormal returns is a highly

significant (7.35%) for the firms with managerial ownership of at least 5%, but is only one fourth

in magnitude and insignificant (1.78%) for firms with managerial ownership of at least 50%. In a

regression not reported in the table, we find that when we compare the target returns of private

firm acquisitions to the target returns of public firm acquisitions, the difference in target returns is

not significant if the public firms are restricted to have managerial ownership of at least 20%.

Those are the firms that most closely resemble private firms in their ownership structure.

    A legitimate concern with this approach is that, as we compare the shareholder gains of

private firm acquisitions to the shareholder gains of acquisitions by highly concentrated public

firms, the number of public firms becomes small. Yet, we have 86 public firms for which

managers own more than 25% of the shares. Further, the difference in shareholder gains between

acquisitions by public firms and acquisitions by private firms falls sharply as managerial

ownership increases.


                                                  17
    Another approach is to split the bidders into sub-samples based on managerial ownership. We

estimate our regressions (not reported) on sub-samples with public bidder managerial ownership

below 5%, from 5 to less than 15%, from 15 to less than 25%, from 25 to less than 50%, and

greater than or equal to 50%. Strikingly, for acquisitions by public firms with managerial

ownership below 5%, the difference in the target shareholder gain between public firm

acquisitions and private firm acquisitions is 10.78% with a p-value of less than one percent. The

only sub-samples with a consistent significant difference between abnormal returns for

acquisitions by public firms and by private firms are those with ownership below 5%, from 5% to

less than 15%, and from 15% to less than 25%. When we look at returns to the completion of the

deal, the only significant difference between acquirer types is for public acquirers with

managerial ownership below 5%, but this difference is 11.98%.

    In Panel B of Table 5 we investigate the role of bidder managerial ownership on each of the

three categories of private bidders: private equity bidders, private operating bidders, and private

bidder groups. We find that the difference in target gains between acquisitions by public acquirers

and acquisitions by any of the three private bidder categories is insignificant in cases where the

managerial ownership of the public bidder firm is at least 50%. However, target shareholders earn

significantly less when acquired by a private operating firm only when compared to being

acquired by a public firm with managerial ownership below 5% (not reported). Further, target

shareholders earn less when acquired by a private equity bidder or a private bidder group than

when acquired by a public firm unless the public firm has managerial ownership of at least 25%

and 50% respectively. In regressions not reproduced in the table, we find that the target

shareholder gains for acquisitions by private acquirers are lower than the target shareholder gains

for acquisitions by public acquirers with managerial ownership smaller than 5% for each type of

private acquirer.

    Another way to shed light on the importance of managerial agency problems as a potential

explanation for the difference in target shareholder gains is to investigate how this difference


                                                18
holds up as the size of the public acquirer varies. One would expect that managers have more

discretion in large companies because the costs of collective action for shareholders are larger in

such companies. We therefore predict that the difference in target shareholder gains between

private and public acquirers is smaller for smaller public acquirers. As we show in Panel A of

Table 6, this is the case.11 In fact, shareholders of targets acquired by public firms earn an

additional 17% of pre-acquisition firm value when the acquisition is made by an acquirer in the

top size quartile of public firms instead of by a private firm, but they earn only an insignificant

additional 3% when the acquisition is made instead by an acquirer in the bottom size quartile of

public bidders.

     The evidence suggests that the gains to target shareholders from being acquired by a private

firm are similar to the gains these shareholders would make if their firm were acquired by a small

public firm but not by a large public firm. It is known from Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz

(2004) that targets receive larger premiums from larger bidders. The results in this paper point to

agency costs as an explanation for their finding. It is important to note, however, that size alone

does not appear to be sufficient to explain the difference in target shareholder gains between

acquisitions by private firms and acquisitions by public firms. When we match private acquirer

deals to public acquirer deals of same size, we find that the target abnormal return for the private

acquirer deals is 7.48% lower than the target abnormal return for public acquirer deals and the

difference is significant well below the one percent level.

     In Panel B of Table 6 we allow for differences in target gains for different types of private

bidders. We find that target gains are always lower when the bidder is classified as a private

bidder group than when the bidder is a public firm, even compared to the gains the shareholders

would obtain if their firm were acquired by a small public firm. Further, shareholders acquired by

private equity firms or private operating firms have lower gains than if their firm were acquired

11
  We estimate our regressions restricting the public acquirers to belong to size quartiles since, not having
the size of private acquirers, we cannot use a bidder size variable as is common in regressions seeking to
explain acquisition abnormal returns.


                                                    19
by firms in all quartiles of public bidder sizes except for the public acquirers in the smallest size

quartile.

    It is often argued that institutional investors reduce the importance of managerial agency

problems. We collect institutional ownership data from Compact Disclosure and compare the

gains of target shareholders in acquisitions by private firms to the gains of target shareholders in

acquisitions by public firms with different levels of holdings by institutional shareholders.

Though we do not report the results in a table, we find that the private firm indicator variable in

our regressions does not vary much as the institutional investor threshold for the public firm

comparison group increases.

    Finally, if managers of private firms have better incentives to maximize shareholder wealth,

we would expect them to be less likely to overpay and hence more likely to walk away from a

deal than managers from public firms. We find that there indeed is a striking difference. For

private firm acquisitions, 36.2% of the offers are withdrawn. In contrast, only 13.8% of the offers

are withdrawn when the acquirer is a public firm.



6. Can the incentives of target managers explain the return difference?

    A concern in the press is that managers of private firms have two advantages over managers

of public firms. First, they are not subject to the greater monitoring that comes from having to

report quarterly results and they do not have to deal with the laws and regulations that affect

public firms. At a time when there is much discussion about the costs of Sarbanes-Oxley,

managers of private firms are not affected by these costs. Second, managers of private firms can

make an outsized payoff when the firm is taken public. It would therefore not be surprising if

private bidders could convince managers of public firms to be acquired in exchange for keeping

their job and receiving a share of the payout when the acquired firm goes public. With such a

view, one would expect that target managers would be less diligent in getting the best possible

deal for their shareholders. Existing empirical evidence is supportive of the view that managers


                                                 20
may have at times incentives to obtain more personal benefits from an acquisition at the expense

of their shareholders. In particular, Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack (2004) show that target

abnormal returns are less when the target’s CEO receives large personal benefits from the

acquisition.

    As managerial ownership in the target firm increases, the post-acquisition payoff from an

acquisition by a private bidder becomes smaller relative to the loss in premium resulting from

acquiescing to a low premium offer. We therefore expect less of a difference in abnormal returns

between bidder types for targets with high managerial ownership. We also predict it to be harder

for target managers to acquiesce to a low premium if their firm has high ownership by

institutional investors. To test these predictions, we collect managerial ownership and

institutional ownership for the target firms from Compact Disclosure.

    We find little difference in managerial ownership between targets of private firms and targets

of public firms. Mean managerial ownership is 21.36% for acquisitions by private firms and

19.32% for acquisitions by public firms. This difference is not significant. The median difference

is significant, but firms acquired by private acquirers have higher median managerial ownership

than firms acquired by public acquirers (13.93% versus 10.48%). This result suggests that private

acquirers do not systematically target low managerial ownership firms. When it comes to

institutional ownership, we again find no difference in the means (29.53% for targets of private

firms versus 36.94% for targets of public firms), but a significant difference in the medians

(24.08% versus 28.12%).

    In Table 7, models (1) and (2) are based on regression (4) and (8) respectively of Table 4 with

target managerial and institutional ownership added as explanatory variables. We find that target

managerial ownership is significant for the three-day abnormal return (CAR3) and that both

target managerial ownership and institutional ownership are significant for the returns to the

completion of the deal (FFRET). The coefficients on the ownership variables are positive and

significant, indicating that targets receive higher returns when managerial ownership and, less


                                                21
clearly, institutional ownership are higher. However, adding our ownership variables to the

regressions has no impact on the magnitude of the coefficient on the private bidder indicator

variable.

    It is conceivable that the relation between the ownership variables and the target gains is

nonlinear. While managers’ incentives to extract a higher premium are expected to increase with

managerial ownership, the likelihood for managers to tender their shares and for the offer to

succeed may decrease in managerial ownership, therefore reducing the premium (see, e.g., Stulz,

1998). To address this possibility, we add the square of the ownership variables in models (3) and

(4) to allow for a nonlinear relation between target gains and the ownership variables. Once we

allow for nonlinear effects, none of the ownership variables are significant. It should be noted that

these regressions suffer from a serious multicollinearity problem because the squared values are

highly correlated with the level values.

    Finally, in models (5) and (6) we explore whether the ownership variables have a different

impact on target gains for acquisitions by private firms and for acquisitions by public firms. Since

we now interact the private bidder indicator with ownership measures we de-mean the ownership

variables to maintain the interpretation of the private bidder intercept coefficient (see e.g. Aiken

and West, 1991). We find no evidence that the ownership variables have a different effect on

target gains when a private firm makes the acquisition.



7. Conclusion

    In this paper, we compare the target shareholder wealth gains of acquisitions made by public

firms to acquisitions made by private firms. We find that target shareholders gain statistically and

economically more if a public firm makes the acquisition. Strikingly, target shareholders gain

43% more if a public firm, instead of a private firm, makes the acquisition. Target shareholders

gain even more, 55%, if a public firm instead of a private equity firm makes the acquisition.




                                                 22
    We investigate why target shareholder wealth gains differ so much depending on whether the

acquirer is a public or a private company? We conclude that observable differences in targets

cannot explain the difference in abnormal returns. However, we find that differences in

managerial ownership between the different types of acquirers can explain why target

shareholders prefer to be acquired by public bidders. We assume that private bidders have

concentrated ownership and that managers have high-powered incentives. We find that the

difference in abnormal returns is highest between acquisitions made by private bidders and by

public acquirers with low managerial ownership. As the managerial ownership of the public

bidder increases, so that the ownership of the public acquirer becomes more similar to the

ownership of the private acquirers, the difference in abnormal returns between the two types of

bidders becomes small and insignificant.

    Our evidence suggests that public firms are more likely to pay too much for acquisitions

because of their diffuse ownership. This evidence helps us to better understand the nature of

target shareholder gains from acquisitions. In particular, this evidence suggests that agency

problems have to be part of the explanation for why bidder shareholders often incur losses when

public bidders announce an acquisition.




                                              23
References

Aiken, L.S., West, S.G., 1991. Multiple regression: testing and interpreting interactions. Newbury

    Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of

    Financial Markets 5, 31-56.

Bebchuck, L.A, Grinstein, Y., 2007. Firm expansion and CEO pay. Harvard Law School

    Working Paper #53, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Berle, A.A. Jr., Means, G.C., 1932. The modern corporation and private property. MacMillan,

    New York.

Betton, S., Eckbo B., 2000. Toeholds, bid jumps, and expected payoffs in takeovers. Review of

    Financial Studies 13, 841-882.

Brown, S., Warner J., 1985. Using daily stock returns, the case of event studies, Journal of

    Financial Economics, 14, 3-31.

Burch, T. R., 2001. Locking out rival bidders: The use of lockup options in corporate mergers.

    Journal of Financial Economics 60, 103-141.

DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Rice, E. M., 1984. Going private: Minority freezeouts and

    stockholder wealth. Journal of Law and Economics 27(2), 367-402.

Harford, J., Li, K., 2007. Decoupling CEO wealth and firm performance: The case of acquiring

    CEOs. Journal of Finance 62. 917-950.

Hartzell, J. C., E. Ofek, and D. Yermack, 2004. What's in it for me? CEOs whose firms are

    acquired. Review of Financial Studies 17, 37-61.

Huang, Y., Walkling, R., 1987. Target abnormal returns associated with acquisition

    announcements: Payment, acquisition form, and managerial resistance. Journal of Financial

    Economics 19, 329-349.

Kaplan, S., 1989. The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value.

    Journal of Financial Economics 24, 217-254.


                                               24
Lang, L.H.P., Stulz, R.M., Walkling, R.A., 1989. Managerial performance, Tobin’s Q, and the

    gains from successful tender offers. Journal of Financial Economics 24, 137-154.

Lehn, K., Poulsen, A., 1989. Free cash flow and stockholder gains in going private transactions.

    Journal of Finance 44, 771-787.

Moeller, S., Schlingemann, F., Stulz, R., 2004. Firm size and the gains from acquisitions. Journal

    of Financial Economics 73, 201-228.

Officer, M., 2003. Termination fees in mergers and acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics

    69, 431-467.

Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., Walkling, R.A., 2002. Divestitures and the liquidity of the

    market for corporate assets. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 117-144.

Schwert, G., 1996. Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics

    41, 153-192.

Stulz, R., 1988. Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the market for

    corporate control. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25-54.




                                               25
Table 1
Distribution of number of deals, deal value, and type of private bidder over time
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed pure cash mergers, acquisitions of assets,
acquisitions of certain assets, and acquisitions of a majority interest announced between 1990 and 2005
where the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm. The
aggregated deal value in Panel B comes from aggregating the individual deal values from SDC.
Information from the LexisNexis database is used to classify private bidders in Panel C.

Panel A: Number of deals
                  All deals                   Private bidder deals                     Public bidder deals
Year                  n                          n            %                          n            %
1990                 30                          5           16.7                       25           83.3
1991                 20                          6           30.0                       14           70.0
1992                 19                          6           31.6                       13           68.4
1993                 25                          7           28.0                       18           72.0
1994                 55                         16           29.1                       39           70.9
1995                 91                         19           20.9                       72           79.1
1996                 92                         25           27.2                       67           72.8
1997                119                         34           28.6                       85           71.4
1998                136                         47           34.6                       89           65.4
1999                156                         51           32.7                       105          67.3
2000                134                         49           36.6                       85           63.4
2001                100                         28           28.0                       72           72.0
2002                 80                         25           31.3                       55           68.8
2003                 89                         41           46.1                       48           53.9
2004                 80                         27           33.8                       53           66.3
2005                 66                         21           31.8                       45           68.2

Total               1292                       407           31.5                       885          68.5
Panel B: Aggregate deal value ($ millions)
               All deals                     Private bidder deals                     Public bidder deals
              Aggregate                    Aggregate                                Aggregate
Year          deal value                   deal value        %                      deal value       %
1990            3,386.37                       213.96        6.3                      3,172.41      93.7
1991            2,067.49                       150.75        7.3                      1,916.74      92.7
1992            3,408.71                       312.32        9.2                      3,096.39      90.8
1993            5,354.97                       812.53       15.2                      4,542.44      84.8
1994           27,931.67                     2,647.57        9.5                     25,284.10      90.5
1995           27,246.59                     1,240.25        4.6                     26,006.34      95.4
1996           37,428.51                     3,362.68        9.0                     34,065.83      91.0
1997           47,368.30                     6,287.40       13.3                     41,080.90      86.7
1998           52,264.76                     9,964.12       19.1                     42,300.64      80.9
1999           67,085.85                    10,219.01       15.2                     56,866.84      84.8
2000           94,248.45                     8,056.93        8.5                     86,191.52      91.5
2001           30,415.93                     4,476.15       14.7                     25,939.78      85.3
2002           17,649.04                     2,004.40       11.4                     15,644.64      88.6
2003           27,997.68                     3,490.68       12.5                     24,507.00      87.5
2004           66,918.17                    20,914.78       31.3                     46,003.39      68.7
2005           55,909.95                    18,733.01       33.5                     37,176.94      66.5

Total          566,682.40                  92,886.54        16.4                    473,795.90       83.6




                                                     26
Table 1 – Continued
Panel C: Type of private bidder
               Private equity bidder        Private operating bidder         Private bidder group
                             % of                          % of                           % of
Year          n         All      Private    n         All       Private   n           All      Private
1990          1         3.3       20.0      2          6.7       40.0      2          6.7       40.0
1991          2        10.0       33.3      3         15.0       50.0      1          5.0       16.7
1992          1         5.3       16.7      3         15.8       50.0      2         10.5       33.3
1993          3        12.0       42.9      3         12.0       42.9      1          4.0       14.3
1994          3         5.5       18.8      9         16.4       56.3      4          7.3       25.0
1995          5         5.5       26.3     12         13.2       63.2      2          2.2       10.5
1996          9         9.8       36.0     14         15.2       56.0      2          2.2        8.0
1997         20        16.8       58.8     10          8.4       29.4     4           3.4       11.8
1998         15        11.0       31.9     23         16.9       48.9      9          6.6       19.1
1999         27        17.3       52.9     16         10.3       31.4      8          5.1       15.7
2000         19        14.2       38.8     18         13.4       36.7     12          9.0       24.5
2001          6         6.0       21.4     12         12.0       42.9     10         10.0       35.7
2002         10        12.5       40.0     11         13.8       44.0      4          5.0       16.0
2003         23        25.8       56.1     11         12.4       26.8      7          7.9       17.1
2004         18        22.5       66.7      6          7.5       22.2      3          3.8       11.1
2005         12        18.2       57.1      8         12.1       38.1      1          1.5        4.8

Total        174       13.5       42.8     161        12.5       39.6     72         5.6       17.7




                                                 27
Table 2
Target return measures for different bidder types
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed cash mergers announced between 1990 and 2005
where the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm. In
Panel A, mean and median [in brackets] return measures are reported for the full sample (All) and for the
sub-samples containing private, public bidders, and their difference respectively. In Panel B, mean and
median [in brackets] return measures are reported for each private bidder type. The p-value for each
difference between the mean [median] return for the private bidder type and public bidders is also reported.
In Panel C the difference in mean [median] returns and its significance level is reported across the private
bidder types. All reported p-values are based on t-tests for differences in the mean and on Wilcoxon tests
for differences in the median. The variables CAR3, CAR5, and CAR11 are respectively the 3-, 5-, and 11-
day cumulative abnormal returns around the announcement day, based on market model residuals. The
variable FFRET is the Fama-French size and book-to-market adjusted buy-and-hold return from one day
before the announcement to the completion date of the transaction. RUNUP is the market-adjusted buy-
and-hold return from 63 days prior to the announcement to 6 days prior to the announcement and ARET_12
is the market-adjusted buy-and-hold return for the 12 months prior to the runup period.
Panel A: Private versus public bidders
                            All                Private              Public           Difference p-value
CAR3                      0.2873               0.2220               0.3174             -0.0954      <0.001
                         [0.2280]             [0.1847]             [0.2517]           [-0.0670]     <0.001
CAR5                      0.2978               0.2265               0.3306             -0.1041      <0.001
                         [0.2364]             [0.1893]             [0.2615]           [-0.0722]     <0.001
CAR11                     0.3145               0.2418               0.3479             -0.1061      <0.001
                         [0.2572]             [0.2092]             [0.2788]           [-0.0696]     <0.001
FFRET                     0.3039              0.2421              0.3324              -0.0903       0.000
                        [0.2441]             [0.1947]            [0.2695]            [-0.0748]      0.001
RUNUP                    0.0771               0.0654              0.0825              -0.0171       0.354
                        [0.0360]             [0.0239]            [0.0437]            [-0.0197]      0.169
ARET_12                  -0.0788              -0.0608             -0.0871             0.0263        0.506
                        [-0.1754]            [-0.1734]           [-0.1827]           [0.0093]       0.765




                                                    28
Table 2 – Continued
Panel B: Return measures by private bidder type
                  Private   Difference           Private     Difference      Private    Difference
                  equity       from             operating      from          bidder       from
                  bidder      Public             bidder       Public         group       Public
                  n=174       p-value            n=161        p-value         n=72       p-value
CAR3              0.2047      <0.001             0.2456        0.023         0.2106       0.002
                 [0.1851]     <0.001            [0.1979]      <0.001        [0.1625]      0.002
CAR5              0.2080      <0.001             0.2496        0.012         0.2196       0.002
                 [0.1760]     <0.001            [0.2048]       0.008        [0.1747]     <0.001
CAR11             0.2183      <0.001             0.2708        0.030         0.2340       0.002
                 [0.1920]     <0.001            [0.2287]       0.005        [0.1887]      0.028
FFRET              0.2032      <0.001              0.2813       0.155        0.2481       0.098
                 [0.1859]      <0.001            [0.2263]       0.104       [0.2357]      0.468
RUNUP             0.0466       0.162              0.0878        0.846        0.0607       0.574
                 [0.0028]      0.048             [0.0483]       0.932       [0.0420]      0.993
ARET_12           -0.0743      0.786              -0.0160       0.341       -0.1285]      0.462
                 [-0.1725]     0.858             [-0.1734]      0.669       [-0.1775]     0.993
Panel C: Return measure differences among private bidder types
                       Private Equity –              Private Equity –        Private Operating –
                      Private Operating                Private Group            Private Group
                   Difference     p-value        Difference      p-value   Difference     p-value
CAR3                -0.0409         0.232          -0.0059        0.862      0.0350        0.411
                   [-0.0127]        0.414         [0.0226]        0.576     [0.0353]       0.277
CAR5                -0.0416         0.237          -0.0116        0.740      0.0300        0.499
                   [-0.0288]        0.301         [0.0013]        0.999     [0.0301]       0.421
CAR11               -0.0524         0.169          -0.0156        0.687      0.0368        0.442
                   [-0.0366]        0.550         [0.0033]        0.999     [0.0400]       0.421
FFRET               -0.0780         0.056          -0.0449        0.412      0.0332        0.596
                   [-0.0404]        0.210         [-0.0497]       0.162    [-0.0094]       0.965
RUNUP               -0.0412         0.213          -0.0141        0.748      0.0271        0.558
                   [-0.0455]        0.141         [-0.0393]       0.576     [0.0063]       0.965
ARET_12             -0.0583         0.479          0.0542         0.444      0.1125        0.208
                    [0.0009]        0.955         [0.0050]        0.999     [0.0041]       0.483




                                                  29
Table 3
Summary statistics on target and deal characteristics
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed pure cash mergers between 1990 and 2005 where
the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm. In Panel A,
mean and median [in brackets] values for target characteristics are reported. Accounting variables are from
Compustat. The market value of equity (MVE) is from CRSP calculated as the price of the stock times the
number of shares outstanding 63 days prior to the announcement. Debt-to-assets (DEBT) is calculated as
the book value of debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity.
Tobin’s q (Q) is defined as the firm market value divided by the book value of assets. Industry-adjusted
Tobin’s q (IAQ) is defined as Tobin’s q minus the median 2-digit SIC code industry value of this variable.
Age (AGE) is the number of months since the firm has been listed on CRSP. Sales growth (ΔSALES) and
employee growth (ΔEMPLOYEE) are both based on the three-year compounded annual growth in sales and
number of employees. R&D is the expense on research and development divided by the book value of
assets. Intangible assets (INTANGIBLE) is calculated as the fraction of the firm’s assets minus net PPE
and minus current assets, divided by the book value of assets. Operating cash flow (OCF) is defined as
sales minus costs of goods sold, sales and general administrative expenses, and change in net working
capital, divided by book value of assets. TARLIQ is the liquidity of the market for corporate control for the
target firm’s industry and is defined as the value of all corporate control transactions for $1 million or more
reported by SDC for each year and two-digit SIC code divided by the total book value of assets of all
Compustat firms in the same two-digit SIC code and year. STDEVAR and STDEV are defined as
respectively the standard deviation of the market model residuals and raw returns from day -379 to day -
127 relative to the announcement day. STOCKLIQ is the measure of stock illiquidity of Amihud (2002).
SEGMENTS is the number of business segments reported on Compustat. FOCUS is an indicator variable
equal to one if SEGMENTS is equal to one. NASDAQ is an indicator variable equal to one if the target
firm is listed on the Nasdaq exchange. In Panel B, mean (and median for continuous variables in brackets)
values are reported for deal characteristics. The deal value ($ million) (DEALVALUE) is the total value of
consideration (cash) paid by the acquirer, excluding fees and expenses. TENDER, DIVERSIFY, MBO,
TOEHOLD, HOSTILE, BANKRUPT, DEFENSE, TARLOCK, BIDLOCK, and TARTERM, BIDTERM,
are indicator variables from SDC equal to one if the deal respectively is a tender offer, involves a target
with a two-digit SIC code other than that of the bidder, is classified as a management buyout, involves a
bidder that holds 0.5% or more of the target stock prior to the announcement, is hostile, includes a bankrupt
target, includes a defensive tactic, includes target or bidder lockup provisions, includes target or bidder
termination fees. COMPETE is an indicator variable equal to one if another deal for the same target is
announced in SDC during the 12 months prior to the announcement date. INITBID is an indicator variable
equal to one if the announcement of the offer is followed by an offer by another firm, while no bids took
place during the 12 months before the announcement. The variable DAY is the number of calendar days
between the announcement date and the completion date.
Panel A: Target characteristics
                            All             Private                  Public            Difference     p-value
MVE                      245.68             147.96                   290.62             -142.66       <0.001
                        [67.94]            [47.78]                  [85.02]             [-37.25]      <0.001
DEBT                      0.187              0.213                    0.175              0.038         0.002
                        [0.125]            [0.153]                  [0.113]             [0.040]        0.106
Q                         1.454              1.212                    1.565              -0.353       <0.001
                        [1.149]            [1.042]                  [1.229]             [-0.187]      <0.001
IAQ                      -0.084             -0.262                   -0.001              -0.261       <0.001
                        [-0.146]           [-0.266]                 [-0.095]            [-0.171]      <0.001
AGE                        128                126                      129                 -3          0.711
                           [87]               [87]                     [87]                [0]         0.857
ΔSALES                   0.180              0.132                    0.204               -0.073        0.014
                        [0.094]            [0.065]                  [0.102]             [-0.038]       0.044
ΔEMPLOYEE                0.080              0.060                    0.090               -0.030        0.108
                        [0.038]            [0.017]                  [0.046]             [-0.029]       0.018



                                                      30
Table 3 – Continued
                        All      Private         Public    Difference   p-value
R&D                    0.047      0.025          0.057       -0.032     <0.001
                      [0.000]    [0.000]        [0.000]     [0.000]     <0.001
INTANGIBLE             0.207      0.211          0.205        0.005      0.641
                      [0.149]    [0.143]        [0.151]     [-0.008]     0.630
OCF                    0.072      0.105          0.057        0.047      0.002
                      [0.092]    [0.097]        [0.089]     [0.008]      0.209
TARLIQ                 0.065      0.061          0.067       -0.006      0.256
                      [0.045]    [0.044]        [0.045]     [-0.001]     0.857
STDEVAR                0.040      0.043          0.039        0.004      0.007
                      [0.036]    [0.037]        [0.035]     [0.002]      0.169
STDEV                  0.041      0.044          0.040        0.004      0.012
                      [0.036]    [0.038]        [0.036]     [0.002]      0.169
STOCKLIQ               0.737      1.244          0.503        0.740      0.012
                      [0.048]    [0.139]        [0.029]     [0.110]     <0.001
SEGMENTS                1.71       1.73           1.70        0.026      0.624
                       [2.00]     [2.00]         [2.00]     [0.000]      0.447
FOCUS                  0.454      0.439          0.462       -0.023      0.473
NASDAQ                 0.717      0.715          0.719       -0.004      0.892
Panel B: Deal characteristics
                          All    Private         Public    Difference   p-value
DEALVALUE              438.61    228.22          535.36     -307.14     <0.001
                      [118.11]   [73.12]        [147.73]    [-74.61]    <0.001
TENDER                  0.432     0.285           0.499      -0.214     <0.001
DIVERSIFY               0.534     0.732           0.443       0.289     <0.001
MBO                     0.060     0.189           0.001       0.188     <0.001
TOEHOLD                 0.072     0.118           0.051       0.067     <0.001
HOSTILE                 0.014     0.007           0.017      -0.010      0.115
BANKRUPT                0.005     0.010           0.003       0.006      0.223
DEFENSE                 0.004     0.000           0.006      -0.006      0.025
TARLOCK                 0.002     0.000           0.003      -0.003      0.083
BIDLOCK                 0.059     0.029           0.072      -0.043      0.000
TARTERM                 0.622     0.548           0.656      -0.109      0.000
BIDTERM                 0.077     0.081           0.076       0.005      0.737
COMPETE                 0.077     0.091           0.070       0.021      0.211
INITBID                 0.023     0.034           0.018       0.016      0.107
DAY                      110       128             101          27      <0.001
                         [90]     [112]            [79]        [33]     <0.001




                                           31
Table 4
Multivariate regression analysis
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed pure cash mergers announced between 1990 and
2005 where the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm.
The dependent variable in models (1) – (4) is the three-day abnormal announcement return (CAR3) and in
models (5) – (8) the Fama French size and market-to-book adjusted compounded return from one day
before to the announcement date to the completion date (FFRET). PRIVATE is an indicator variable equal
to one if the bidder is a private firm. The market value of equity (MVE) is from CRSP calculated as the
price of the stock times the number of shares outstanding 63 days prior to the announcement. Debt-to-
assets (DEBT) is calculated as the book value of debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the
market value of equity. Tobin’s q (Q) is defined as the firm market value divided by the book value of
assets. Industry-adjusted Tobin’s q (IAQ) is defined as Tobin’s q minus the median 2-digit SIC code
industry value of this variable. Operating cash flow (OCF) is defined as sales minus costs of goods sold,
sales and general administrative expenses, and change in net working capital, divided by the book value of
assets. TARLIQ is the liquidity of the market for corporate control for the target firm’s industry and is
defined as the value of all corporate control transactions for $1 million or more reported by SDC for each
year and two-digit SIC code divided by the total book value of assets of all Compustat firms in the same
two-digit SIC code and year. RUNUP is the market-adjusted compounded return from 63 days prior to the
announcement to 6 days prior to the announcement and ARET_12 is the market-adjusted compounded
return for the 12 months prior to the runup period. STDEVAR and STDEV are defined as respectively the
standard deviation of the market model residuals and raw returns from day -379 to day -127 relative to the
announcement day. STOCKLIQ is the measure of stock illiquidity of Amihud (2002). TENDER,
DIVERSIFY, TOEHOLD, HOSTILE, BIDLOCK, and TARTERM are indicator variables from SDC equal
to one if the deal respectively is a tender offer, involves a target with a two-digit SIC code other than that of
the bidder, involves a bidder that holds 0.5% or more of the target stock prior to the announcement, is
hostile, includes bidder lockup provisions, or includes target termination fees. COMPETE is an indicator
variable equal to one if another deal for the same target is announced in SDC during the 12 months prior to
the announcement date. INITBID is an indicator variable equal to one if the announcement of the offer is
followed by an offer by another firm, while no bids took place during the 12 months before the
announcement. All p-values (in italics) are based on heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors.
Regressions include year and industry (2-digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables.
Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level respectively.
                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                  CAR3         CAR3        CAR3       CAR3        FFRET        FFRET        FFRET       FFRET
PRIVATE         -0.1015a     -0.0994a    -0.1006a    -0.1010a    -0.0894a     -0.0867a    -0.0889a     -0.0893a
                 0.000        0.000       0.000       0.000       0.001        0.001       0.001        0.001
ln (MVE)        -0.0234a     -0.0256a    -0.0249a    -0.0236b    -0.0307a     -0.0300a    -0.0289a     -0.0269b
                 0.001        0.004       0.007       0.011       0.000        0.005       0.008        0.015

Q               -0.0201b     -0.0203b    -0.0192b                -0.0170c     -0.0184c    -0.0171c
                 0.027        0.028       0.035                   0.095        0.072       0.095
IAQ                                                  -0.0270a                                          -0.0300a
                                                      0.005                                              0.007
DEBT             -0.012      -0.0127     -0.0077     -0.0039      0.0109       0.0076      0.0087       0.0126
                 0.845        0.834       0.901       0.948       0.884         0.917       0.907        0.862
OCF              0.0836      0.0831       0.084       0.077       0.0656       0.0703      0.0641       0.0579
                 0.278        0.286       0.283       0.312       0.463         0.443       0.488        0.516
TARLIQ          -0.2876a                 -0.2829a    -0.2921a    -0.3136a                 -0.3072a     -0.3183a
                 0.002                    0.003       0.002       0.008                     0.009        0.007
RUNUP           -0.1654a     -0.1630a    -0.1634a    -0.1632a    -0.1829a     -0.1805a    -0.1808a     -0.1810a
                 0.000        0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000
ARET_12         -0.0527a     -0.0519a    -0.0529a    -0.0514a    -0.0588a     -0.0578a    -0.0589a     -0.0571a
                 0.000        0.000       0.000       0.000       0.001        0.001        0.001        0.002



                                                      32
Table 4 – Continued
                  (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                 CAR3      CAR3       CAR3       CAR3       FFRET      FFRET      FFRET      FFRET
DIVERSIFY      -0.0146    -0.0155    -0.0137    -0.0116    -0.0303    -0.0317    -0.0293    -0.0273
                0.479      0.452       0.507     0.572       0.242     0.222      0.260      0.291
HOSTILE        0.1485b    0.1367b    0.1530b    0.1492b     0.2335a   0.2136a    0.2334a    0.2289a
                0.014      0.026       0.012     0.014       0.002     0.005      0.002      0.003
COMPETE        -0.1015a   -0.1000a   -0.1014a   -0.1014a   -0.1032a   -0.1011a   -0.1028a   -0.1031a
                0.000      0.000       0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000
INITBID        -0.0514    -0.0454    -0.0495    -0.0491     0.0259     0.0328     0.0296     0.0279
                0.203      0.253       0.220     0.220       0.651     0.560      0.605      0.625
TENDER         0.0960a    0.0917a     0.0947a   0.0930a     0.1011a   0.0960a    0.1013a    0.0977a
                0.000      0.000       0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000
TARTERM         0.0184     0.0179     0.0186     0.0196     0.0295     0.0289     0.0295     0.0305
                0.370      0.378       0.361     0.334       0.253     0.255      0.247      0.232
TOEHOLD         -0.022    -0.0166    -0.0201    -0.0199    -0.0339    -0.0283    -0.0322    -0.0328
                0.456      0.573       0.496     0.499       0.450     0.525      0.473      0.465
STDEV                     -0.1011                                      0.3103
                           0.886                                       0.717
STDEVAR                              -0.1583    -0.1864                          -0.0266     0.224
                                      0.841      0.796                            0.978      0.795
BIDLOCK                   0.0522     0.0497     0.0502                 0.045     0.0444     0.0421
                          0.128       0.151      0.144                 0.313      0.324      0.345
STOCKLIQ                             -0.0002                                     0.0028
                                      0.905                                       0.167
Constant       0.4352a    0.3661a    0.4344a    0.4016a    0.5997a    0.4815a    0.5921a    0.5525a
                0.000      0.001      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.001      0.000      0.000
n               1288       1292       1288       1288       1288       1292       1288       1288
Adj. R2         0.134       0.13      0.133      0.137       0.14      0.137       0.14      0.143




                                                 33
Table 5
Multivariate regressions by public bidder managerial ownership
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed pure cash mergers announced between 1990 and
2005 where the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm
with managerial ownership (own) cutoffs of 5, 10, 15, 25, and 50% respectively using the officers and
directors entry on Compact Disclosure. The dependent variable in models (1)–(5) is the three-day abnormal
announcement return (CAR3). In Panel A, PRIVATE is an indicator variable equal to one if the bidder is a
private firm. In Panel B, PRIVATE EQUITY, PRIVATE OPERATING BIDDER, and PRIVATE GROUP
are indicator variables based on the classification of private bidders using a Lexis-Nexis search. The market
value of equity (MVE) is from CRSP calculated as the price of the stock times the number of shares
outstanding 63 days prior to the announcement. Debt-to-assets (DEBT) is calculated as the book value of
debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity. Tobin’s q (Q) is defined
as the firm market value divided by the book value of assets. Industry-adjusted Tobin’s q (IAQ) is defined
as Tobin’s q minus the median 2-digit SIC code industry value of this variable. Operating cash flow (OCF)
is defined as sales minus costs of goods sold, sales and general administrative expenses, and change in net
working capital, divided by the book value of assets. TARLIQ is the liquidity of the market for corporate
control for the target firm’s industry and is defined as the value of all corporate control transactions for $1
million or more reported by SDC for each year and two-digit SIC code divided by the total book value of
assets of all Compustat firms in the same two-digit SIC code and year. RUNUP is the market-adjusted
compounded return from 63 days prior to the announcement to 6 days prior to the announcement and
ARET_12 is the market-adjusted compounded return for the 12 months prior to the runup period.
STDEVAR and STDEV are defined as respectively the standard deviation of the market model residuals
and raw returns from day -379 to day -127 relative to the announcement day. STOCKLIQ is the measure of
stock illiquidity of Amihud (2002). TENDER, DIVERSIFY, TOEHOLD, HOSTILE, BIDLOCK, and
TARTERM are indicator variables from SDC equal to one if the deal respectively is a tender offer, involves
a target with a two-digit SIC code other than that of the bidder, involves a bidder that holds 0.5% or more of
the target stock prior to the announcement, is hostile, includes bidder lockup provisions, or includes target
termination fees. COMPETE is an indicator variable equal to one if another deal for the same target is
announced in SDC during the 12 months prior to the announcement date. INITBID is an indicator variable
equal to one if the announcement of the offer is followed by an offer by another firm, while no bids took
place during the 12 months before the announcement. All p-values (in italics) are based on
heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. Regressions include year and industry (2-digit SIC code main
classifications) dummy variables. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the 1%, 5%, or 10%
level respectively.
Panel A: Public versus private bidder transactions
                                    (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)
                                own >= 5%       own >= 10% own >= 15% own >= 25% own >= 50%
PRIVATE                          -0.0735a         -0.0753b         -0.0525c         -0.0355          -0.0178
                                   0.008            0.012            0.066           0.253            0.682
                                          b                c                b               a
Ln (MVE)                         -0.0252          -0.0197          -0.0244         -0.0333          -0.0356a
                                   0.042            0.088            0.038           0.005            0.008
                                          a                a                b               b
IAQ                              -0.0651          -0.0624          -0.0544         -0.0416          -0.0426c
                                   0.003            0.008            0.014           0.048            0.082
DEBT                             -0.1043c         -0.0837          -0.0422          -0.0606          -0.0665
                                   0.098            0.209            0.473           0.310            0.299
                                         b                b                b               b
OCF                               0.2629           0.2715           0.2607          0.3073           0.3580b
                                   0.013            0.025            0.032           0.016            0.028
TARLIQ                           -0.0699          -0.1285           -0.097          -0.0239           0.0245
                                   0.576            0.328            0.458           0.862            0.871
RUNUP                            -0.1477a         -0.1280a         -0.1226a        -0.0981b         -0.1314b
                                   0.000            0.003            0.008           0.038            0.015
                                                           b                b               b
ARET_12                          -0.0245          -0.0360          -0.0361         -0.0357          -0.0361b
                                   0.154            0.026            0.018           0.021            0.033



                                                     34
Table 5 - Continued
                                (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)
                            own >= 5%      own >= 10%      own >= 15%   own >= 25%   own >= 50%
DIVERSIFY                    -0.0246         -0.0263          -0.025      -0.0212      -0.0272
                               0.362          0.370            0.382        0.485        0.415
HOSTILE                       0.0879          0.0669          0.0806       0.1399       0.2594b
                               0.180          0.383            0.304        0.128        0.043
COMPETE                      -0.0868a        -0.1119a        -0.1056a     -0.1027b     -0.0902b
                               0.006          0.001            0.003        0.011        0.030
INITBID                      -0.0245         -0.0353         -0.0322      -0.0276      -0.0421
                               0.561          0.449            0.495        0.559        0.408
TENDER                       0.0533c         0.0559c         0.0655b       0.0734b      0.0768b
                               0.054          0.050            0.026        0.018        0.033
TARTERM                       0.0273          0.0344           0.023       0.0073      -0.0003
                               0.286          0.190            0.389        0.794        0.993
TOEHOLD                       0.0069          -0.001         -0.0077      -0.0194      -0.0249
                               0.862          0.982            0.860        0.677        0.609
STDEVAR                       0.0819          0.0528          0.0432       0.0243       0.0438
                               0.173          0.375            0.480        0.701        0.582
BIDLOCK                      -1.1552         -0.7098          -0.885      -1.1432c     -1.2057c
                               0.123          0.280            0.167        0.070        0.100
Constant                      0.4412a        0.4258b         0.4334a       0.3503a      0.3587a
                               0.002          0.012            0.010        0.000        0.000
n                               675             600           559          506          451
Adj. R2                        0.110           0.115         0.092        0.087        0.099
Panel B: Public versus private bidder categories
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)
                              own >= 5%      own >= 10%    own >= 15%   own >= 25%   own >= 50%
PRIVATE EQUITY                  -0.0933a        -0.1020a     -0.0790b     -0.0624      -0.0389
                                  0.005           0.005        0.024        0.110        0.474
PRIVATE OPERATING               -0.0528          -0.0521     -0.0316      -0.0189       -0.004
                                  0.124           0.148        0.370        0.602        0.931
                                         a
PRIVATE GROUP                   -0.1406         -0.1408b     -0.1224b     -0.1088c     -0.0961
                                  0.008           0.011        0.022        0.058        0.159
                                         b
ln (MVE)                        -0.0260         -0.0202c     -0.0254b     -0.0347a     -0.0385a
                                  0.041           0.091        0.039        0.006        0.007
                                         a
IAQ                             -0.0672         -0.0645a     -0.0568b     -0.0441b     -0.0455c
                                  0.003           0.008        0.013        0.042        0.072
DEBT                             -0.099          -0.0774     -0.0372      -0.0581       -0.067
                                  0.124           0.255        0.533        0.333        0.292
                                        b
OCF                             0.2688           0.2794b      0.2673b      0.3150b      0.3673b
                                  0.012           0.022        0.029        0.014        0.025
TARLIQ                          -0.0769          -0.1352     -0.1062      -0.0429       0.0076
                                  0.534           0.300        0.411        0.751        0.960
                                         a
RUNUP                           -0.1515         -0.1313a     -0.1253a     -0.1001b     -0.1344b
                                  0.000           0.003        0.007        0.035        0.013
ARET_12                         -0.0248         -0.0370b     -0.0370b     -0.0368b     -0.0368b
                                  0.156           0.023        0.015        0.017        0.029



                                                 35
Table 5 - Continued
                          (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)
                      own >= 5%   own >= 10%   own >= 15%   own >= 25%   own >= 50%
DIVERSIFY              -0.0053      -0.0019       0.0015       0.0073       0.0016
                         0.866       0.957        0.966         0.849        0.970
HOSTILE                 0.0749        0.053        0.067       0.1225       0.2257
                         0.251       0.492        0.395         0.194        0.113
COMPETE                -0.0855a     -0.1121a     -0.1046a     -0.1016b     -0.0898b
                         0.008       0.002        0.004         0.013        0.035
INITBID                 -0.018      -0.0297      -0.0266      -0.0227      -0.0354
                         0.682       0.543        0.590         0.646        0.507
TENDER                 0.0466c      0.0481c      0.0571b       0.0650b      0.0673c
                         0.087       0.086        0.045         0.030        0.053
TARTERM                 0.0226       0.0291       0.0173        0.001      -0.0075
                         0.390       0.283        0.530         0.972        0.813
TOEHOLD                 0.0289       0.0197       0.0142       0.0049       0.0036
                         0.505       0.662        0.767         0.925        0.947
STDEVAR                  0.082       0.0528       0.0441       0.0267       0.0438
                         0.172       0.374        0.470         0.671        0.581
BIDLOCK                -1.1507      -0.7141      -0.8932      -1.1429c     -1.1833
                         0.120       0.272        0.157         0.065        0.101
Constant                0.4445a     0.4207b      0.4308b       0.3517a      0.3710a
                         0.002       0.013        0.013         0.001        0.001
n                         675          600          559          506          451
Adj. R2                  0.112       0.117        0.095          0.09        0.102




                                      36
Table 6
Multivariate regressions by public bidder size quartiles
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed pure cash mergers announced between 1990 and
2005 where the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm.
The dependent variable in models (1) – (4) is the three-day abnormal announcement return (CAR3). Public
bidder size quartiles (Q1 – Q4) are based on inflation-adjusted measures of the bidder’s market value of
equity three months prior to the announcement. In Panel A, PRIVATE is an indicator variable equal to one
if the bidder is a private firm. In Panel B, PRIVATE EQUITY, PRIVATE OPERATING BIDDER, and
PRIVATE GROUP are indicator variables based on the classification of private bidders using a Lexis-
Nexis search. The market value of equity (MVE) is from CRSP calculated as the price of the stock times
the number of shares outstanding 63 days prior to the announcement. Debt-to-assets (DEBT) is calculated
as the book value of debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity.
Tobin’s q (Q) is defined as the firm market value divided by the book value of assets. Industry-adjusted
Tobin’s q (IAQ) is defined as Tobin’s q minus the median 2-digit SIC code industry value of this variable.
Operating cash flow (OCF) is defined as sales minus costs of goods sold, sales and general administrative
expenses, and change in net working capital, divided by the book value of assets. TARLIQ is the liquidity
of the market for corporate control for the target firm’s industry and is defined as the value of all corporate
control transactions for $1 million or more reported by SDC for each year and two-digit SIC code divided
by the total book value of assets of all Compustat firms in the same two-digit SIC code and year. RUNUP
is the market-adjusted compounded return from 63 days prior to the announcement to 6 days prior to the
announcement and ARET_12 is the market-adjusted compounded return for the 12 months prior to the
runup period. STDEVAR and STDEV are defined as respectively the standard deviation of the market
model residuals and raw returns from day -379 to day -127 relative to the announcement day. STOCKLIQ
is the measure of stock illiquidity of Amihud (2002). TENDER, DIVERSIFY, TOEHOLD, HOSTILE,
BIDLOCK, and TARTERM are indicator variables from SDC equal to one if the deal respectively is a
tender offer, involves a target with a two-digit SIC code other than that of the bidder, involves a bidder that
holds 0.5% or more of the target stock prior to the announcement, is hostile, includes bidder lockup
provisions, or includes target termination fees. COMPETE is an indicator variable equal to one if another
deal for the same target is announced in SDC during the 12 months prior to the announcement date.
INITBID is an indicator variable equal to one if the announcement of the offer is followed by an offer by
another firm, while no bids took place during the 12 months before the announcement. All p-values (in
italics) are based on heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. Regressions include year and industry (2-
digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at
the 1%, 5%, or 10% level respectively.
Panel A: Public versus private bidder transactions
                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                        Q1 (smallest)           Q2                Q3            Q4 (largest)
PRIVATE                                    -0.0337          -0.1020a           -0.1150a           -0.1762a
                                            0.247              0.004             0.000              0.000
                                                  a                  a                 a
ln (MVE)                                  -0.0340           -0.0517            -0.0361            -0.0449a
                                            0.009              0.000             0.006              0.002
                                                  b                  b
IAQ                                       -0.0557           -0.0620             -0.0219           -0.0197c
                                            0.013              0.010             0.287              0.098
                                                                                       b
DEBT                                      -0.0733            -0.0911           -0.1349              0.031
                                            0.173              0.143             0.042              0.661
OCF                                        0.2482c           0.2235c            0.2605b            0.2423b
                                            0.066              0.086             0.028              0.040
TARLIQ                                    -0.0412             -0.151            -0.1227            -0.0167
                                            0.754              0.219             0.270              0.894




                                                     37
Table 6 - Continued
                                         (1)                 (2)        (3)         (4)
                                    Q1 (smallest)            Q2         Q3      Q4 (largest)
RUNUP                                 -0.1148b            -0.1369a   -0.1483a    -0.2078a
                                        0.011               0.009      0.003       0.000
ARET_12                               -0.0227             -0.0380b   -0.0434b    -0.0387b
                                        0.120               0.019      0.026       0.013
DIVERSIFY                             -0.0075              0.0004    -0.0414     -0.0471c
                                        0.789               0.989      0.149       0.090
HOSTILE                                0.0548              0.1444b    0.1140c     0.2336b
                                        0.548               0.038      0.065       0.029
COMPETE                               -0.0942a            -0.0859b   -0.1075a    -0.0735c
                                        0.003               0.014      0.002       0.055
INITBID                                0.0005             -0.0162     -0.062     -0.0513
                                        0.993               0.749      0.205       0.436
TENDER                                 0.0903a             0.0619b    0.1028a     0.0757b
                                        0.003               0.045      0.001       0.010
TARTERM                                0.0067              0.0133      0.029      0.0075
                                        0.787               0.652      0.292       0.788
TOEHOLD                               -0.0328             -0.0228    -0.0136      0.0123
                                        0.462               0.611      0.735       0.781
STDEVAR                                -0.883             -1.4913c   -0.6903     -0.9929
                                        0.138               0.083      0.322       0.301
BIDLOCK                                0.0555              0.0637    -0.0031      0.1327b
                                        0.294               0.139      0.938       0.025
Constant                               0.3938a             0.6202a    0.5222a     0.5585a
                                        0.000               0.000      0.000       0.000
n                                        593                594        594          595
Adj. R2                                 0.117              0.141      0.123        0.138
Panel B: Public versus private bidder categories
                                           (1)               (2)        (3)         (4)
                                     Q1 (smallest)           Q2         Q3      Q4 (largest)
PRIVATE EQUITY                          -0.0575           -0.1274a   -0.1284a    -0.1831a
                                          0.121             0.001      0.000       0.000
PRIVATE OPERATING                        -0.0123          -0.0776c   -0.1028b    -0.1657a
                                          0.725             0.053      0.011       0.000
PRIVATE GROUP                           -0.1063b          -0.2177a   -0.1605a    -0.2455a
                                          0.041             0.001      0.006       0.000
                                        -0.0354b          -0.0552a   -0.0365a    -0.0474a
ln (MVE)                                  0.011             0.000      0.008       0.002
                                        -0.0589b          -0.0647a   -0.0237     -0.0198c
IAQ                                       0.012             0.009      0.254      0.095
                                        -0.0698           -0.0867    -0.1336b     0.0298
DEBT                                      0.196             0.165      0.045       0.670
                                         0.2559c           0.2368c    0.2637b    0.2510b
OCF                                       0.060             0.071      0.027       0.033
                                        -0.0436           -0.1632    -0.1266     -0.0242
TARLIQ                                    0.739             0.189      0.253       0.847



                                                     38
Table 6 – Continued
                           (1)                (2)        (3)         (4)
                      Q1 (smallest)           Q2         Q3      Q4 (largest)
                        -0.1188a           -0.1450a   -0.1512a    -0.2120a
RUNUP                     0.009              0.006      0.003       0.000
                        -0.0236            -0.0380b   -0.0438b    -0.0384b
ARET_12                   0.111              0.017      0.027       0.015
                          0.017             0.0308    -0.0276     -0.0339
DIVERSIFY                 0.616              0.410      0.427       0.297
                         0.0232             0.1176c    0.0947      0.2192c
HOSTILE                   0.791              0.075      0.126       0.053
                        -0.0951a           -0.0819b   -0.1063a    -0.0685c
COMPETE                   0.003              0.023      0.003       0.079
                         0.0061            -0.0054    -0.0588     -0.0451
INITBID                   0.910              0.918      0.239       0.500
                         0.0824a            0.0501     0.0980a     0.0707b
TENDER                    0.005              0.100      0.001       0.015
                         0.0016              0.004     0.0255      0.0022
TARTERM                   0.950              0.896      0.374       0.938
                         -0.004             0.0226     0.0031      0.0382
TOEHOLD                   0.937              0.640      0.945       0.417
                        -0.8951            -1.4845c    -0.652      -0.983
STDEVAR                   0.128              0.077      0.347       0.298
                         0.0566             0.0615    -0.0041      0.1291b
BIDLOCK                   0.282              0.154      0.917       0.033
                         0.3959a            0.6412a    0.5240a     0.5808a
Constant                  0.000              0.000      0.000       0.000
n                         593                594        594          595
Adj. R2                  0.121              0.148      0.122        0.139




                                      39
Table 7
Multivariate regressions with target ownership measures
The sample comes from SDC and includes all completed pure cash mergers, acquisitions of assets,
acquisitions of certain assets, and acquisitions of a majority interest announced between 1990 and 2005
where the target firm is fully acquired U.S. public firm and the bidder is a private or public U.S. firm. The
dependent variable in models (1) – (6) is either the three-day abnormal announcement return (CAR3) or the
Fama French size and market-to-book adjusted compounded return from one day before the announcement
date to the completion date (FFRET). PRIVATE is an indicator variable equal to one if the bidder is a
private firm. Target managerial ownership (TAR_MAN_OWN) and target institutional ownership
(TAR_INST_OWN) are from Compact Disclosure. Models (5) and (6) use mean centered values of
ownership. The market value of equity (MVE) is from CRSP calculated as the price of the stock times the
number of shares outstanding 63 days prior to the announcement. Debt-to-assets (DEBT) is calculated as
the book value of debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity.
Tobin’s q (Q) is defined as the firm market value divided by the book value of assets. Industry-adjusted
Tobin’s q (IAQ) is defined as Tobin’s q minus the median 2-digit SIC code industry value of this variable.
Operating cash flow (OCF) is defined as sales minus costs of goods sold, sales and general administrative
expenses, and change in net working capital, divided by the book value of assets. TARLIQ is the liquidity
of the market for corporate control for the target firm’s industry and is defined as the value of all corporate
control transactions for $1 million or more reported by SDC for each year and two-digit SIC code divided
by the total book value of assets of all Compustat firms in the same two-digit SIC code and year. RUNUP
is the market-adjusted compounded return from 63 days prior to the announcement to 6 days prior to the
announcement and ARET_12 is the market-adjusted compounded return for the 12 months prior to the
runup period. STDEVAR and STDEV are defined as respectively the standard deviation of the market
model residuals and raw returns from day -379 to day -127 relative to the announcement day. STOCKLIQ
is the measure of stock illiquidity of Amihud (2002). TENDER, DIVERSIFY, TOEHOLD, HOSTILE,
BIDLOCK, and TARTERM are indicator variables from SDC equal to one if the deal respectively is a
tender offer, involves a target with a two-digit SIC code other than that of the bidder, involves a bidder that
holds 0.5% or more of the target stock prior to the announcement, is hostile, includes bidder lockup
provisions, or includes target termination fees. COMPETE is an indicator variable equal to one if another
deal for the same target is announced in SDC during the 12 months prior to the announcement date.
INITBID is an indicator variable equal to one if the announcement of the offer is followed by an offer by
another firm, while no bids took place during the 12 months before the announcement. All p-values (in
italics) are based on heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. Regressions include year and industry (2-
digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at
the 1%, 5%, or 10% level respectively.
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                         CAR3        FFRET       CAR3        FFRET         CAR3        FFRET
PRIVATE                                 -0.1032a -0.0909a -0.1028a -0.0898a -0.1035a -0.0964a
                                         0.000        0.001       0.000       0.001        0.000        0.000
                                               c            c
TAR_MAN_OWN                             0.0778       0.0977      0.0464       0.089        0.0716      0.1336c
                                         0.090        0.091       0.689       0.533        0.224        0.070
TAR_INST_OWN                             0.0651      0.0824c     0.0299      -0.0725       0.0671      0.1188b
                                         0.112        0.084       0.811       0.622        0.166        0.034
                    2
TAR_MAN_OWN                                                      0.0418       0.0105
                                                                  0.762       0.952
                    2
TAR_INST_OWN                                                     0.0427       0.192
                                                                  0.745       0.226
TAR_MAN_OWN×PRIVATE                                                                        0.0187      -0.1122
                                                                                           0.823        0.275
TAR_INST_OWN×PRIVATE                                                                      -0.0059      -0.1189
                                                                                           0.933        0.172




                                                     40
Table 7 – Continued
                         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                       CAR3       FFRET      CAR3       FFRET      CAR3       FFRET
LOGMVE                -0.0304a   -0.0349a   -0.0304a   -0.0345a   -0.0304a   -0.0354a
                        0.005      0.005      0.005      0.005      0.005      0.004
IAQ                   -0.0258a   -0.0285b   -0.0259a   -0.0293a   -0.0257a   -0.0285b
                        0.009      0.011      0.009      0.010      0.009      0.012
DEBT                   -0.003     0.0134     -0.004     0.0093    -0.0028     0.0123
                        0.961      0.855      0.948      0.900      0.963      0.867
OCF                    0.0703     0.0547     0.0705     0.0552     0.0701     0.0571
                        0.359      0.543      0.358      0.539      0.360      0.526
TARLIQ                -0.3107a   -0.3418a   -0.3129a   -0.3516a   -0.3098a   -0.3485a
                        0.001      0.004      0.001      0.003      0.001      0.004
STDEVAR               -0.2902     0.1064    -0.3052     0.0761    -0.2838     0.0562
                        0.688      0.902      0.673      0.930      0.696      0.949
RUNUP                 -0.1653a   -0.1829a   -0.1658a   -0.1827a   -0.1651a   -0.1824a
                        0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
ARET_12               -0.0500a   -0.0553a   -0.0499a   -0.0546a   -0.0501a   -0.0554a
                        0.001      0.003      0.001      0.003      0.001      0.003
DIVERSIFY             -0.0148    -0.0289     -0.015    -0.0302    -0.0148    -0.0285
                        0.466      0.258      0.461      0.238      0.466      0.265
HOSTILE               0.1516b     0.2422a   0.1512b     0.2413a   0.1509b     0.2410a
                        0.016      0.003      0.016      0.002      0.017      0.003
COMPETE               -0.1004a   -0.1028a   -0.1010a   -0.1035a   -0.1006a   -0.1017a
                        0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
INITBID               -0.0498     0.0327    -0.0507     0.0310    -0.0495     0.0299
                        0.240      0.586      0.234      0.609      0.245      0.622
TENDER                0.0905a     0.0925a    0.0909a    0.0948a    0.0906a    0.0898a
                        0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
TARTERM                0.0272     0.0406     0.0281     0.0428c    0.0269     0.0393
                        0.173      0.101      0.159      0.081      0.179      0.114
TOEHOLD               -0.0153     -0.031    -0.0143    -0.0281    -0.0159    -0.0301
                        0.601      0.497      0.625      0.537      0.585      0.507
BIDLOCK                0.0383     0.0278     0.0389     0.0301     0.0382     0.0285
                        0.234      0.498      0.228      0.464      0.236      0.488
Constant               0.3889a    0.5197a    0.3982a    0.5422a    0.4224a    0.6015a
                        0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
n                       1,265      1,265      1,265      1,265      1,265      1,265
Adj. R2                 0.137      0.143      0.135      0.143      0.135      0.143




                                   41
