NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STRATEGIC ENTRY DETERRENCE AND THE BEHAVIOR OF PHARMACEUTICAL
INCUMBENTS PRIOR TO PATENT EXPIRATION
Glenn Ellison
Sara Fisher Ellison
Working Paper 13069
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13069

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2007

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (grants SES-9818534, SES-0219205,
and SES-0550897), the Sloan Foundation, and the Hoover Institute. We thank Emek Basker, Tom
Chang, David Hwang, and Alan Sorensen for excellent research assistance, Gillian Currie for help
in constructing the data set, Katie MacFarlane for guidance on institutional details, and Ditas Riad
and Rhea Mihalison for their assistance on data issues. We also thank Fiona Scott Morton for her
part in our joint data collection efforts and for providing other data to us. Finally, we thank Marcus
Asplund, Ernie Berndt, Steve Berry, Richard Blundell, Judy Chevalier, Paul Joskow, Nancy Rose,
Otto Toivanen, and seminar participants at various schools for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Strategic Entry Deterrence and the Behavior of Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent
Expiration
Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison
NBER Working Paper No. 13069
April 2007
JEL No. L13,L65
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a new approach to testing for strategic entry deterrence and applies it to the behavior
of pharmaceutical incumbents just before they lose patent protection. The approach involves looking
at a cross-section of markets and examining whether behavior is nonmonotonic in the size of the market.
Under certain conditions, investment levels will be monotone in market size if firms are not influenced
by a desire to deter entry. Strategic investments, however, may be nonmonotone because entry deterrence
is unnecessary in very small markets and impossible in very large ones, resulting in overall nonmonotonic
investment. The pharmaceutical data contain advertising, product proliferation, and pricing information
for a sample of drugs which lost patent protection between 1986 and 1992. Among the findings consistent
with an entry deterrence motivation are that incumbents in markets of intermediate size have lower
levels of advertising and are more likely to reduce advertising immediately prior to patent expiration.
Glenn Ellison
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-380A
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gellison@mit.edu
Sara Fisher Ellison
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive, E52-274B
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
sellison@mit.edu

1

Introduction

The insight that firms may make “strategic investments” to alter future competitive conditions is one of the most fundamental ideas in industrial organization. The chapter on
“Entry, Accomodation, and Exit” is easily the longest in Tirole’s (1988) text. In it, Tirole
reviews arguments about how excess capacity, capital structure, advertising, contractual
practices, learning-by-doing, and long-run decisions can be used to deter entry.1 Strategic
investment models are difficult to test directly, however, and the vast majority of this literature is theoretical. In this paper, we propose a new empirical approach for examining
strategic entry deterrence.
Our applied focus is on the pharmaceutical industry. Using a panel of drugs that
lost their U.S. patent protection between 1986 and 1992, we explore how pharmaceutical
incumbents have dealt with the threat of generic entry. We examine incumbents’ advertising, product proliferation, and pricing decisions as patent expiration approached, and ask
whether the behaviors appear to be influenced by an entry-deterrence motive.
We begin in Section 2 with a discussion of strategic entry deterrence and some motivation for our approach. We modify the textbook model to bring it closer to empirical
applications: we assume that entry costs are random and unknown to the incumbent so
that it is impossible to perfectly forecast whether entry will occur. We review what is meant
by “strategic entry deterrence” in this setting. We note that the incentive to deter entry
will be stronger in intermediate-sized markets than in very small or very large markets.
In the former, no investments are needed to deter entry. In the latter, deterring entry is
often impossible. A simple numerical example illustrates how the nonmonotonicity of the
entry-deterrence incentive can lead to a nonmonotonic relationship between equilibrium
investment levels and market size.
Our approach to testing whether firms are actively trying to deter entry is a classic
reduced-form approach: we identify a prediction of the strategic investment model that differs depending on whether firms take entry-deterrence benefits into account when choosing
1
Some of the classic papers in this literature are Bulow, Geanakoplos, and Klemperer (1985), Fudenberg
and Tirole (1983a, 1983b, 1984), Dixit (1980), Schmalensee (1978, 1981), Gelman and Salop (1983), Judd
(1985), Aghion and Bolton (1987), and Cooper (1986).

1

their actions; and then test this prediction. The formal results underlying the approach are
presented in Section 3. Our main IO theory result is a demonstration that, under specified
conditions, actions will be monotonically related to a market size parameter if firms are not
influenced by an entry deterrence motive. Several examples are used to provide intuition
for the required conditions. The important implication of the theoretical result is that one
can reject the null hypothesis that firms are not actively trying to deter entry by testing
and rejecting the hypothesis that there is a monotonic relationship between firms’ actions
and market size in a cross-section of markets.
Several recent papers have discussed ways of performing statistical hypothesis tests that
a relationship is monotonically increasing.2 Section 4 contains a brief discussion of this literature, a description of the tests we will use, and some additional monotonicity theorems
relating to models with measurement error and endogenous right-hand side variables. Robustness to such factors is a potential advantage of an approach focusing on monotonicity.
In Section 5 we turn our attention to the pharmaceutical industry. The pharmaceutical
industry is an important industry that has attracted a great deal of attention in policy
circles. It also has several features that make it a nice environment in which to study
strategic entry deterrence. One of these is that one can obtain a sizable sample of similarly
situated incumbents facing a threat of entry by looking at manufacturers of branded drugs
whose patent protection is about to expire. Another is that there are several potential tools
that incumbents might use to deter entry, and we were able to obtain data on several of the
most important: advertising, product proliferation, and pricing. A third is that there is a
change in entry conditions within each market—entry is prohibited until a known date. Our
approach to testing for strategic entry deterrence only requires a single cross-section, but
having data both on actions immediately prior to patent expiration and actions in earlier
years when patent expiration was less salient allows us to also implement a difference-indifferences version of our test.
The first thing we do in our analysis is to identify a proxy for “market size” and note
that our dataset contains sufficient heterogeneity in market size to make it plausible that
2

These include Hall and Heckman (2000), Ghosal, Sen and van der Vaart (2000), and Gijbels, Hall, Jones
and Koch (2000).

2

we could find nonmonotonicities. Specifically, revenue received in the U.S. in the years
immediately prior to patent expiration can serve as a proxy for market size because it is
a strong predictor of whether generic entry will occur.3 The lowest-revenue drugs in our
dataset are unlikely to ever face generic competition. For high-revenue drugs generic entry
is a near certainty.
We then examine four incumbent behaviors that might plausibly be involved in an
entry deterrence strategy. “Detail advertising” is the practice of sending representatives to
doctors’ offices to promote a drug via one-on-one conversations. “Journal advertising” is the
placement of advertisements for a drug in medical journals. We use the term “presentation
proliferation” to refer to firms’ decisions about whether to sell a drug in small or large
number of presentations, e.g. should it be offered just in a 100mg tablets or should the
firm also produce a 50mg tablet, a 200mg tablet, a gelcap, an oral liquid, etc. Finally, we
examine pricing. The literature on “limit pricing” is one of earliest and best known parts
of the entry deterrence literature.4
We look for evidence that each of these behaviors is influenced by the entry-deterrence
motive in two ways. First, we take a pure cross-sectional approach: we look at the relationship between each behavior and pre-expiration revenues in the cross-section of drugs and
test whether the relationship is nonmonotonic. We find some evidence of nonmonotonicity
in the journal advertising data. The form of the nonmonotonicity is that journal advertising is unusually low for drugs in intermediate-sized markets. This is what one would
expect under a strategic-entry deterrence theory: firms in intermediate-sized markets have
an incentive to let their market languish to make it less attractive to generic entrants.
Second, we examine how incumbents change their behavior as patent expiration nears.
We find some evidence of a nonmonotonic relationship between behavior changes and market size in detail advertising and (less strongly) in product proliferation. The changes in
detail advertising have a similar pattern to that noted above: it is most likely to be reduced
in the intermediate-sized markets.
We conclude that there appears to be some evidence of strategic entry-deterrence by
3

Grabowski and Vernon (1992), Bae (1997), and Scott Morton (2000) previously reported similar results.
See, for example, Gaskins (1971), Milgrom and Roberts (1982), Fudenberg and Tirole (1986), and
Klemperer (1987).
4

3

pharmaceutical incumbents. More broadly, we hope that our results also suggest that
monotonicity tests may be a useful way to provide evidence on “strategic investment”
theories in industrial organization and other fields.
Our paper can be seen as related to two empirical literatures in industrial organization.
First, a number of papers have previously explored pricing, advertising, and entry in the
pharmaceutical industry.5 Most closely related to our work is Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz
(1991), a descriptive study based on thirty drugs with patents expiring between 1976 and
1987. They look mostly at the average behavior of incumbents before and after expiration
and also separate drugs into low and high revenue categories and see if incumbent advertising behavior differs. Scott Morton (2000) focuses on the determinants of generic entry
in a data set that overlaps substantially with ours. In addition to looking at exogenous
market characteristics, she also looks for effects of incumbents’ advertising expenditures on
the probability of generic entry. Grabowski and Vernon (1992) also study a panel of drugs
with expiring patents and focus on post-entry behavior of both incumbents and generic
entrants. Ellison and Wolfram (2006) examine pricing as a potentially strategic investment
to forestall future regulation. They find that price increases by pharmaceutical firms during
the Clinton health care reform debate were related to measures of firms’ potential losses
from drug price regulation.
A second literature to which we contribute is the empirical literature on strategic entry
deterrence (and entry accommodation). Developing structural tests of whether particular
investments are strategic has been seen as difficult. The one paper we are aware of that
has attempted this approach is Kadiyali’s (1996) study of the market for film. Kadiyali
estimates price and advertising elasticites and argues that observed levels of price and
advertising by Eastman Kodak were inconsistent with static monopoly profit maximization
but consistent with entry deterring behavior. It has been more common to provide indirect
evidence that investments are chosen strategically by showing that investments do affect
5

Some notable papers are, for instance, Masson and Steiner (1985), Comanor (1986), Grabowski and
Vernon (1990), Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz (1991), Frank and Salkever (1992), Scherer (1993), Berndt,
Griliches and Rosett (1993), Griliches and Cockburn (1994), Berndt, Cockburn and Griliches (1996), Frank
and Salkever (1997), Ellison, Cockburn, Griliches and Hausman (1997), Lu and Comanor (1998), Ellison
(1998), Scott Morton (1999), and Ellison and Wolfram (2006). There are a number of books of interest
about the economics of pharmaceuticals including Walker (1971), Schwartzman (1976), Temin (1980), and
Schweitzer (1997).

4

future competition (which will lead us to conclude that investments must be strategic if we
believe that firms are rational and aware of the effect on competition). One can think of
Chevalier’s (1995a, 1995b) studies of the effect of capital restructuring on entry and exit
and supermarket pricing, Lieberman’s (1987) discussion of the responses by incumbents in
chemical industries to rivals’ additions of capacity, and Scott Morton’s (2000) discussion of
the effects of advertising on entry as providing evidence of this sort. Lieberman also looks
for evidence of entry deterring behavior in cross-sectional patterns in examining whether
there is more excess capacity in markets which are more concentrated. A third approach
taken by Goolsbee and Syverson (2004) in the airline industry is to examine how incumbent
behavior changes in response to exogenous changes in potential entry that otherwise have
no effect on current competitive conditions.6

2

Strategic entry deterrence

In this section we develop a simple model to review the idea of strategic entry deterrence
and bring out its implications in a framework suited to empirical applications. We use a
numerical example to illustrate how nonmonotonic patterns can arise in cross-section data.

2.1

A model

The prototypical model of strategic entry deterrence is a three-stage game like the first one
in Figure 1. In the first stage, the incumbent firm 1 chooses an investment level A at a
cost of c(A). Assume that c0 (A) > 0 and c00 (A) ≥ 0. Before the second stage, the potential
entrant (firm 2) observes the incumbent’s choice of A. Firm 2 then chooses whether to
enter the market, which requires paying a sunk cost of E. In the third stage, either the
incumbent is a monopolist or the incumbent and entrant compete as duopolists. If the
incumbent is a monopolist, assume that it chooses some action xm
1 (A) in the third period
and as a result earns profits, π1m∗ (A) ≡ π1 (xm
1 (A), A). If entry occurs, assume that the
unique Nash equilibrium of the third stage game involves the firms choosing actions x∗1 (A)
and x∗2 (A) and receiving profits πid∗ (A) ≡ πid (x∗1 (A), x∗2 (A), A). Assume that π1m∗ (A) and
6

Other approaches have also been taken in a few papers. Smiley (1988) reports evidence from surveys
of firms about what strategies they use to deter entry. Cooper, Garvin and Kagel (1997) examines a
limit-pricing model experimentally. Dafny (2005) applies our approach in studying hospital markets.

5

πid∗ (A) are concave, and that the firms’ best responses are always interior and given by the
unique solution to the first-order conditions.
Tirole (1988) describes how a large number of classic papers in industrial organization
(and corporate finance and international trade) can be fit within this framework. The key
insight is that the “investment” A can be any action that is not easily undone. The could be
a standard investment like building a new plant that will have a lower marginal production
cost. It could also, however, be something like a lobbying expenditure, choosing a product
design that makes the product less (or more) similar to other products, building up goodwill
through an advertising campaign, or taking on debt. Entry deterring investments can be
welfare-reducing, but this need not be the case.
The one departure we have made from the way strategic investment models are presented
in Tirole (1988) (and in most papers) is that we assume that the entry cost E is stochastic
with CDF F (E) and that Firm 2 learns the entry cost before making its entry decision.
The primary consequence is that Firm 1 will not know for sure whether entry will occur
when making its investment decision. We think that this is a more realistic depiction of the
situation firms face in the real-world and as well as a necessary modification for empirical
applications.

2.2

The strategic entry deterrence incentive

In this model, the incumbent firm 1 is said to practice “strategic entry deterrence” in that it
“distorts” A away from the level that maximizes profits (holding firm 2’s entry probability
fixed) in hopes of deterring entry by firm 2. More precisely, let A∗ED be the sequential
equilibrium choice of A in this model. What IO economists mean when they say that
investment is “distorted” is that A∗ED differs from the investment level, A∗N D , that would
be chosen in the second game pictured in Figure 1.7 In the second game, firm 2 does
not observe firm 1’s investment level until after the entry decision has been made. Hence,
investment can not have a causal effect on the entry decision. The nonstrategic investment
7

To avoid confusing people who know the literature we should note that we have simplified the standard
presentation to omit any mention of strategic entry accomodation. Our assumption that A is observed at
t = 2 12 in the model “with no strategic entry deterrence motive” implies that both A∗N D and A∗ED reflect
strategic entry accomodation effects. Hence, any differences between A∗ED and A∗N D are entirely due to
entry deterrence motives.

6

Strategic Entry Deterrence Model
t=1

t = 1 12

t=2

t=3

Incumbent
chooses A
at cost c(A)

Potential
entrant
observes A

Potential entrant
learns E.
Chooses whether to
enter at cost E

Monopolist
chooses x1
or
duopolists
choose x1 , x2
Profits: πi (x1 , x2 , A)

Investment With No Entry Deterrence Motive
t=1

t=2

t = 2 21

t=3

Incumbent
chooses A
at cost c(A)

Potential entrant
learns E.
Chooses whether to
enter at cost E

Potential
entrant
observes A

Monopolist
chooses x1
or
duopolists
choose x1 , x2
Profits: πi (x1 , x2 , A)

Figure 1: The model

7

level A∗N D can be thought of either as reflecting what would happen if there was no entry
deterrence motive or as reflecting what would happen if there was an entry deterrence
motive but the incumbent ignored it. Whether incumbents behave in this manner can be
of interest for several reasons. For example, antitrust authorities may insist that firms do
not take actions that serve only to eliminate future competition, and economists may want
to know whether firms are sufficiently rational and forward looking to invest strategically
(and whether the long-run consequences of an investment are what we think they are).
Aspects of the strategic entry deterrence motive are most apparent in the first-order
conditions that describe A∗ED and A∗N D . In the strategic entry deterrence model, firm 1’s
expected profit is a function of its first period investment:
E(π1 (A)) = F (π2d∗ (A))π1d∗ (A) + (1 − F (π2d∗ (A)))π1m∗ (A) − c(A).
In the model with no strategic entry deterrence motive, firm 1’s expected profit depends
both on the actual value of A and on firm 2’s belief about the value of A that was chosen in
the first period. In equilibrium, firm 2 will assign probablility one to firm 1 having chosen
A∗N D , so firm 1’s profit function is
E(π1 (A, A∗N D )) = F (π2d∗ (A∗N D ))π1d∗ (A) + (1 − F (π2d∗ (A∗N D )))π1m∗ (A) − c(A).
The first-order conditions for the equilibrium investment levels in the two models are
thus
∂π m∗
∂π1d∗ ∗
(AN D ) + (1 − F (π2d∗ (A∗N D ))) 1 (A∗N D )
∂A
∂A
m∗
d∗
∂π
∂π
c0 (A∗ED ) = F (π2d∗ (A∗ED )) 1 (A∗ED ) + (1 − F (π2d∗ (A∗ED ))) 1 (A∗ED )
∂A
∂A
d∗
dπ
+(π1d∗ (A∗ED ) − π1m∗ (A∗ED )) 2 (A∗ED )f (π2d∗ (A∗ED )).
dA

c0 (A∗N D ) = F (π2d∗ (A∗N D ))

The difference between the two first order conditions is the presence of the final term in
the first-order condition for A∗ED . This term is the “strategic entry deterrence” incentive.
Because firm 1’s profit is higher when it is a monopolist, it has an incentive to distort its
investment to reduce firm 2’s profit (which reduces the likelihood of firm 2 entering).
The main observation about the strategic entry deterrence incentive we would like to
highlight is that it may be larger in intermediate-sized markets than in very small or very
8

large markets. The incentive is a product of three terms. The third of these, f (π2d∗ (A∗ED )),
is the likelihood that firm 2’s fixed entry costs are exactly equal to the equilibrium profits
firm 2 would earn at the post-entry stage, making firm 2 indifferent between entering and
not entering. In very small markets this likelihood will be small because the fixed entry
costs will almost surely be much larger than the duopoly profits. In very large markets
it will be small because the fixed entry costs will almost surely be much smaller than the
duopoly profits. In intermediate-sized markets there is a greater chance that the investment
will have a pivotal effect on entry.

2.3

An example of entry-deterrence in a cross-section of markets

In this section, we present a concrete example of a strategic investment model and discuss
cross-sectional implications.
Example 1 Consider a cross-section of markets. Suppose that the ith market has a mass
zi of potential consumers, but that the markets are otherwise identical. Let A reflect expenditures on a form of advertising that raises potential consumers’ valuations for all products
in the product class. More specifically, assume that each market contains consumers with
heterogeneous types, θ, distributed uniformly uniformly on [0, 1], and that if the monopolist
spends zi A2 /2 on advertising in market i, a consumer of type θ receives utility θA − p1 if
he buys the (branded) good from firm 1 at price p1 , 12 θA − p2 if he buys the (generic) good
from firm 2 at price p2 , and zero if he buys neither good.
In the final period of this model it is easy to check that a monopolist sets p1 =
receives profit
profits are

zA
4 .

8
49 zA

The duopoly equilibrium prices are p∗1 = 72 A and p∗2 =

and

1
14 A.

A
2

and

Duopoly

1
49 zA.

Figure 2 contains a graph of the equilibrium advertising levels in this model when the
distribution F of entry costs is log normal with mean 0.0025 and variance 0.0015. In the
model without entry deterrence motives, A declines smoothly from

1
4

at z = 0 to

8
49

in the

limit as z → ∞.8 When there is also an entry deterrence motive, advertising levels are
similar when z is small, but substantially lower in markets of small to intermediate size
8

Note that in order to show what happens as z goes from zero to infinity we have rescaled the x-axis on
the graph using x = z/(z + 1).

9

as firm 1 distorts its advertising downward to deter entry. In larger markets firm 1 begins
to give up on entry deterrence, and the advertising levels in the strategic entry deterrence
model approach the equilibrium values of the model without entry deterrence.
A notable feature of this example is that the relationship between advertising and market
size is monotonic in the model without the entry deterrence incentive and nonmonotonic
in the model with the entry deterrence incentive. In the section that follows we discuss the
generality of this observation and the possibility of basing tests of strategic intent on it.

2.4

An aside on structural estimation

Few empirical papers have attempted to provide evidence on strategic entry deterrrence
via structural methods. At first, one might think that this is surprising: in theory a
structural test is as simple as testing which of the competing first-order conditions for A
best fits the data. In practice, however, such an approach can be very difficult. By the
very nature of these models, entry deterrence can only occur when investments have long
term consequences, which is a case when econometric estimates are more difficult. Also,
to compute the terms in the first order conditions, one needs estimates of the incumbent’s
prior on the likelihood of entry, and what the long run benefit of the investment would have
been in the counterfactual state of the world in which entry did or did not occur. Each of
these can also be a challenge to estimate.9

3

Some Results on Monotonicity and Entry Deterrence Motives

In the classic reduced-form approach to empirical industrial organization, one identifies
where competing models make different predictions and then tests those differences. The
null hypothesis for the test we have in mind is that investments are not influenced by the
strategic entry deterrence motive. In this section we discuss conditions under which investments that are not influenced by the strategic entry deterrence motive will be monotone in
the market size. Under those conditions, if the data are nonmonotone, one can conclude
9

See Kadiyali (1996) for one structural estimation. Recent advances in the estimation of dynamic structural models, e.g. Aguirregabiria and Mira (2007), Bajari, Benkard, and Levin (2006), and Berry, Ostrovsky,
and Pakes (2005), should provide additional opportunities for work along these lines.

10

that investments are influenced by the strategic entry deterrence motive (or that auxilliary
assumptions of our propositions are violated).

3.1

A basic monotonicity result: the direct and competition effects

Consider the model of investment without an entry deterrence motivation. Suppose that
the profit and cost functions also depend on a characteristic z of the market. Our leading
example will be the number of potential consumers in the market. Assume that the variable
z is ordered so that larger values of z correspond to markets that are more profitable for
firm 2, i.e.,

∂ d∗
∂z π2 (A, z)

> 0.

In the nonstrategic investment model, investments will covary with z for two reasons.
∂ 2 π d∗

1
+ (1 − F (π2∗ ))
Definition 1 The “direct effect” of z on A is F (π2∗ ) ∂z∂A

∂ 2 π1m∗
∂z∂A

−

∂2c
∂z∂A .

The direct effect is positive if increasing z raises the marginal benefit from the investment
more than it raises the marginal cost of the investment (holding entry probabilities fixed).
When the direct effect is positive, it gives the incumbent an incentive to invest more when
z is larger. A negative direct effect gives the opposite incentive.
Definition 2 The “competition effect” of z on A is

∂π1d∗
∂A

−

∂π1m∗
∂A .

The competition effect is positive if the marginal benefit of the investment is larger when
firm 1 is engaged in duopoly competition than it is when firm 1 is a monopolist. A larger
value of z makes it more likely that firm 2 will enter. When the competition effect is
positive, it provides an incentive for firm 1 to invest more when z is larger.
The following simple proposition identifies a set of circumstances in which investment
levels will be monotone in z.
Proposition 1 Let A∗N D (z) be the equilibrium investment level in the model of investment
absent entry deterrence motivations described above. Suppose
10

dπ2d∗
dz

> 0.10 Then A∗N D (z)

Note that this does involve an additional assumption. We had earlier assumed just that z was ordered
∂π d∗

dπ d∗

∂π d∗

∂π d∗

2 dA
so that ∂z2 > 0. Because dz2 = ∂z2 + ∂A
, the added assumption can be thought of as a requirement
dz
that the direct effect of z on firm 2’s profits is greater than the indirect effect that comes from firm 1 changing
its investment level in response to changing market conditions. While this assumption is often satisfied, it

is stronger than is necessary. By expanding

d∗
dπ2
dz

before solving for

11

dA
dz

it is easy to see that it suffices to

is monotone increasing if the direct and competition effects are positive and A∗N D (z) is
monotone decreasing if the direct and competition effects are negative.11
The proof of this proposition is given in the Appendix.
Remark 1: Proposition 1 is not a result that says that investment without an entry
deterrence motive is monotone in z provided some minor technical conclusions hold. We
get monotonicity if the direct and competition effects work in the same direction. In some
applications, the two effects go in the same direction. In others they would not. One must
think about whether an application is of the former or latter type before interpreting a
violation of monotonicity as evidence that investments reflect strategic entry deterrence
concerns.
Remark 2: When examining the relationship between investment levels and market sizes, one has substantial latitude in defining the left- and right-hand-side variables.
Monotone transformations of either variable (like taking the log of A) will not affect whether
a relationship is monotonic, but other choices one makes in defining variables clearly can.
For example, a graph of total advertising expenditure vs. population could look very different from a graph of per capita advertising expenditure vs. population. Appropriate choices
for variable definitions will reflect two concerns: the variables should be chosen so that one
would expect the direct and competition effects to be of the same sign; and one should define
them so that the direct effects are not so strong so as to make it implausible that strategic
entry deterrence motives will be strong enough to lead to nonmonotonicities. For example, in many applications total advertising expenditures will be approximately proportional
instead add the assumption that
∂ 2 π1d∗
∂ 2 π1m∗
∂π d∗
∂2c
− F (π2∗ )
− (1 − F (π2∗ ))
> f (π2∗ ) 2
2
2
2
∂A
∂A
∂A
∂A



∂π1d∗
∂π1m∗
−
∂A
∂A


.

This will always hold if the direction in which firm 1 changes A as competition becomes more likely reduces
firm 2’s profits (so that the right hand side is negative). For example, this would be the case for an investment
in a form of norivalrous advertising which raised consumer awareness of or valuation for all products in a
product class. Otherwise, it will be necessary that the term on the right hand side not be too large, which
will hold, for example, if the distribution of entry costs is sufficiently diffuse so that the density term is
sufficiently small.
11
To make the propositions easier to read, we have written them using words like increasing and positive
rather than nondecreasing and nonnegative. The results extend in all of the obvious ways, e.g. investment
is monotone nondecreasing if the direct and competition effects are both nonnegative, and investment is
monotone increasing if the direct and competition effects are both nonnegative and one is strictly positive.

12

to the market size and strategic entry deterrence motives would need to be tremendously
strong to make total advertising expenditures decreasing in market size over any range. It
is more plausible that there might be nonmonotonicities in per capita expenditures.
Remark 3: The proposition says nothing about what happens if the direct and competition effects go in opposite directions. Investment absent entry deterrence motives can
be nonmonotone in z in such applications, but there is no strong reason to think this will
usually be the case, e.g. it is not true that one effect tends to dominate at small z and
the other at large z. It would not be unreasonable to look for evidence of strategic entry
deterrence by looking for nonmonotonicities even in the absence of a convincing argument
that the direct and competition effects went in the same direction. One would, however,
need to recognize that one could fashion an alternate expanation for the nonmonotonicity
by having different nonstrategic effects dominate in different regions, and one would want
to consider whether such an explanation is plausible.
One noteworthy special case in which the monotonicity argument is particularly simple
is when z is the number of potential consumers in the market and the profit and cost
functions are directly proportional to z. In this case we have the following corollary.
Corollary 1 In the model above, suppose c(A, z) = zc(A, 1) and πij∗ (A, z) = zπij∗ (A, 1) for
i = 1, 2 and j = d, m. Then, the direct effect is zero. Hence A∗N D (z) will be monotone increasing if the competition effect is always positive and A∗N D (z) will be monotone decreasing
if the competition effect is always negative.

3.2

Examples of direct and competition effects

In this section we discuss the direct and competition effects in a few examples. The examples
are related to our pharmaceutical application, and are also intended to help build intuition
for the two effects.
We already saw one numerical example of a situation in which investment absent entry
deterrence motives was monotone decreasing in the market size. Why the pattern of investment is as it is in this example is straightforward: The profit and cost functions in example
1 satisfy the hypotheses of Corollary 1. The competition effect is negative because the

13

benefit of the advertising is greater for a monopolist than for a duopolist. (The duopolist
gains less both because advertising has a smaller impact on consumers’ incremental preference for the incumbent’s product relative to the entrant’s and because the incumbent has
a smaller market share in duopoly.)
Another useful example to think about is advertising that increases perceived differentiation between the incumbent’s product and the entrant’s. With proportional advertising
costs we would again expect advertising levels in such models to be monotone. This time,
however, we would expect advertising to be monotone increasing: differentiating advertising is more valuable to a duopolist (which relies on differentiation to maintain markups)
than to a monopolist. Here is formal version:
Example 2 Differentiating advertising.
Consider a mass z of potential consumers with unit demands differentiated by a taste
parameter θ which is uniformly distributed on [−1, 1]. Suppose that after firm 1 spends
zA2 /2 on advertising, a consumer of type θ receives utility 1 − p1 if he buys the good from
firm 1 at price p1 , 1 + θt(1 + A) − p2 if he buys from firm 2 at p2 , and zero if he makes no
purchase.
With this specification duopoly profits are proportional to 1 + A and monopoly profits
are independent of A. Hence, the competition effect is positive. Again, there is no direct
effect. Hence, A∗N D (z) will be monotone increasing.
In this example, we would get the same result with another reasonable specification for
advertising costs.
Example 3 Differentiating advertising via broadcast media.
Suppose that A represented total advertising expenditure in a model where the advertising
technology (perhaps like direct-to-consumer television advertising) is such that all potential
consumers see any ad, i.e., where c(A, z) = c(A, 1) and πij∗ (A, z) = zπij∗ (A, 1).
In this case the direct effect of z on A is positive so the direct and competition effects
of differentiating advertising would work in the same direction.
Another type of investment we will think about in the pharmaceutical application is
investments in product proliferation.
14

Example 4 Product proliferation.
Let z be the mass of potential consumers and let A be a fixed expenditure on developing
new versions of the product to be located at various points of a horizontal taste space a la
Hotelling. Suppose that costs of developing these new varieties are independent of size of
the consumer population, c(A, z) = c(A, 1). Suppose also that second stage monopoly profits
are only slightly increasing in A (because idiosyncratic taste variation is small relative to
the value of the good), whereas duopoly profits are more steeply increasing in A (because
product proliferation leads firm 2 upon entry to choose to compete directly with only a subset
of firm 1’s products).
In this example, A∗N D (z) will again be monotone increasing. The direct effect is positive:
the benefits of an investment A are increasing in z whereas the costs are independent of z.
The competition effect is positive because the marginal value of the investment is greater
for a duopolist.

4

Econometric issues

The theoretical results above illustrate a general idea: one could seek evidence that investment levels reflect a strategic entry-deterrence motive by first arguing that investment
levels A should be monotone is a market size measure z absent entry-deterrence motives and
then showing that they are actually nonmonotone. To develop this idea into one on which
econometric tests can be based, the model obviously needs to be augmented to contain
an error term that can can account for measurement error in A, unobserved heterogeneity
across markets, etc. In this section, we review the existing literature on monotonicity tests,
describe the specific tests we will carry out on our data, and discuss additional econometric
issues relevant when one moves from the theory to applications.

4.1

Standard tests of monotonicity

Several recent papers have proposed tests of the hypothesis that data {Ai , zi } are generated
by a process
Ai = A∗ (zi ) + i ,

15

with A∗ (z) being monotone increasing in z and the i being independent of zi . These
include Gijbels et al. (2000), Ghosal et al. (2000), and Hall and Heckman (2000). Hall
and Heckman’s approach is simple and intuitive: if the true A∗ (z) is monotone increasing,
then it is unlikely that there will be large ranges of z over which the relationship between
Ai and zi appears to be decreasing. This motivates forming a test statistic by looking at
how strong of a downward relationship one can find by considering all ranges R = [r1 , r2 ]
containing at least m datapoints. Specifically, they propose estimating a linear regression
on the subset of the data with zi ∈ R for each such R and using the product of the regression
coefficient β̂ R and the sample standard deviation of the z’s in the range σzR as a measure
of the strength of any decreasing relationship, i.e. they set
THH =

max

|R∩{z1 ,...,zn }|≥m

−β̂ R σZR .

They show that critical values can be obtained by a bootstrap with normal errors or by a
nonparametic bootstrap provided that m increases sufficiently quickly in n.

4.2

Our implementation

In this paper we will test for monotonicity in two ways: one uses a slight modification of
Hall and Heckman’s test statistic; the other uses a new statistic we propose.
Our modification of Hall and Heckman’s test statistic is necessitated by the fact that
we want the null hypothesis to be that A∗ (z) is monotone rather than monotone increasing.
To this end, we set
THH = min{

max

|R∩{z1 ,...,zn }|≥m

−β̂ R σZR ,

max

|R∩{z1 ,...,zn }|≥m

β̂ R σZR }.

Intuitively, this will be large if there are both ranges over which the data are increasing
and ranges over which the data are decreasing.
The second test statistic we try assesses how well the data can be fit by a monotone
function. Specifically, we use isotone regression to determine the monotone function fˆ(z)
that best fits the data, form the residuals ˆi ≡ Ai − fˆ(zi ), and use a test statistic like that in
Ellison and Ellison (2000) to test whether the residuals appear to come from a misspecified
model:
TEE = √

ˆ0 W ˆ
,
P
2σ̂ 2 ij w2ij
16

where W is a kernel weight matrix reflecting differences in the z’s and W = (W + W 0 )/2.
Intuitively, if the true A∗ (z) is nonmonotone, then there will be regions where A∗ (z) > fˆ(z)
and other regions where A∗ (z) < fˆ(z). This test looks for such regions by looking at whether
the residuals from nearby observations are positively correlated.
We obtained critical values for each of these tests via bootstrap methods. We have
not tried to extend the existing results to obtain formal proofs that that this procedure is
valid in our setting.12 We, therefore, conduct simulations to help assess the validity of the
procedure and the power of the tests. We discuss these briefly in the appendix.13

4.3

Measurement error

A second issue that will come up in many applications is that one may have only an
imperfect proxy for “market size” z. For example, in a dataset examining a cross-section
of cities or countries, one would typically use population as a proxy for market size, which
would not allow for taste differences across markets.14 We note here that this is often not
a problem for our approach.
Suppose z is unobserved, but the data contain a proxy r correlated with z. Given
a dataset containing observations {Ai , ri } satisfying Ai = A∗ (zi ) + i and appropriate
regularity conditions, one can estimate the function A(r) defined by A(r) ≡ E(A∗ (z)|r).
Whether looking for nonmonotonicity remains an appropriate way to look for evidence
of strategic entry deterrence depends on whether A(r) inherits the monotonicity of A∗ (z)
under the null.
Obviously, we can only hope that A(r) will be monotone in r if the joint distribution
of r and z is such that higher values of r are associated with higher values of z. It is a
standard result in incentive theory that the appropriate meaning of association for many
such problems is having the monotone likelihood ratio property (MLRP). The conditional
12
The theoretical results of Hall and Heckman (2000) cannot be applied directly for a couple reasons:
we have modified the test statistic to make it two-sided, and in some of our applications the A variable is
discrete, which does not fit with their assumption that the i are i.i.d. The theoretical results in Ellison
and Ellison (2000) are inapplicable because it is assumed there that the function fˆ(z) is obtained via a
parametric method, whereas the fˆ(z) in this paper is a nonparametric estimate.
13
In unreported simulations we also examined the power of the Ghosal et al. (2000) and Gijbels et al.
(2000) tests. We chose to use the two statistics we use because they were quicker to compute and/or more
powerful in these simulations.
14
See Bronnenberg, Dhar, and Dube (2005) for an interesting study of cross-market taste differences.

17

density f (x|θ) of a random variable is said to have the MLRP in x if f (x|θ)/f (x|θ) is
monotone increasing in x whenever θ > θ. Under this assumption we have
Proposition 2 Suppose A∗ (z) is monotone in z. Suppose distribution of r conditional on
z has the MLRP in r. Then, A(r) is monotone in r.
Proof
MLRP implies that the distribution of z conditional on r is increasing in the first order
stochastic dominance sense. (See Milgrom (1981).) This implies that the expectation
conditional on r of any increasing function of z is increasing in r. A(r) is the expectation
of A∗ (z).
QED.
In the classic measurement error model, ri = zi + i , the MLRP holds provided that
the density g of  has g( − δ)/g() increasing in  for any δ > 0. This property, called
monotone likelihood ratio, holds for most standard distributions including the normal. We
therefore think of Proposition 2 as indicating that measurement error is not a significant
obstacle to our approach.15

4.4

Endogeneity

In some applications, one may also worry that the available proxies for market size are endogenous. For example, in our pharmaceutical application, our best proxy for the potential
market for a drug is the total revenue that the incumbent monopolist has been receiving
prior to patent expiration. This will be correlated with the number of potential consumers
and their aggregate willingness to pay for the drug, but one would also expect that it would
be influenced by the investments, e.g. revenue will be higher if the incumbent advertises
more.
Endogeneity is a more serious concern than measurement error. However, because we are
only interested in monotonicity (as opposed to obtaining consistent parameter estimates)
endogeneity can be less of a problem for our approach than it would be for structural
15

The textbook example of a situation in which the property fails is when the distribution of i is extremely
bimodal. For example, if z is standard normal and  is always either -10 or 10, then observing r = −9 likely
indicates that z = 1, whereas observing r = 9 likely indicates that z = −1.

18

estimation. One can easily envision two situations in which the use of an endogenous
proxy without an instrument would not be a problem. First, if the endogeneity bias in
estimating ∂A/∂z is of the same sign as ∂A/∂z, then investments will still be estimated
to be monotone in the endogenous variable under the null. The power of our test may be
reduced, but a rejection of monotonicity would still be evidence of strategic entry deterrence
motives. Second, if the endogeneity bias is of the opposite sign as ∂A/∂z but is sufficiently
small, then the estimated investment function would also still be monotone under the null.
Formally, consider again a cross-section dataset containing investment levels Ai and a
proxy ri for the market size. Suppose the data generating process is
Ai = A∗ (zi ) + i
ri = r(zi , Ai ) + ηi ,
where zi , i , and ηi are unobserved independent random variables and r(z, A) is a function
that is monotone increasing in both arguements. Again, the function one can hope to
estimate from the data is A(r) ≡ E(A∗ (z) + |r).
Define r̃(z, ) ≡ r(z, A∗ (z) + ). One result showing that endogeneity need not be a
problem is straightforward.
Proposition 3 Suppose A∗ (z) is monotone increasing. Suppose the distribution of η has
a monotone likelihood ratio, and that the distributions of r̃(z, ) conditional on z and  both
have the MLRP in r̃. Then, A(r) is monotone increasing in r.
Proof
When η has a monotone likelihood ratio, the distribution of r̃(z, ) is increasing in r
in the sense of first order stochastic dominance (FOSD). When the distributions of r̃(z, )
conditioned on each argument both have the MLRP, this in turn implies that the distributions of z and  are both increasing in r in the FOSD sense. When A∗ (z) is monotone
increasing, this implies that the distribution of A∗ (z) +  is increasing in r in the FOSD
sense, which implies that A(r) is increasing.
QED.

19

Proposition 3 has two primary limitations. The most important limitation for applied
work is that it only covers the case in which A∗ (z) is monotone increasing, not to the case
when A∗ (z) is monotone decreasing.
A second limitation is that we have assumed that r̃(z, ) has the MLRP in both arguments. If r(z, A) is linear in its arguments, then one of these assumptions is simply that
the distribution of  has a monotone likelihood ratio. The other is that the distribution of
z + βA∗ (z) has a monotone likelihood ratio. Even if z is normally distributed, one could
find monotone functions A∗ (z) for which z + βA∗ (z) has a bimodal distribution (choose
a function with two broad flat portions separated by a steeper portion). This seems less
important as a practical concern.
If A∗ (z) is monotone decreasing the argument in the proof of Proposition 3 goes through
until the very last step.16 It does not go all the way through because we end up with
E(A∗ (z)|r) decreasing in r and E(|r) increasing in r, leaving the sum E(A∗ (z) + |r) indeterminate. In some applications with A∗ (z) monotone decreasing it will still be appropriate
to interpret a test of whether A∗ (r) is nonmonotonic as a test for strategic entry deterrence.
This would be justified in applications for which the A∗ (z) decreasing effect should outweigh
the E(|r) increasing effect. The former effect will be stronger than the latter when r(z, A)
is more dependent on z than A, when the variance of z is large relative to the variance in
, and when A∗ (z) is more steeply downward sloping.

5

The Pharmaceutical Industry

In this section we provide some background on the U.S. pharmaceutical industry, discuss
strategic instruments that firms might try to use to deter generic entry, describe our dataset,
and note that the dataset has the type of heterogeneity in “market size” required for our
approach.
16

The assumption that r̃(z, ) has the MLRP in both arguments may also be more difficult to justify. For
larger values of r̃ to be associated with larger values of z we will need dr̃/dz to be positive, which requires
that the direct effect dr/dz is larger than the indirect effect through investment levels dr/dA dA∗ /dz.

20

5.1

Industry background

Prior to 1984 all but the most popular drugs tended to retain their monopoly position in
the U.S. market long after their patent protection expired. FDA reguations required any
firm wanting to produce a generic substitute to repeat the lengthy process of tests and
clinical trials to which the incumbent had been subjected. Things changed dramatically
in the mid-1980’s: the Waxman-Hatch Act (1984) reduced regulatory barriers to generic
entry; and state laws mandating/allowing generic substitution by pharmacists boosted the
market share of generic drugs.17
When a blockbuster drug like Prozac loses patent protection, generic entry is swift and
sure—within 18 months Prozac faced 21 generic competitors and had lost more than 80%
of its market. Most drugs, however, are not blockbusters. Many FDA-approved drugs
never achieve much commercial success. Others have been largely supplanted by the time
they lose protection. In this paper, we study a set of 63 drugs that lost patent or FDA
exclusivity protection between 1986 and 1992.18 Whereas Prozac had annual revenues of
about $3 billion prior to patent expiration, the median drug in our sample only had annual
revenue of around $20 million. For such a drug, generic entry is much less certain: only
thirty seven of the sixty three drugs in our sample faced generic competitors within three
years of the expiration of their patents.
There are a number of “investments” that one could imagine pharmaceutical incumbent distorting in order to deter entry. The most obvious is advertising, which plays an
extremely important role in pharmaceutical markets—an oft-cited statistic by critics of the
17

See Grabowski and Vernon (1996).
These drugs are a subset of those used in Scott Morton (2000). The sample is intended to be an
as-complete-as-possible list of the drugs that lost patent protection in this period, although we were conservative in constructing the sample and only included drugs when we were sufficiently confident about the
identification of the relevant patent and exclusivity restrictions. This can be difficult even though drug
manufacturers are required by the FDA to report all relevant patents with expiration dates and the FDA
publishes this information in the Approved Product List (“The Orange Book”). The reason is that which
patents are truly relevant is not something the FDA can sort out, and it is clearly in the interests of the manufacturers to list patents even if their relevance is questionable. For the high revenue drugs, potential entry
dates are often listed in trade publications and are, therefore, fairly easy to track down, absent court battles
over expiration. Information is more difficult to come by for the smaller revenue drugs because potential
entry into those drugs is usually not an important event. For those we relied more on FDA publications.
Additional sources we used were lists of patent expiration dates published by the Generic Pharmaceutical
Industry Association and Arthur D. Little, Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991), lists of ANDAs, and
information on generics being produced in various issues of Drug Facts and Comparisons.
18

21

pharmaceutical industry is that more money is spent by the industry on marketing than
on research and development.19 In the period we study, there were two main advertising
channels: “detail” and journal advertising.20 Detail advertising is the practice of having
sales representatives visit doctors’ offices to inform them about studies assessing a drug’s
effectiveness and otherwise promote the product in one-on-one conversations. Journal advertising means placing advertisements in medical journals and other publications read by
doctors. Expenditures on detail advertising are typically much larger than expenditures on
journal advertising. An important aspect of both of these advertising technologies is that
increases in demand they generate will in part be captured by generic competitors: doctors
will know that generic versions of a drug can provide the same benefits; and pharmacists
may dispense a generic even when the doctor has written a prescription for a brand name.
A second potential instrument for strategic entry deterrence that has received much less
attention is presentation proliferation. Many prescription drugs are sold in a large number
of “presentations”. The tranquilizer Haldol, for example, is sold in 21 , 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20
milligram tablets, as a concentrated liquid in bottles, and as a solution for intravenous use
in vials, ampules and disposable syringes. Increasing the variety of presentations could be
a strategy for deterring entry. It makes it more costly for an entrant to reproduce the
incumbent’s complete product line, and reduces the revenues of an entrant that avoids the
cost increase by only producing some presentations.
An additional instrument that firms might use to deter entry is pricing. The theoretical
literature has identified a number of ways in which pricing decisions may affect subsequent
entry: prices may signal something about the incumbent or the market to the entrant, they
may be be distorted for signal jamming reasons, or there may be some more direct link
between periods due to switching costs, learning by doing, etc.21 In the pharmaceutical
19
See U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1993). Bill Clinton, in a 1993 speech, said that
the pharmaceutical industry spends “$1 billion more each year on advertising and lobbying than it does
on developing new and better drugs . . . . We cannot have profits at the expense of our children.” (The
Wall Street Journal, February 16, 1993) Schweitzer (1997) provides a thorough discussion of research and
marketing expenditures of pharmaceutical firms. See Caves, Whinston, and Hurwitz (1991), Hurwitz and
Caves (1988), Leffler (1981), Berndt, Bui, Reiley, and Urban (1995) and Rizzo (1999) for discussions of other
aspects of pharmaceutical advertising.
20
Direct-to-consumer advertising via mass media did not begin in earnest until the mid 1990’s. See
Rosenthal et al. (2002) for a description of the practice and some documentation of its prevalence.
21
Among the early papers in this literature are Milgrom and Roberts (1982), Fudenberg and Tirole (1983b,

22

industry it is plausible that generic entrants have some uncertainty about the slope of the
demand curve, and also plausible that prices may have some commitment value due to the
scrutiny directed at price increases. Hence, several of the mechanisms by which prices could
be a strategic investment seem potentially relevant.

5.2

Data

Our basic data set includes 63 distinct chemical compounds that faced potential generic
entry as the result of a patent or FDA exclusivity expiration between 1986 and 1992.22
We collected the data on revenues, prices, and advertising from historical IMS audits
of the pharmaceutical industry. Like all IMS sales data, the prices and revenues are those
paid by the retail or hospital sector, in other words, essentially at the wholesale level. Our
revenue data contain annual presentation-level wholesale revenues for all presentations of
each drug in both the hospital and drugstore submarkets for five years: three years prior to
patent expiration, the year of patent expiration and the year following patent expiration.
We construct two variables from this data which we use to help measure the attractiveness
of the market to potential entrants: Revenue3 is the average annual revenue (in thousands
of dollars) from hospital and drugstore sales in the three calendar years before but not
including the year of patent expiration; and HospF rac is the fraction of total revenues in
the calendar year prior to patent expiration which were due to hospital sales. All prices
and revenues are in constant 1982-1984 dollars.
Our advertising data on each drug consist of two variables, Detail and Journal. The
former is the number of minutes that pharmaceutical company “detailers” spent promoting
the drug in direct conversations with physicians. The latter is an estimate of dollars spent
on journal advertisements promoting the drug based on audits of medical journals. The
advertising data is at a monthly frequency and includes 48 observations per drug covering
the thirty six months prior to patent expiration, the month of patent expiration and the
eleven subsequent months.
1986), Harrington (1986), and Klemperer (1987).
22
Our data set contains 71 drugs, where a drug is defined as a brand-name product sold by the patentholder or licensee prior to expiration. Seven of our chemical compounds were sold under multiple brandnames, accounting for the discrepency.

23

Our primary measure of the degree to which an incumbent has engaged in presentation
proliferation, P resHerf , is a Herfindahl-style measure that is also constructed from the
presentation-level revenue data. Specifically, we define P resHerfit = wi
wi )

2
k zihkt ,

P

2
k zidkt

P

+ (1 −

where wi is the fraction of the sales of drug i which are made through drug-

stores and zidkt and zihkt are the fractions of drug i’s revenues in year t in the drugstore
and hospital markets, respectively, which are accounted for by presentation k.23 P resHerf
will be large in markets where a small number of presentations account for most of the revenues and smaller in markets where sales are more evenly divided among a larger number
of presentations.
Because of the different presentations, a drug’s price is difficult to define. (Prices for
different presentations are clearly not set to equalize the total cost of a duration of treatment
or in proportion to the quantity of the active ingredient.) In our study of pricing patterns,
we look at changes in the drugstore and hospital prices of each drug using variables, HP rice
and DP rice, which give the price of one particular presentation of each drug in the five
year window around the year of patent expiration.24
We obtained information on drug characteristics and whether generic entry did in fact
occur from several other sources.25

The primary variable we will use to study entry,

Entry3Y r, is a dummy variable equal to one if at least one firm had an Abbreviated New
Drug Application (ANDA) approved (allowing it to produce a generic version of the drug)
within three years of the date at which a patent expires.26 Chronic is set to zero for drugs
23

Defining presentations by differences at the wholesale level will in some cases be a poor reflection of how
proliferation affects the costs of entry. For example, 100mg tablets sold to pharmacies in a 100 tablet bottle
will be treated as different from 100mg tablets sold in bubble packs and as different from 100mg tablets
sold to pharmacies in a 500 tablet bottle. The descriptors in our data at times do not make it clear how
similar/different wholesale presentations are, but it did not appear that problems like those described above
are very important in the aggregate.We would also have preferred to sum the presentation-by-presentation
revenues across hospitals and drugstores before computing the sum of squares, but given the form of our
data, this would have entailed a laborious manual matching. Given that 70 percent of the drugs have at
least 90 percent of their sales in one submarket or the other, we felt that just taking weighted averages was
a reasonable compromise.
24
We usually chose the presentation that had the highest revenue in the first year of our data.
25
These include Drug Facts and Comparisons, Physician’s Desk Reference, the FDA’s Approved Drug
Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations, and discussions with physicians.
26
Caves, Whinston and Hurwicz (1991) and Scott Morton (1999) note that entry in pharmaceutical
markets often does not occur immediately upon patent expiration, and that only part of the delay in
attributable to uncertainties in the length of time necessary for ANDA approval.

24

which treat an acute condition and to one for drugs which treat a chronic condition.27
P sych is an indicator for whether the drug primarily treats a psychological condition.
T opical is an indicator for whether the drug is usually applied topically. T herSubs is the
number of other chemical compounds in a drug’s therapeutic class, where we used therapeutic categories defined by Drug Facts and Comparisons. Specialist is a proxy for the extent
to which the drug tends to be prescribed by specialists. It is obtained by computing the
GINI coefficient for each therapeutic class of drugs from a table of frequency of prescription
by various specialties. Cardiovascular drugs, for instance, have a GINI coefficient of 0.18
whereas ophthalmic drugs have a value of 0.35, indicating that prescriptions for cardiovasculars are more spread out across specialties than are prescriptions for ophthalmics. (Those
two categories represent the minimum and maximum values.) Each drug is categorized in
therapeutic class and assigned the GINI coefficient for its therapeutic class as its value of
Specialist.
Summary statistics are presented in Table 3. The first five variables in the table are
defined at the drug level. The mean of the Entry3Y r variable reflects that 37 of the 63
drugs experienced generic entry in the three year window. The mean of the Revenue3
variable indicates that the average drug had annual revenues of $39.4 million.
Detail3 and Journal3 are average annual values of the advertising variables over the
same three-year pre-expiration period for which Revenue3 was computed. The values for
the mean advertising ratios in Table 3 indicate that 1.4% of sales were spent on journal
advertising and approximately 5% on detail advertising.28 P resHerf 3 is an average of the
P resHerf variable over the same three year period.29 Although the average number of
presentations per drug is greater than six, the mean value of 0.54 indicates that one or two
presentations usually account for a large portion of revenues.30 The Detail3, Journal3, and
P resHerf 3 variables have 69 or 70 observations rather than 63 because we have defined
27

The variable is set to one-half for a few drugs which were judged to be intermediate on this dimension.
Our detailing data are in minutes. This calculation assumes a cost of $10 a minute.
29
For seven of the drugs we are missing data for one of the three years. In these cases, the average was
taken over the two years for which data was available.
30
Recall that the scale of a Herfindahl index is such that the index would be equal to 1/n if a drug is sold
in n presentations and each receives equal revenues. Ten of our drugs are sold in a single presentation and
hence have P resHerf 3 equal to one. The mean of P resHerf 3 for the remaining drugs is still 0.46.
28

25

them at the level of the brand-name rather than at the level of the drug.31
The DP ricet and HP ricet variables are yearly observations of the price of one presentation of each drug deflated by the Consumer Price Index. The summary statistics indicate
that the average price increases in the drugstore and hospital markets are 1% and 1.9%
above the rate of inflation.
The data on the HospF rac variable reflect that drugstore revenues are usually substantially larger than hospital revenues.

5.3

Revenue as a proxy for market size

Our approach to studying stategic investment requires that we have a proxy for “market
size”. and that there be sufficient heterogeneity in this variable. In this section, we note
that pre-expiration revenues should be a good market-size proxy.
Previous work by Grabowski and Vernon (1992), Bae (1987), and Scott Morton (2000)
has established that pre-expiration revenues are a significant predictor of generic entry. This
should not be surprising: there is tremendous variation in revenues across drugs and no
obvious reason why the fixed costs of developing drugs should be comparably heterogeneous
and correlated. The first column of Table 5 reports estimates from a probit regression of
Entry3Y r on Revenue3 to verify that such a relationship exists in our data as well. The
second column adds several other covariates to the regression. None except Revenue3 have
a statistically significant effect on the likelihood of generic entry.32
One can only expect to be able to find a nonmonotonic investment pattern in the crosssection due to strategic investment if the heterogeneity in market sizes is sufficiently large
so that a dataset contains markets where the likelihood of entry is small, intermediate, and
31

Hence, the seven drugs that are sold under multiple brand names contribute multiple observations to
these regressions. The small number of missing observations are due to cases where we judged the data to
be unreliable. Drugs for which no detail or journal advertising was performed are included and coded as
zeros.
32
The point estimates are that drugs treating chronic conditions and drugs sold mostly through hospitals
were more likely to face generic entry, although neither estimate is significant even at the 10% level. We
would also find such estimates a bit surprising as they do not conform with intuitive findings in the previous
literature about where markups are greatest: Sorensen’s (2000) study of dispersion in retail drug prices
in New York State indicates that drugs treating acute conditions have higher retail markups (and less
dispersion), and Ellison and Snyder (2001) and others report that hospitals pay lower wholesale prices for
antibiotics than do drugstores. Scott Morton (2000) does report that entry is significantly more likely for
drugs treating chronic conditions and for drugs where the hospital share of sales is larger in her analysis of
a larger dataset which overlaps substantially with ours.

26

large. To give some feel for the degree of heterogeneity in our data, we divide our sample
into five revenue-based subsamples. Table 4 reports the range of revenues in each group
and the fraction of drugs in each group that experienced entry within three years of patent
expiration.33 The main observation to be taken away from this table is that one can think
of the lowest quintile, Q1, as containing drugs that face a low probability of generic entry,
those in the next quintile, Q2, as having an intermediate probability of generic entry, and
those in the top three quintiles, Q3, Q4 and Q5, as having a high probability of generic
entry. The strategic entry-deterrence motive will vary continuously with revenues (and
other unobservables), but one can roughly regard it as being most salient for drugs in the
second-lowest revenue quintile.

6

Evidence on Strategic Investment in Pharmaceuticals

In this section we examine our data on detail advertising, journal advertising, presentation
proliferation, and pricing for evidence that the incumbents’ actions reflect a strategic entry
deterrence motive. We will do this in two ways. First, in the most straightforward application of the framework developed in this paper we look for evidence of nonmonotonicity
in the cross-section. Second, we conduct a similar analysis using behavior in the early part
of our data (when entry deterrence was less salient) as an additional control variable.

6.1

Cross-sectional patterns in incumbent behavior

In our theory section we presented conditions under which investment would be monotone
in market size if firms are not influenced by an entry-deterrence motive, and noted that a
strong entry-deterrence motive might be expected to produce a nonmonotone pattern. We
now discuss the potentially strategic actions one by one. In each case, we discuss what
might be expected absent entry deterrence motives, how behavior would be distorted to
deter entry, and what patterns are observed in our dataset. We find some evidence in favor
of the entry-deterrence hypothesis in the journal advertising data.
33

Note that the five “quintiles” in this table contain uneven numbers of drugs. Recall that we are
sometimes treating our sample as 63 drugs and sometimes as 69 brand names/drug combinations. We do
the latter more frequently, and hence chose to define the quintiles to have the same number of brand names
in each. Note that the quintiles are only being used to provide a feel for the data and our nonparametric
monotonicity tests do not involve any arbitrary cutoffs.

27

6.1.1

Detail advertising

Detail advertising is extremely important in the development of the market for a prescription drug. Our cross-sectional analysis will examine advertising-to-sales ratios.34 What
patterns might be indicative of strategic entry deterrence? Absent entry-deterrence motives we would expect to see these ratios decline slightly with market size. The “competition effect” is that there are reduced long-run benefits to advertising high-revenue drugs
approaching patent expiration (because a substantial share of future prescriptions will instead go to generics). There is little “direct effect” because the fact that detailing efforts are
focused on doctors who write a substantial number of prescriptions for a condition means
that they are not particularly less productive for drugs that treat less common conditions.
In a strategic-entry-deterrence model the strategic effect is that an incumbent might reduce
detail advertising levels in intermediate sized markets. This reduction in advertising would
reduce the attractiveness of the market to potential entrants, and entry could thereby be
deterred.
For a first look at how the detailing-to-sales ratio varies with revenues, we estimate the
regression
Detail3i
= β0 + β1 log(Revenue3i ) + β2 (log(Revenue3i ) − R)2 + β3 Specialisti + i ,
Revenue3i
where R is the mean of log(Revenue3). We include Specialisti because detailing is more
cost-effective for drugs prescribed by specialists than for drugs prescribed by nonspecialists
(each of whom will only have a small number of patients who could benefit from the drug).
Coefficient estimates are reported in the first column of Table 6. The regression does
not provide any evidence for a nonmonotonic pattern. Indeed, it provides little evidence
of any patterns at all. The R2 of the regression is low. The coefficient estimates on the
revenue variables and the coefficient estimate on the Specialist variable are all statistically
insignificant.
Table 7 presents additional descriptive evidence and formal tests for nonmonotonicity.
The first five columns of the first row of the table give the mean values of Detail3/Revenue3
34

For drugs sold under multiple brand names our advertising data is at the level of the brand rather than
the drug. In these cases, we use brand-specific sales in the advertising to sales ratios.

28

within each of the revenue quintiles. The most noteworthy value is the low value for the
second quintile, which, as noted earlier, can be thought of as drugs facing an intermediate
probability of generic entry. To provide formal tests of nonmonotonicity we carried out the
tests described in section 4.2. We used a parameter for the Hall-Heckman test corresponding
to subregressions of fifteen observations. We set the smoothing parameter for the EllisonEllison style test to be equal to one-fifth of the support of the regressor. The sixth and
seventh columns of the Table report estimated p-values for these two tests, neither of
which rejects monotonicity at standard levels of significance. Apparently, the level of noise
is sufficiently high and/or the pattern is sufficiently sensitive to the cutoffs so that the
nonmonotonic pattern in the quintile means is not significant in our nonparametric tests.
6.1.2

Journal advertising

The second potential instrument for strategic entry deterrence available to us is journal
advertising. What patterns might be expected here with and without strategic entry deterrence?
The direct effect should tend to make advertising-to-sales ratios increasing in revenues:
many medical journals reach a fairly wide audience, so the cost per potential patient of
journal advertising is probably decreasing in the size of the pool of potential patients. The
competition effect should go in the other direction for the same reason as it did with detail
advertising. The fact that the two effects go in opposite directions makes this a less than
ideal application for our methodology, although we would expect that the direct effect
would outweigh the competition effect and produce a monotone increasing pattern absent
entry-deterrence motivations.
The prediction of the strategic-entry-deterrence model is as in the detail advertising case:
firms should reduce advertising in intermediate-sized markets to reduce the attractiveness
of the market to potential entrants.
The second column of Table 6 reports estimates from a regression of Journal3/Revenue3
on log(Revenue3), (log(Revenue3)−R)2 and Specialist. The positive coefficient on log(Revenue3)
suggests that advertising-to-sales ratios are higher in larger markets, but this coefficient and
all the others are not significant. The R2 is again low.

29

The quintile means reported in the second row of Table 7 indicate that journal advertising is also lowest in the second quintile. This time, the Hall-Heckman test rejects
monotonicity at the 5% level.
We would summarize these results by saying that they suggest that there is evidence of
nonmonoticity in the relationship between journal advertising and market size. The form
of the nonmonotonicity is consistent with what one would expect from an entry-deterrence
model. We should note, however, that one could also tell a nonstrategic story: it could be
that the competition effect dominates in small markets whereas economies of scale drive
the cross-sectional pattern in large markets.
6.1.3

Presentation proliferation

The final incumbent action we examine in this section is presentation proliferation. As
noted above, the entry-deterrence motive gives incumbents in intermediate-sized markets
an incentive to increase the number of presentations in which the drug is sold. This makes
it more costly for entrants to match the incumbents’ full product line (or leaves entrants
with a lower market share if they enter with a limited product line). This would be reflected
in a reduction in our Herfindahl-style measure, P resHerf 3, in intermediate-sized markets.
This again is a not an ideal application because there are effects going in both directions.
There should be a strong negative “direct effect” because the fixed costs of developing a
new presentation can be spread over a larger quantity of sales in large markets. The
“competition effect” likely goes in the opposite direction because the incumbent has lower
sales in a duopoly. We would anticipate, however, that the latter is likely to be smaller, so
we are comfortable applying our tests assuming that a monotone decreasing relationship
would be most likely absent entry-deterrence motives.
The third column of Table 6 reports coefficient estimates from a regression of P resHerf 3
on log(Revenue3), (log(Revenue3) − R̄)2 , and two control variables. There is clearly
a strong relationship between presentation proliferation and revenues: the coefficient on
log(Revenue3) is negative and highly significant. The quadratic term yields no evidence of
nonmontonicity. The control variables, P sych and T opical, are also highly significant.35
35

Psychoactive drugs tend to be offered in a much wider range of dosages than other drugs and topical
medications tend to have a large number of presentations both because of variation in the dosage and

30

Table 7 similarly gives no indication of a nonmonotone pattern. The quintile means are
montonically decreasing. The p-values for the two monotonicity tests are 0.34 and 0.19.
We would summarize these results by saying that they suggest that there is a strong
direct effect of market size on presentation proliferation. Our approach will have less power
to detect strategic entry deterrence when direct effects are larger. The cross-section data on
presentation proliferation appear to be a case where our approach will have limited power.

6.2

Changes in behavior as expiration approaches

In this section we exploit an additional feature the pharmaceutical environment—entry is
prohibited until a known point in time—to construct additional tests for strategic entry
deterrence. We find additional evidence of nonmonotonicities.
One can think of the analysis in the previous subsection as examining a cross-section
produced by a data generating process of the form
Ait = A∗N D (zi ) + γt (A∗ED (zi ) − A∗N D (zi )) + ηi + it ,
where we have broken the equilibrium behavior A∗ (zi ) into two components: the behavior that would have been optimal if firms ignored the strategic entry-deterrence motive,
A∗N D (zi ), and the pure strategic term, A∗ED (zi ) − A∗N D (zi ), multiplied by a coefficient γt ,
which would take on the value of one if firms fully recognized and reacted to the strategic entry-deterrence motive, and zero in the other extreme where firms do not recognize
this incentive or choose not to reaspond to it. Writing the equation this way highlights
two reasons why it might be difficult to find evidence of strategic entry deterrence in a
pure cross-section dataset. First, if A∗N D (zi ) is steeply sloped, then this may overwhelm
the nonomonotonicity of the strategic term γt (A∗ED (zi ) − A∗N D (zi )) and leave us with no
nonmonotonicity to detect. Second, even if this is not the case, the error terms due to
drug-specific heterogeneity and noise, ηi and it , may be large enough to make it hard to
provide significant evidence from small sample sizes.
Suppose that one also had the opportunity to observe each market at two points in
time: a time t when the incumbent invested as above and a second point in time t0 when
because they may be offered as creams, liquids, gels, etc. in different-sized tubes.

31

the entry-deterrence motive was weaker (or absent) and the incumbent chose
Ait0 = A∗N D (zi ) + γt0 (A∗ED (zi ) − A∗N D (zi )) + ηi + it0 ,
with γt0 < γt . The difference between the two observations would then be given by
Ait − Ait0 = (γt − γt0 )(A∗ED (zi ) − A∗N D (zi )) + it − it0 .
Detecting nonmonotone pattern in this equation could be much easier: the potentially
steeply sloped nonstrategic term has been eliminated, and the error variance may be smaller.
In our pharmaceutical application, generic entry is prohibited until a known date. Further in advance of this date, the entry deterrence motive should be weaker, e.g. if the rate
at which advertising goodwill decays is such that advertising today will have only a trivial
impact on demand at the patent-expiration date, then the incentive to distort advertising
will be very weak. Of course, if one looks much further from the patent expiration date it
becomes less plausible that the nonstrategic optimum, A∗N D (zi ), and the drug-spcific heterogeneity ηi , are really the same at the two points in time, e.g. firms advertise much more
when launching a new drug than in subsequent years. To balance these two considerations,
we examine here the difference between firm behavior in the year immediately prior to
patent expiration and firm behavior in the preceding two years.36
In the subsections that follow, we examine whether changes in each of the potential
“strategic investments” are nonmontone in market size. For these tests, we drop all observations for which there is no change in incumbent behavior, e.g. drugs which do zero
advertising in both years and drugs that are only ever offered in a single presentation. Our
primary dependent variable is an indicator variable for the behavior having increased or
decreased. This makes the comparisons as simple as possible and eliminates problems due
to outliers and heteroskedasticity.
6.2.1

Detail advertising

Recall that a strategic entry-deterrence model predicts that firms in intermediate-sized markets would reduce their detail advertising to make their market less attractive to potential
36
In the case of the advertising variables, which are available to us at monthly frequency, we do this
by comparing the twelve months prior to patent expiration with the preceding twenty-four months. Our
presentation and pricing data are at an annual frequency, and we compare the calendar year prior to
expiration with the two previous calendar years.

32

entrants. We did not see evidence of such a pattern in our cross-section analysis of detail
advertising, though.
For a first look at the question of which firms are increasing and decreasing detail
advertising prior to patent expiration, the first row of Table 8 reports the fraction of each
drugs in each revenue quintile that increased their detail advertising in the year prior to
patent expiration. (The row below this lists the number of drugs remaining in each quintile
after we dropped drugs that did no detail advertising at all in the thirty-six months prior
to patent expiriation.) Note that a pattern roughly consistent with the entry-deterrence
model is again visible: the majority of drugs in the smallest- and largest-revenue quintile
are increasing detailing as patent expiration approaches; while most drugs in the secondand third quintiles (which are the ones where entry is most uncertain) are decreasing detail
advertising. Although the sample sizes behind some of these numbers are small (and one
could have worried that the stark numbers in the table were sensitive to the arbitrary bin
cutoffs), we are able to strongly reject monotonicity with the nonparametric Ellison-Ellison
style test.
We conclude that when we examine detail advertising changes prior to patent expiration
instead of levels, there is evidence of strategic entry-deterrence: firms in intermediate-sized
markets are reducing detail advertising prior to patent expiration.
6.2.2

Journal advertising

The strategic use of journal advertising is similar: firms in intermediate-sized markets
would reduce journal advertising to deter entry. The second row of Table 8 indicates that
reducing journal advertising is most common among firms in the third revenue-quintile.
Neither of the nonparametric tests finds the departure from monotonicity to be significant
at reasonable levels, though.
We conclude with a mixed message. Our cross-section analysis found evidence that
journal advertising was being altered for entry-deterrence reasons. Looking at changes in
journal advertising as patent expiration approaches, though, does not provide additional
evidence of this strategic behavior.

33

6.2.3

Presentation proliferation

The potential strategic use of presentation proliferation is that firms in intermediate-sized
markets could try to deter entry by introducing more presentations. This would mean that
our P resHerf measure of presentation dispersion would be lower in these markets.
The quintile means reported in the third main row of Table 8 suggest the possibility
of nonmonotonicity, but the evidence is not conclusive. The Hall-Heckman test indicates a
departure from monotonicity significant at about the 8% level.
We conclude that looking at how firms change their behavior in the year prior to patent
expiration yields some additional weaker evidence that firms might be influenced by a
strategic entry-deterrence motive, this time in the context of presentation proliferation.
6.2.4

Pricing

Pricing is an area in which looking at changes in behavior has the largest incremental benefit. We did not attempt to discuss strategic pricing at all in our cross-section analysis
because it is hard to normalize prices in any way that makes comparisons across drugs
meaningful.37 Looking at whether firms are increasing or decreasing prices as patent expiration approaches, in constrast, is both simple and sensible.
What patterns might one see if pricing decisions are influenced by an entry deterrence
motive? As mentioned above, in the simplest limit-pricing models, firms set low prices
to deter entry, and this is effective because firms are somehow committed to these prices.
This story could make sense in the pharmaceutical industry, with government or public
scrutiny being the external force that makes raising prices costly. With regard to the various
signalling and signal-jamming theories of strategic pricing, our discussions with industry
sources suggest that generic firms are well-informed about both prices and revenues (and
indeed have all the same data we have). Generic firms are less likely to be well informed
about price elasticities. Hence, it might be plausible to imagine that firms could choose
prices that are too low from the perspective of static profit maximization in order to convince
37
What one would want for a study of strategic pricing is to look at each drug’s price relative to the level
that would be optimal absent entry-deterrence motives, but any normalization of this kind would require
much more information than is available to us, e.g. one would want to estimate own-price elasticities for
each drug.

34

generic entrants that elasticities are such that it will be profitable for them to continue
to charge low prices after generic entry. In summary, the most plausible applications of
strategic pricing models suggest that firms in intermediate-sized markets might distort
prices downward to deter entry.38
The fourth row of Table 8 reports the frequency with which firms in each quintile are
raising prices charged to drugstores in the year before patent expiration.39 The quintiles
suggest some nonmonotonicity, but the formal nonparametric tests do not find it to be
significant.
The fifth row repeats this exercise for hospital prices. Here, the general pattern is that
price increases are more common in the higher-revenue quintiles and the monotonicity tests
indicate that there is no significant evidence of nonmonotonicity.

7

Conclusion

The expiration of a pharmaceutical patent and the subsequent opening of a drug market to
potential entrants is a momentous event for pharmaceutical firms. In this paper we have
examined how a number of firms have set prices, chosen advertising levels, and adjusted
their presentation-level product mix at this time. In some cases, we have found evidence of
nonmonotonic patterns that suggest that incumbents’ actions may be motivated in part by a
desire to deter generic entry. We found some evidence of nonmonotonic behavior in journal
advertising in the cross-section and of detail advertising and presentation proliferation in
changes before patent expiration. One possible interpretation of this pattern of results
is that journal advertising is considered to be a longer-lived investment than the other
two strategic tools, so that any strategic use of journal advertising could precede patent
38
Incumbents distorting their prices down in advance of entry might also provide an additional explanation
for the much talked about observation that incumbents sometimes raise prices following generic entry. See
Masson and Steiner (1985), Hurwitz and Caves (1988), Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz (1991), Grabowski
and Vernon (1992) and Griliches and Cockburn (1994). One situation in which the opposite distortion in
prices might be expected is when the incumbent also sells another product in the therapeutic category that
has a greater remaining patent life. In such a situation, a strategy for dealing with generic entry which has
been mentioned to us is to try to induce consumers of the product with the expiring patent to switch to the
other product. One way to do this is to raise the price of the older product.
39
To be precise, the table reports the fraction of drugs for which the real price was higher in the year
immediately prior to patent expiration than it was, on average, in the two previous years. Note that not all
drugs in our sample were sold in both hospitals and drugstores.

35

expiration by a relatively long time.
From a practical perspective, it should be pointed out that the entry-deterring behavior
we identify is not in blockbuster drugs—it occurs for more obscure drugs with relatively
low revenues. This is a result of our empirical strategy, and should not be interpreted as
a suggestion that strategic behavior is more common in these incumbents than in incumbents with blockbuster drugs. On the contrary, the fact that these incumbents seem to
have figured out the potential gains from altering future competitive conditions on these
unimportant drugs would lead one to assume that firms are also strategically sophisticated
with regard to their more important products.
More generally, this is a paper about the testing of strategic entry-deterrence theories.
Strategic investment models have become widespread in industrial organization, strategic
management, and other fields over the last two decades. Empirical analyses of such models should be useful for diverse reasons: from a behavioral perspective one could wonder
whether firms have figured out the sometimes subtle effects; and regulators may be interested in whether firms are actively trying to deter entry. Direct tests of strategic intent are
made difficult by the need to precisely estimate long run elasticities and to consider the
value of investments in alternate states of the world, however, and the empirical literature
to-date is limited. Our approach does not require extensive data. We hope that it may
thereby enable future work in this area.40
We hope also that our paper may more generally spur future work on monotonicity tests
as a tool for applied work. Predictions about monotonicity might be used to distinguish
between theories in other sorts of models as well. The robustness of the approach to common
econometric difficulties could be a significant advantage.

40

See Dafny (2005) for an interesting application to hospital markets.

36

Appendix
A. Proof of Proposition 1
The first order condition for A∗N D (z) is
∂c ∗
∂π d∗
∂π m∗
(AN D (z), z) = F (π2d∗ (A∗N D (z), z)) 1 (A∗N D (z), z)+(1−F (π2d∗ (A∗N D (z), z))) 1 (A∗N D (z), z).
∂A
∂A
∂A
Differentiating with respect to z gives
∂ 2 c dA∗
∂2c
+
∂A2 dz
∂z∂A

=

F (π2∗ )

∂ 2 π1d∗ ∂ 2 π1d∗ dA∗
+
∂z∂A
∂A2 dz

dπ d∗
+f (π2d∗ (A∗N D (z), z)) 2
dz

!

+ (1 −

F (π2∗ ))

∂π1d∗ ∂π1m∗
−
∂A
∂A

∂ 2 π1m∗ ∂ 2 π1m∗ dA∗
+
∂z∂A
∂A2 dz

!

!

,

dπ d∗

where we have written dz2 for the total derivative of π2d∗ (A∗N D (z), z) with respect to z, π2∗
for π2d∗ (A∗N D (z), z), and where all derivatives are evaluated at (A∗N D (z), z).
∗
Solving for dA
dz gives
dA∗
=
dz

∂ 2 π1d∗
F (π2∗ ) ∂z∂A

+ (1 −
∂2c
∂A2

∂ 2 π1m∗
F (π2∗ )) ∂z∂A

− F (π2∗ )

∂ 2 π1d∗
∂A2

−

∂2c
∂z∂A

d∗

+

dπ
f (π2∗ ) dz2

− (1 − F (π2∗ ))



∂ 2 π1m∗
∂A2

∂π1d∗
∂A

−

∂π1m∗
∂A



,

where again all derivatives are evaluated at (A∗N D (z), z).
The denominator of this expression is always positive. Given the assumption that
dπ2d∗
dz > 0, the numerator is a sum of the direct effect and the product of the competition
effect and something that is nonnegative. Hence, A∗N D (z) will be monotone increasing if
the two effects are positive and monotone decreasing if they are both negative.
QED.

B. Monte Carlo Study of Monotonicity Tests
Table 1 reports results of simulations designed to assess the size and power of the tests
of monotonicity we use.
The table reports the frequency with which monotonicity was rejected when we constructed simulated datasets using various data generating processes and then tested for
monotonicity via the same procedures we apply to our real data. To compute each entry
in the table we constructed 1000 simulated datasets, ran our bootstrap procedure to find
estimated 5% critical values, and then compared the value of the test statistic on the simulated dataset to the estimated critical value.41 The simulated datasets had 100 data points
with uniform draws on [0, 1]. The first column reports rejection rates (based on 5% critical
41

We used 1000 bootstrap repetitions to construct the estimated critical values. The procedure for doing
these was to fit an isotone regression to the simulated dataset and draw errors from the difference between
the actual and fitted values.

37

values) for the Hall-Heckman style test with smoothing parameter m = 15. The second
column reports rejection rates for the Ellison-Ellison style test with window width w = 0.2.
The first three rows of the table examine the size of the test statistics under three
different monotone data generating processes. The first, labeled M1, is Ai = i , with i a
standard normal random variable. The second, M2, is Ai = x(2−x)+i . In the third, M3, Ai
is a 0/1 variable generated from the linear probability model Prob{Ai = 1|zi } = 0.25+0.5zi .
The rejection rates are usually around 5% as they should be.
The fourth and fifth rows examine the power of the tests when applied to nonmonotone
data generating processes. The process labelled NM1 consisted of setting Ai = 10zi (1.4 −
zi ) + i , with i a standard normal random variable. Note that this function is increasing on
[0, 0.7) and decreasing on (0.7, 1]. The value at the right endpoint is 0.9 less than the value
at the peak, which is slightly less than one standard deviation of the error distribution. In
the process labelled NM2, Ai is a 0/1 variable with Prob{Ai = 1|zi } = 0.25 + 2zi (1 − zi ).
The rejection rates in these simulations range from 26.8% to 47.2%. Hence, one can think of
processes NM1 and NM2 as exemplifying the magnitude of the departure from monotonicity
that must be present in the data to be detected by our tests.
Table 1: Simulation study of size and power of monotonicity tests
Data generating
process
M1
M2
M3
NM1
NM2

Rejections with 5% critical values
H-H based test
E-E based test
0.056
0.056
0.062
0.048
0.038
0.018
0.356
0.398
0.268
0.472

The table presents rejection rates for the Hall-Heckman and Ellison-Ellison style monotonicity tests when applied to five data generating processes with 5% critical values obtained
from a bootstrap procedure.

38

C. List of Drugs Used in the Study
Generic name
albuterol
amiodarone hydrochloride
amoxapine
atenolol
auranofin
baclofen
betamethasone
bretylium tosylate
bromocriptine mesylate
carbidopa
carboprost tromethamine
chlorpheniramine maleate
chlorthalidone
cinoxacin
clonidine
clorazepate dipotassium
clotrimazole

colestipol hydrochloride
cromolyn sodium
cyclobenzaprine hydrochlor
cytarabine
deferoxamine mesylate
desipramine hydrochloride
desmopressin acetate
dimethyl sulfoxide
dipivefrin hydrochloride
doxepin hydrochloride
dronabinol
enflurane
fenoprofen calcium

Brand names
proventil
ventolin
cordarone
asendin
tenormin
tenoretic
ridaura
lioresal
celestone
bretylol
parlodel
sinemet
hemabate
ornade
combipres
cinobac
catapres
tranxene
gyne-lotrimin
mycelex
lotrimin
colestid
nasalcrom
intal
flexeril
cytosar
desferal
norpramin
ddavp
rimso50
propine
adapin
sinequan
marinol
ethrane
nalfon

39

Expiration
1989

Revenue3
172,952

Entry3Y r
1

1990
1989
1991

11,283
18,306
301,311

0
1
1

1992
1986
1986
1986
1990
1991
1990
1986
1986
1989
1986
1987
1989

9,766
12,033
8,226
10,418
54,031
91,883
189
15,303
15,988
5,680
70,045
87,533
55,283

0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0

1989
1989

7,089
49,640

0
1

1986
1986
1986
1986
1987
1987
1991
1986

40,630
8,140
3,366
19,439
6,112
296
23,353
55,059

1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1

1990
1987
1988

1,454
19,337
49,538

0
1
1
cont’d

Generic name
fluocinonide
fluorometholone
flurandrenolide
guanfacine hydrochloride
halazepam
haloperidol
ipratropium bromide
ketoprofen
loperamide hydrochloride
loxapine hydrochloride
mazindol
mebendazole
metaproterenol sulfate
miconazole
molindone hydrochloride
nalidixic acid
naloxone hydrochloride
naltrexone
norgestrel
pancuronium bromide
piroxicam
prazosin hydrochloride
procarbazine hydrochloride
pyrantel
stanozolol
sulfasalazine
sulindac
timolol maleate
tolmetin sodium
tretinoin
trilostane
verapamil hydrochloride

Brand names
lidex
fluor-op
cordran
tenex
paxipam
haldol
atrovent
orudis
imodium
loxitane
mazanor
sanorex
vermox
alupent
monistat
moban
neggram
narcan
trexan
ovrette
pavulon
feldene
minipress
matulane
antiminth
winstrol
azulfidine
clinoril
blocadren
timoptic
tolectin
retin a
modrastane
isoptin
calan

40

Expiration
1988
1989
1989
1991
1986
1986
1991
1991
1990
1987
1990

Revenue3
24,012
93
4,527
23,530
1,621
72,705
37,356
60,313
28,278
11,567
2,001

Entry3Y r
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0

1989
1986
1991
1987
1988
1986
1989
1991
1988
1992
1989
1987
1989
1989
1988
1990
1989

6,154
39,260
107,102
2,725
4,501
15,262
723
637
18,801
216,998
67,923
565
597
541
9181
164,545
114,148

0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1

1990
1990
1989
1986

48,654
61,167
24
56,494

1
0
0
1

References
Aghion Philippe, and Bolton, Patrick (1987): “Entry Prevention Through Contracts with
Customers,” American Economic Review, 77, 388-401.
Aguirregabiria, V. and Mira, P. (2007): “Sequential Estimation of Discrete Games,” forthcoming Econometrica.
Bae, J. P. (1997): “Drug Patent Expirations and the Speed of Generic Entry,” Health
Services Research 32, 87-101.
Bajari, P., Benkard, C.L., and Levin, J. (2006): “Estimating Dynamic Models of Imperfect
Competition,” mimeo.
Berndt, Ernst, Bui, Linda, Reiley, David, and Urban, Glen (1995): “Information, Marketing, and Pricing in the U.S. Anti-Ulcer Drug Market,” American Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings, 85, 100-105
Bronnenberg, Bart, Dhar, Sanjay, and Dube, Jean-Pierre (2005): “Endogenous Sunk Costs
and the Geographic Distribution of Brand Shares in CPG Industries, mimeo, University of
Chicago.
Bulow, Jeremy, Geanakoplos, John, and Klemperer, Paul (1985): “Multimarket Oligopoly:
Strategic Substitutes and Complements,” Journal of Political Economy, 93, 488-511.
Caves, Richard, Whinston, Michael, and Hurwitz, M. (1991): “Patent Expiration, Entry,
and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1-66.
Chevalier, Judith (1995a): “Capital Structure and Product Market Competition: Empirical
Evidence from the Supermarket Industry,” American Economic Review, 85, 415-435.
Chevalier, Judith (1995b): “Do LBO Supermarkets Charge More? An Empirical Analysis
of the Effects of LBOs on Supermarket Pricing,” Journal of Finance 50, 1095 - 1112.
Cooper, David J., Susan Garvin and John Kagel (1997): “Signalling and Adaptive Learning
in an Entry Limit Pricing Game,” RAND Journal of Economics, 28, 662-683.
Cooper, T.E. (1986): “Most-Favored Customer Pricing and Tacit Collusion,” RAND Journal of Economics, 17, 377-388.
Dafny, Leemore (2005): “Games Hospitals Play: Entry Deterrence in Hospital Procedure
Markets,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 14, 513-542.
Dixit, Avinash (1980): “The Role of Investment in Entry Deterrence,” Economic Journal,
90, 95-106.
Ellison, Glenn, and Ellison, Sara Fisher (2000): “A Simple Framework for Nonparametric
Specification Testing,” Journal of Econometrics, 96, 1-23.

41

Ellison, Sara Fisher, Cockburn, Iain, Griliches, Zvi, and Hausman, Jerry (1997): “Characteristics of Demand for Pharmaceutical Products: An Examination of Four Cephalosporins,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 28, 426-446.
Ellison, Sara Fisher, and Snyder, Christopher (2001): “Countervailing Power in Wholesale
Pharmaceuticals,” MIT Economics Department Working Paper 01-27.
Ellison, Sara Fisher, and Wolfram, Catherine (2006): “Coordinating on Lower Prices: Pharmaceutical Pricing Under Political Pressure,” RAND Journal of Economics, 37, 324-340.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Tirole, Jean (1983a): “Capital as a Commitment: Strategic Investment to Deter Mobility,” Journal of Economic Theory, 31, 227-250.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Tirole, Jean (1983b): “Learning by Doing and Market Performance,”
Bell Journal of Economics, 14, 522-530.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Tirole, Jean (1984): “The Fat Cat Effect, the Puppy Dog Ploy, and
the Lean-and-Hungry Look,” American Economic Review, 74, 361-366.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Tirole, Jean (1986): “A ‘Signal Jamming’ Theory of Predation,”
Rand Journal of Economics, 17, 366-376.
Gaskins, Darius W., Jr. (1971): “Dynamic Limit Pricing: Optimal Pricing Under Threat
of Entry,” Journal of Economic Theory 3, 306-322.
Gelman, J.R., and Salop, S.C. (1983): “Judo Economics: Capacity Limitation and Coupon
Competition,” Bell Journal of Economics, 14, 315-325.
Ghosal, Subhashis, Sen, Arusharka, and van der Vaart, W. (2000): “Testing Monotonicity
in Regression,” Annals of Statistics, 28, 1054-1082.
Gijbels, Irene, Hall, Peter, Jones, M.C., and Koch, Inge (2000): “Tests for Monotonicity of
a Regression Mean with Guaranteed Level,” Biometrika, 87, 663-673.
Goolsbee, Austan and Syverson, Chad (2004): “How Do Incumbents Respond to the Threat
of Entry? Evidence from the Major Airlines?,” mimeo, University of Chicago.
Grabowski, H., and Vernon, J. (1992): “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in
Pharmaceuticals after the 1984 Drug Act,” Journal of Law and Economics 35, 331-350.
Grabowski, H., and Vernon, J. (1996): “Longer Patents for Increased Generic Competition
in the U.S.: the Waxman-Hatch Act after One Decade,” PharmacoEconomics 10, 110-123.
Griliches, Zvi, and Cockburn, Iain (1994): “Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical
Price Indexes,” American Economic Review, 84, 1213-1232.
Hall, Peter, and Heckman, Nancy (2000): “Testing for Monotonicity of a Regression Mean
by Calibrating for Linear Functions,” Annals of Statistics, 28, 20-39.
Harrington, Joseph (1986): “Limit Pricing When the Potential Entrant is Uncertain of Its
Cost Function,” Econometrica 54, 429-437.
42

Hurwitz, M. and Caves, Richard (1988): “Persuasion or Information? Promotion and the
Shares of Brand Name and Generic Pharmaceuticals,” Journal of Law and Economics, 31,
299-320.
Judd, Kenneth (1985): “Credible Spatial Preemption,” RAND Journal of Economics, 16,
153-166.
Kadiyali, Vrinda (1996): “Entry, Its Deterrence and Its Accommodation: A Study of the
U.S. Photographic Film Industry,” Rand Journal of Economics 27, 452-478.
Klemperer, Paul (1987): “The Competitiveness of Markets with Switching Costs,” Rand
Journal of Economics 18, 138-150.
Leffler, K. (1981): “Persuasion or Information? The Economics of Prescription Drug Advertising,” Journal of Law and Economics 24, 45-74.
Lieberman, Marvin (1987): “Post Entry Investment and Market Structure in the Chemical
Processing Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 18, 533-549.
Masson, A. and Steiner, R. (1985): Generic Substitution and Prescription Drug Prices:
Economic Effects of State Drug Product Selection Laws. U.S. Federal Trade Commission.
Milgrom, Paul (1981): “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications,” The Bell Journal of Economics 12, 380-391.
Milgrom, Paul and Roberts, J. (1982): “Limit Pricing and Entry Under Incomplete Information: An Equilibrium Analysis,” Econometrica 50, 443-460.
Rizzo, J. (1999): “Advertising and Competition in the Ethical Pharmaceutical Industry:
The Case of Hypertensive Drugs,” The Journal of Law and Economics 42, 89-116.
Rosenthal, Meredith, Berndt, Ernst, Donohue, Julie, Frank, Richard, and Epstein, Arnold
(2002): “Promotion of Prescription Drugs to Consumers,” New England Journal of Medicine, 346, 498-505.
Schmalensee, Richard (1978): “Entry Deterrence in the Ready-to-Eat Breakfast Cereal
Industry,” Bell Journal of Economics, 9, 305-27.
Schmalensee, Richard (1981): “Economies of Scale and Barriers to Entry,” Journal of
Political Economy, 89, 1228-38.
Schwartzman, D. (1976): Innovation in the Pharmaceutical Industry. The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Schweitzer, S. (1997): Pharmaceutical Economics and Policy, Oxford University Press.
Scott Morton, Fiona (1999): “Entry Decisions in the Generic Drug Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics 30 , 421-440.
Scott Morton, Fiona (2000): “Barriers to Entry, Brand Advertising and Generic Entry
in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry,” International Journal of Industrial Organization18,
43

1085-1104.
Smiley, R. (1988): “Empirical Evidence on Strategic Entry Deterrence,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 6, 167-180.
Sorensen, Alan (2000): “Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription
Drugs,” Journal of Political Economy 108, 833-850.
Temin, Peter (1980): Taking Your Medicine: Drug Regulation in the United States. Harvard
University Press.
Tirole, Jean (1988): The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press.
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1993): Pharmaceutical R&D: Costs, Risks,
and Rewards. U.S. Government Printing Office.
Walker, H. (1971): Market Power and Price Levels in the Ethical Drug Industry. Indiana
University Press.

44

Last Updated on 3/22/00
By Glenn Ellison

Figure 2: Equilibrium advertising levels in the model of advertising with spillovers
The figure graphs the equilibrium advertising intensity in the model of section 2.3 where
advertising raises consumers valuations both for the branded drug and for a generic substitute. The distribution of entry costs is assumed to be lognormal with mean 0.0025 and
standard deviation 0.0015. The dotted line is the equilibrium advertising level when advertising is not observed until after firm 2’s entry decision is made (and hence there is no entry
deterrence motive.) The solid line is the equilibrium advertising level when advertising is
observed in advance of the potential entry.

45

Table 2: Variable names
Variable Name
Entry3Y r
EntryP rob
Chronic
HospF rac
Revenue3
T herSubs
Detail
Journal
Detail3
Journal3
P resHerf
P resHerf 3
HP rice
DP rice
Specialist
P sych
T opical

Variable Description
1 if entry within 3 years of patent expiration
Predicted entry probability
0 if for acute illness; 1 if for chronic illness
Hospital fraction of revenue (for year prior to patent expiration)
Average annual revenue for 3 years prior to patent expiration
(000’s constant dollars)
Number of other drugs in the therapeutic class
Monthly detailing advertising (000’s of minutes)
Monthly journal advertising expenditures (000’s of constant dollars)
Average annual detailing in 3 years before patent expiration
Average annual journal advertising in 3 years before patent expiration
HospF rac-weighted average of drugstore and hospital presentation Herfindahls
Average of P resHerf in the 3 years before patent expiration
Hospital price (in constant dollars)
Drugstore price (in constant dollars)
Index for how often drugs in therapeutic class are prescribed by specialist
1 if drug is psychoactive
1 if drug is applied topically

The table describes the variables used in the analysis.

Table 3: Summary statistics

Variable
Entry3Y r
Revenue3
log(Revenue3)
HospF rac
Chronic
T herSubs
Detail3/Revenue3
Journal3/Revenue3
P resHerf 3
DP ricet /DP ricet−1
HP ricet /HP ricet−1

Number of
Observations
63
63
63
63
63
63
69
70
70
245
233

Mean
0.59
39,355
9.40
0.21
0.63
8.48
0.005
0.014
0.54
1.019
1.010

Standard
Deviation
0.50
55,754
2.00
0.30
0.42
6.04
0.008
0.022
0.29
0.067
0.129

The table presents summary statistics for some of the variables used in our analysis.

46

Table 4: Summary statistics by revenue quintile

Variable
Revenue3
Entry3Y r
Number of Obs.

Q1
882
0.00
13

Mean within revenue quintile
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
7,572 22,161 52,336 127,359
0.43
0.86
0.80
0.92
14
14
10
12

The table reports the mean annual revenues in the three years prior to patent expiration
and the fraction of drugs experiencing entry for drugs in each revenue quintile.

Table 5: Entry versus pre-expiration revenues
Dependent variable for probit is Entry3Y r
Variable
log(Revenue3)
0.70
0.76
(0.17)
(0.20)
HospF rac
1.01
(0.78)
Chronic
0.60
(0.54)
log(T herSubs)
0.01
(0.29)
Constant
-6.39
-7.60
(1.94)
(1.94)
Number of Obs.
63
63
P seudoR2
0.40
0.43
The table presents estimates of probit models. The dependent variable is a dummy for
whether entry occurs within three years of patent expiration. The explanatory variables
are average revenue in the three years prior to patent expiration, the fraction of sales which
are through hospitals (as opposed to drugstores), a measure of whether the drug treats a
chronic or acute condition, and the number of other drugs in the therapeutic class. The
observations are 63 drug molecules which lost patent protection at some point between 1986
and 1992.

47

Table 6: Incumbent behavior versus market size: linear regressions
Independent
Variables
log(Revenue3)
(log(Revenue3) − R)2
Specialist
P sych
T opical
Constant
Number of Obs.
R2

Dependent variable:
Journal3
P resHerf 3
Revenue3
0.000
0.003
-0.069
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.016)
-0.0001
0.0000
-0.003
(0.0002) (0.0005)
(0.005)
0.006
0.008
(0.009)
(0.026)
-0.342
(0.075)
-0.388
(0.090)
-0.014
-0.014
0.990
(0.014)
(0.041)
(0.360)
69
70
70
0.04
0.06
0.52
Detail3
Revenue3

The table reports coefficient estimates from linear regressions of three types of investment,
two advertising-to-sales ratios and the Herfindahl index of presentations, on the average
revenue in the three years prior to patent expiration, the square of this variable minus its
mean, and appropriate controls. The unit of observation is branded drugs which lost patent
protection between 1986 and 1992.

Table 7: Incumbent behavior versus market size: quintile means and monotonicity tests

Variable
Detail3/Revenue3
Journal3/Revenue3
P resHerf 3

Variable mean for drugs in revenue quintile
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
0.0051 0.0012 0.0055 0.0084
0.0041
0.011
0.005
0.011
0.024
0.018
0.78
0.64
0.49
0.44
0.35

Monotonicity test p-value
H-H Test
E-E Test
0.274
0.161
0.053
0.197
0.336
0.187

The table reports the means of three types of investment, two advertising measures and the
Herfindahl index of presentations, by revenue quintiles. Drugs are classified into quintiles
based on the mean of their revenue for the three years prior to patent expiration. The EE
and HH test columns reports the p-values for two tests of non-monotonicity (Ellison and
Ellison 2000, Hall and Heckman 2000).

48

Table 8: Changes in incumbent behavior as expiration approaches: quintile means and
monotonicity tests

Detail3
Journal3
P resHerf
DP rice
HP rice

Fraction increasing
Q1 Q2 Q3
0.75 0.22 0.25
(4)
(9) (12)
0.50 0.43 0.17
(2)
(7) (12)
0.33 0.42 0.38
(6) (12) (13)
0.70 0.58 0.75
(10) (12) (12)
0.50 0.50 0.54
(8) (12) (13)

by quintile
Q4 Q5
0.54 0.62
(13) (13)
0.29 0.31
(14) (13)
0.50 0.62
(14) (13)
0.54 0.92
(13) (13)
0.77 0.73
(13) (11)

Monotonicity test p-value
H-H Test
E-E Test
0.307
0.031
0.321

0.696

0.083

0.217

0.430

0.601

0.573

0.854

This table reports the fraction of drugs in each revenue quintile for which the investment
variable was higher in the year immediately prior to patent expiration than it was on average
in the previous two years. The number of observations in each cell is in parentheses below
the quintile means.

49

