                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHAT CAUSES INDUSTRY AGGLOMERATION? EVIDENCE FROM COAGGLOMERATION
                            PATTERNS

                                            Glenn Ellison
                                          Edward L. Glaeser
                                            William Kerr

                                        Working Paper 13068
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13068


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2007




 We thank Jim Davis, Alex Bryson, Keith Maskus, and Debbie Smeaton for comments and data assistance.
 The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers
 of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center (BRDC). Support for this research
 from NSF grant (ITR-0427889) is gratefully acknowledged. Research results and conclusions expressed
 are our own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau or NSF. This paper has
 been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those
 of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2007 by Glenn Ellison, Edward L. Glaeser, and William Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections
 of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
 credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns
Glenn Ellison, Edward L. Glaeser, and William Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 13068
April 2007
JEL No. A1

                                              ABSTRACT

Many industries are geographically concentrated. Many mechanisms that could account for such agglomeration
have been proposed. We note that these theories make different predictions about which pairs of industries
should be coagglomerated. We discuss the measurement of coagglomeration and use data from the
Census Bureau's Longitudinal Research Database from 1972 to 1997 to compute pairwise coagglomeration
measurements for U.S. manufacturing industries. Industry attributes are used to construct measures
of the relevance of each of Marshall's three theories of industry agglomeration to each industry pair:
(1) agglomeration saves transport costs by proximity to input suppliers or final consumers, (2) agglomeration
allows for labor market pooling, and (3) agglomeration facilitates intellectual spillovers. We assess
the importance of the theories via regressions of coagglomeration indices on these measures. Data
on characteristics of corresponding industries in the United Kingdom are used as instruments. We
find evidence to support each mechanism. Our results suggest that input-output dependencies are the
most important factor, followed by labor pooling.

Glenn Ellison                                         William Kerr
Department of Economics                               Rock Center 212
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                 Harvard Business School
50 Memorial Drive, E52-380A                           Boston, MA 02163
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                              wkerr@hbs.edu
and NBER
gellison@mit.edu

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

We know that industries are geographically concentrated.1 We know that this concentration
is too great to be explained by exogenous spatial differences in natural advantage.2 We have
an abundance of theories for this concentration.3 But we do not which of these theories
are important or even right. This paper uses patterns of coagglomeration–the tendency
of different industries to locate near to each other–to assess the importance of different
theories of geographic concentration.
    Marshall (1920) emphasized three different types of transport costs–the costs of moving
goods, people, and ideas–that could be reduced by industrial agglomeration. First, he
considered transport costs for goods and argued that firms will locate near suppliers or
customers to save shipping costs. Second, he developed a theory of labor market pooling
in which firms located near one another can share labor. The larger labor pool created
by agglomeration allows workers to move to more productive firms when there are shocks.
Third, he began the theory of intellectual spillovers by arguing that in agglomerations, “the
mysteries of the trade become no mystery, but are, as it were, in the air.” Firms, such as
those described by AnnaLee Saxenian (1994) in Silicon Valley, locate near one another to
learn and to speed their rate of innovation.
    Although each of these determinants certainly contributes to agglomeration in some
industries, assessing their aggregate relative importance is challenging because they all
predict that firms will co-locate with other firms in the same industry. One approach
pioneered by David B. Audretsch and Maryann P. Feldman (1996) and Stuart S. Rosenthal
and William C. Strange (2001) is to examine cross-industry variation in the degree of
agglomeration, e.g. regressing the degree to which an industry is agglomerated on the
importance of R&D to the industry. In this paper we propose an alternate approach: we
study the agglomeration process through the lens of how industries are coagglomerated.
This can potentially exploit the fact that the theories make different predictions about
   1
     See P. Sargant Florence (1948), E. M. Hoover (1948), Victor Fuchs (1990), Paul Krugman (1991a), and
Glenn Ellison and Edward L. Glaeser (1997).
   2
     See Ellison and Glaeser (1999).
   3
     See Johann Heinrich von Thünen (1826), Alfred Marshall (1920), and Krugman (1991b).




                                                   1
which pairs of industries will tend to coagglomerate.4 For example, if transport costs for
goods are important, then firms in an industry should be agglomerated near industries
that are their customers or suppliers. If labor market pooling is important, then industries
should locate near other industries that employ the same type of labor. Our approach, like
those of the other papers mentioned above, uses industry characteristics as covariates. One
could worry that these are endogenous and reflect the industry’s geography. Our second
main empirical innovation is to use characteristics of U.K. industries as instruments for the
characteristics of their U.S. counterparts.
      We begin in Section II with some material on the measurement of coagglomeration. We
review the index of coagglomeration proposed in Ellison and Glaeser (1997), note that a
simpler equivalent definition can be used when measuring pairwise coagglomeration, and
further develop the economic motivation for the index as a measure of the importance of
cross-industry spillovers and shared natural advantage.
      Section III describes the data used to generate our coagglomeration index and presents
some basic descriptive results. We base our coagglomeration measures on establishment-
level data from the Census of Manufactures. This data set allows us to calculate co-
agglomeration for every pairwise combination of three-digit Standard Industrial Classifica-
tion (SIC) industries at the state, metropolitan area, and county levels.
      Section IV reviews Marshall’s three theories and discusses the covariates we will use to
assess the importance of different reasons for co-location. We use input-output tables to
construct proxies for the importance of transport costs for goods. We use the correlation
across industries in their employment of different occupations to measure the potential gains
from labor market pooling. Finally, we use data on technology flows and patent citations
to construct proxies for the importance of technological spillovers. Our empirical approach
is to regress the extent to which each pair of industries is co-located on the extent to which
these two industries buy and sell from each other, hire the same type of workers, and share
ideas. One potential concern with this approach is that the measures may not be innate
characteristics of industries: firms may buy and sell from one another because they are
  4
     See J. Vernon Henderson (2003) for a related approach: Henderson examines how plant-level produc-
tivity is related to the set of plants in the area.




                                                  2
close, not be close because they buy and sell from each other. To address this, we use
British input-output tables, employment patterns, and patent citations to instrument for
our American measures.
    Section V presents our main empirical results. The ordinary least squares relationships
support the importance of all three theories. Input/output relationships appear to be the
most important determinants of co-location. Given the remarkable decline of transportation
costs over the 20th century (Glaeser and Janet E. Kohlhase, 2004), it is striking that
transport costs remain so important. Industries that hire the same type of workers are
also quite likely to locate near one another. This effect is almost as strong as the role
of supplier/customer relationship. Our proxies for intellectual spillovers have a slightly
weaker, but still quite significant, impact on the tendency of industries to coagglomerate.
Our instrumental variables strategy delivers similar results.
    Section VI concludes. Industrial co-location patterns are far from random. Firms
unsurprisingly locate near their customers and suppliers. They are almost as driven by the
advantages of sharing a large labor pool, and intellectual spillovers also matter.


2     Measurement of Coagglomeration

In this section we discuss an index of coagglomeration introduced in Ellison and Glaeser
(1997). We note that the index takes on a simpler form when used to measure pairwise
coagglomeration and we further develop the economic motivation for the index as a measure
of the importance of cross-industry spillovers and shared natural advantages.

2.1    Background

Consider a group of industries indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , I. Suppose that a geographic whole
is divided into M subareas and suppose that s1i , s2i , . . . , sM i are the shares of industry i’s
employment contained in each of these areas. Let x1 , x2 , . . . , xM be some other measure of
the size of these areas, such as each area’s share of population or aggregate employment.
A simple measure of the raw geographic concentration of industry i is
             M
             X
      Gi =         (smi − xm )2 .
             m=1



                                                3
       Ellison and Glaeser (1997) note that it is problematic to make cross-industry or cross-
country comparisons using this measure because it will be affected by the size distribution
of plants in the industry and the fineness of the available geographic data. They propose
an alternate measure of agglomeration we will refer to as the EG index:

                Gi /(1 − m x2m ) − Hi
                        P
         γi ≡                         ,
                        1 − Hi

where Hi is the plant-level Herfindahl index of industry i.5 They show that the EG index
“controls” for differences in the plant size distribution and the fineness of the geographic
breakdown, in the sense of being an unbiased estimator of a parameter reflecting the im-
portance of natural advantages and spillovers in a simple model of location choice.
       Ellison and Glaeser (1997) also propose a measure of the coagglomeration of a group
of I industries. Let wi be industry i’s share of total employment in the I industries. Let
s1 , . . . , sM be the shares of the total employment in the group of I industries in each of
                                                       PI
the geographic subareas. (Note that sm =                   i=1 wi smi .)   Write G for the raw geographic
                                                        PM
concentration for the I-industry group: G =                 m=1 (sm   − xm )2 . Write H for the plant-level
Herfindahl of the I-industry group: H =
                                                   P     2
                                                      i wi Hi .   The EG index of coagglomeration is

                                    G/(1 −      2    − H − Ii=1 γi wi2 (1 − Hi )
                                             P                 P
                            c                m xm )
(1)                       γ ≡                                                    .
                                                   1 − Ii=1 wi2
                                                       P


The index reflects excess concentration of the I-industry group relative to what would be
expected if each industry were as agglomerated as it is, but the locations of the agglom-
erations were independent. The particular form is motivated by a proposition relating the
expected value of the index to properties of the location-choice model.

Proposition 0 Ellison and Glaeser (1997)
       In an I-industry probabilistic location choice model, suppose that the indicator variables
{ukm } for whether the k th plant locates in area m satisfy E(ukm ) = xm and
                                (
                                    γi if plants k and ` both belong to industry i
         Corr(ukm , u`m ) =
                                    γ0 if plants k and ` belong to different industries.

Then, E(γ c ) = γ0 .
   5                           i
                                PN 2
   This is defined by Hi = k=1   zki , where k = 1, 2, . . . , Ni indexes the plants in industry i and zki is the
employment of plant k as a share of the total employment in industry i.


                                                       4
2.2   A simpler formula

The EG coagglomeration index is a measure of the average coagglomeration of industries
in a group. A simpler equivalent formula can be given for the coagglomeration of two
industries.

Proposition 1 An equivalent formula for the EG coagglomeration index when I = 2 is
              PM
                      − xm )(sm2 − xm )
               m=1 (sm1
      γc =                              .
                    1− M      2
                      P
                        m=1 xm

   The formula makes clear that the EG coagglomeration index is closely related to the
covariance of the state-industry employment shares in the two industries. The denominator
rescales the simple covariance to eliminate a sensitivity to the fineness of the geographic
breakdown. Note that plant-level Herfindahls do not enter into the formula: the lumpi-
ness of plants causes an increase in the variance of the state-industry employment shares
that could be mistaken for within-industry agglomeration, but does not by itself lead to a
spurious increase in the cross-industry covariance. (Larger plant Herfindahls will, however,
make γ c a noisier parameter estimate.)

2.3   Explicit models of location choice

Proposition 0 is in a sense quite general: it shows that the coagglomeration index is ap-
propriate if location decisions are made in any manner that satisfies one property. This
generality, however, is obtained at the expense of losing explicit connections to the eco-
nomics of location decisions and how they are influenced by natural advantages, spillovers,
etc. In this section we extend the single-industry model of Ellison and Glaeser (1997) to
make these connections.
   We will discuss spillovers and natural advantages separately using two models with
many elements in common. There are two industries indexed by i = 1, 2, with N1 plants in
industry 1 and N2 plants in industry 2. Plants are indexed by k ∈ K1 ∪ K2 , with K1 being
the set of plants in industry 1 and K2 being the set of plants in industry 2. The plants
choose among M possible locations. Each plant has an exogenously fixed employment level
ek that is independent of its location choice.


                                                 5
2.3.1      Spillovers

We conceptualize spillovers as mechanisms that make plant k’s profits a function of the
other plants’ location decisions. A general model of this form would be to assume that
firm k’s profits when locating in area m are of the form πkm = f (m, `−k , km ), where `−k
is the vector of all plants’ location decisions and km is a random shock. A difficulty with
discussing the degree of geographic concentration in such a model is that the location choice
process becomes a game that can have multiple equilibria. For example, if plants k and
k 0 receive substantial benefits from co-locating, then there may be equilibria in which the
two plants co-locate in any of several areas that are fairly good for each plant, and also an
equilibrium in which the plants forego the spillover benefits and locate in the areas that are
most advantageous for each plant separately. (This will only be an equilibrium if plant k’s
most-preferred location is sufficiently unattractive to plant k 0 and vice-versa.) The different
equilibria will typically lead to different levels of measured concentration.
       Ellison and Glaeser (1997) note that the impact of equilibrium multiplicity is substan-
tially reduced if one considers random “all-or-nothing” spillovers. To extend their analysis,
                                                                                 →
define a partition ω of K1 ∪ K2 to be a correspondence ω : K1 ∪ K2               →   K1 ∪ K2 such that
k ∈ ω(k) for all k and k 0 ∈ ω(k) ⇒ ω(k) = ω(k 0 ). Suppose that plants’ location decisions
are the outcome of game in which the plants choose locations in some (possibly random)
exogenously specified order and plant k’s profits from locating in area m are given by
                                    X
         log(πkm ) = log(xm ) +              I(`k0 6= m)(−∞) + km .
                                  k0 ∈ω(k)

The first term on the right-side of this expression, xm , is the measure of the size of area
m we used when constructing the concentration index. Its inclusion allows the model to
match real-world data in which many more plants locate in California than in Wyoming.6
The second term reflects the impact of spillovers: the interpretation is that a spillover exists
between plants k and k 0 if k 0 ∈ ω(k) and that when spillovers exist they are sufficiently
strong so as to outweigh all other factors in the location decision process. The third term in
   6
    Ellison and Glaeser (1997) note that their model has an equivalent formulation in which each potential
“location” is equally profitable on average and the reason why there are many more plants in California is
that California is an aggregate of a larger number of “locations”.




                                                      6
the profit function, km , is a Weibull distributed random shock that is independent across
plants and locations.

Proposition 2 Consider the model of location choices with spillovers described above:
   (a) The Perfect Bayesian equilibrium outcome is essentially unique. In equilibrium,
each plant k chooses the location m that maximizes log(xm ) + km if no plant with k 0 ∈ ω(k)
has previously chosen a location, and the location of previously located plants with k 0 ∈ ω(k)
if some such plants have previously chosen a location.
   (b) If 0 ≤ γ0s ≤ γ1s , γ2s or 0 ≤ γ1s , γ2s and 0 ≤ γ0 ≤ min(1/N1 , 1/N2 ), then there exist
distributions over the set of possible partitions for which
                          (
             0                γis if plants k and k 0 both belong to industry i
      Prob{k ∈ ω(k)} =
                              γ0s if plants k and k 0 belong to different industries,

   (c) If the distribution satisfies the condition in part (b), then in any PBE of the model
the agglomeration and coagglomeration indexes satisfy

      E(γi ) = γis

      E(γ c ) = γ0s .

Remarks:
1. Note that Proposition 2 shows a degree of robustness to equilibrium selection: it shows
that the agglomeration index has the same expected value in any PBE of the sequential
move games obtained by ordering the plants in different ways.

2. Proposition 2 also shows some robustness to the distribution of spillover benefits. Our
agglomeration and coagglomeration indexes have the same expected value for any distri-
bution over partitions satisfying the condition in part (b). The proof of the proposition
describes a couple different ways to generate distributions satisfying the condition. One is
very simple technically and has a four point support. Another generates coagglomeration
patterns that look more reasonable by first creating clusters within each industry and then
joining clusters across industries.




                                                7
2.3.2      Shared natural advantage

Another mechanism that can lead to the coagglomeration of plants in two industries is
the presence in some areas of “shared natural advantages” that provide benefits to firms
in both industries. The natural advantages can be exogenous factors, as when a coastal
location makes a state attractive both to shipbuilding plants and to oil refineries. They can
also be endogenous factor advantages of the types described in each of Marshall’s theories,
e.g. airplane manufacturers and automobile parts manufacturers may be coagglomerated
because both benefit from locating in areas with skilled machinists.
      To model natural-advantage influenced location choice, we suppose that profits for a
plant k that belongs to industry i(k) and locates in area m are given by

(2)                                  log(πmk ) = log(ηm + ξmi(k) ) + mk ,

where the ηm , ξmi , and mk are mutually independent random variables. The ηm can be
thought of as reflecting shared natural advantages of each area m that make it attractive
or unattractive to plants in both industries.7 The ξmi reflect additional factors that are
idiosyncratic to industry i. As in the previous model, we also assume that there are plant-
idiosyncratic factors, mk .

Proposition 3 Suppose that profits are as in equation (2) and that each plant k chooses
the location m that maximizes πmk .
                                                                          1−γ2na na
      (a) Suppose 0 < γ1na ≤ γ2na , and that 0 ≤ γ0na ≤                   1−γ1na γ1 .   Write δmi for ηm + ξmi .
Then, there exist distributional choices for the ηm and ξmi for which
                  M
                  X
        E(δmi /           δm0 i ) = xm ,
                  m0 =1

                    M
                    X
        Var(δmi /           δm0 i ) = γina xm (1 − xm ),
                    m0 =1

                     M
                     X                      M
                                            X
        Cov(δm1 /           δm0 1 , δm2 /           δm0 2 ) = γ0na xm (1 − xm ).
                    m0 =1                   m0 =1
  7
      These could include state policies as discussed in Thomas Holmes (1998).




                                                              8
        (b) If the distributions of the ηm and the ξmi are such that the conditions in part (a)
are satisfied and the mk are independent Weibull random variables, then the agglomeration
and coagglomeration indexes satisfy

          E(γi ) = γina

          E(γ c ) = γ0na .

Remarks:
1. As is described in more detail in the proof of Proposition 3, one specification of the
shared- and industry-idiosyncratic natural advantages that can be made to satisfy the
conditions in part (a) involves choosing the ηm and ξmi to be χ2 random variables with
appropriately chosen degrees of freedom. In this specification the δmi are χ2 random vari-
ables with 2xm (1 − γina )/γina degrees of freedom. The lowest level of coagglomeration,
E(γ c ) = 0, obtains when there are no shared natural advantages: if we assume that the ηm
are identically zero, then the δmi are independent across industries and state-industry em-
ployments will be independent across industries. The greatest degree of coagglomeration,
             1−γ2na na
E(γ c ) =    1−γ1na γ1 ,   obtains when we make the shared natural advantages as important as
possible: if the ξm2 are identically zero, then all of the natural advantages affecting industry
2 are shared natural advantages.8

2. Ellison and Glaeser (1997) also provide a result characterizing the expected value of the
agglomeration index when both spillovers and natural advantages are present. This result
does not have a clean generalization to the multi-industry case. The difficulty is that both
agglomeration and coagglomeration are no longer independent of the equilibrium selection.
For example, if a spillover exists between plants in separate industries, there will be more
agglomeration in each industry if the plant from the more agglomerated industry chooses
the joint location than if the plant from the less agglomerated industry does so.


3        Data on Coagglomeration

In this section we present some descriptive statistics on coagglomeration patterns.
    8
    In this case, the ηm are distributed χ2 with 2xm (1 − γ2na )/γ2na degrees of freedom and the ξm1 are χ2
           1−γ na   1−γ na
with 2xm ( γ na1 − γ na2 ) degrees of freedom.
               1       2



                                                    9
    We compute pairwise coagglomation measures for manufacturing industries using the
confidential plant-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Census of Manufactures.9 We
examine the censuses from 1972 to 1997, each of which contains data on approximately
300,000 establishments employing about 17 million workers. We aggregate the plant-level
employment data in the census up to the county-level, PMSA-level, and the state-level and
compute coagglomeration metrics all three ways.10 At the industry level we focus on the
three-digit level of the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC3). The sample analyzed
in this section includes 134 industries, consisting of all SIC3 manufacturing industries except
Tobacco (210s), Fur (237), and Search and Navigation Equipment (381).11
    Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of several measures of agglomeration and coag-
glomeration.12 The table is divided into three panels. The top panel presents indices
calculated from state-level employment data. The first row shows that the EG industrial
agglomeration index remains fairly stable between 1972 and 1982, and then falls by about
10% in the following decade. The next two rows summarize trends in the pairwise coagglom-
eration index. The mean pairwise coagglomeration is approximately zero. This is largely by
definition: our benchmark measure of a state’s “size” is its share of manufacturing employ-
ment so each industry’s deviations from the benchmark will be approximately uncorrelated
with the average of the deviations of all other industries. The standard deviation of the
coagglomeration index is more interesting, showing a decline (tighter distribution) from
1972 to 1997.
    The second panel presents corresponding figures computed using PMSA-level employ-
ments. The average decline in agglomeration from 1982 to 1992 is smaller at this geographic
level and agglomeration appears to have increased from 1992 to 1997. The coagglomera-
tion distribution again shows a declining standard deviation. At the industry-pair level,
   9
     Timothy Dunne, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson (1989a, 1989b), Robert McGuckin and Suzanne
Peck (1992), Steven Davis, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996), and David Autor, William Kerr, and
Adriana Kugler (forthcoming) provide detailed accounts of this dataset.
  10
     We use reported employment in all manufacturing establishments excluding auxiliary units as our mea-
sure x of aggregate activity in the geographic unit.
  11
     These six industries are omitted due to major industry reclassifications at the plant-level in the Census
of Manufacturers that are difficult to interpret.
  12
     Additional details on the dataset construction are catalogued in the data appendix. A portion of these
coagglomeration estimates have been released for public use by the Census Bureau and are available from
the authors upon request.



                                                     10
the coagglomeration indices computed using the PMSA-level data have an 0.59 correlation
with indices computed from state-level data.
       A nice feature of the Census of Manufactures is that one can track plants over time and
separate new plants from old plants. The third panel provides statistics on agglomeration
and coagglomeration indices for the new “startups” in each industry.13 The agglomeration
and coagglomeration of these startups could be different from the overall pattern because
they are less tied to past industrial centers than existing plants or the new establishments
of existing firms (see Guy Dumais, Ellison, and Glaeser 2002) and their location choices
come after the inter-industry dependencies described below are formed. These measures
are naturally more noisy than those calculated through total employment due to smaller
number of plants involved and the distinct sets of plants being considered in each census
year. The agglomeration data show an initial decline and a later increase, particularly in the
final census year. This pattern is reflected in the standard deviation of the coagglomeration
index too. At the industry-pair level, the correlation between coagglomeration measures
computed at the state level using all firms and those computed using new startups is 0.33.
       Dumais et al. (2002) noted that the EG agglomeration index for an industry is highly
correlated over time (even relative to the magnitude of state-industry employment changes).
Table 2 indicates that coagglomeration indices are also highly correlated over time. For
example, the number in the upper left cell indicates that the correlation between the 1972
and 1977 coagglomeration indices for an industry-pair is 0.953. The correlations are at least
0.936 for each five-year period. The correlation between 1972 and 1997 coagglomeration
indices is still about 0.740.
       Table 3 contains a list of the fifteen most coagglomerated industry pairs. Most involve
textile and apparel industries, which are heavily concentrated in North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia. None of these coagglomerations are as strong as the within-industry
agglomerations of the most agglomerated industries. For example, Ellison and Glaeser
  13
     More precisely, we first compute the total employment in each state-industry attributable to plants that
did not appear in the previous census and did not belong to a firm that existed in the previous census (in
this or any other industry). We then compute the agglomeration and coagglomeration indices using these
totals as the state-industry employments. Approximately 80% of new manufacturing plants are startups
in this sense. These startups enter at smaller sizes and account for about 50% of entering establishment
employment. See Kerr and Ramana Nanda (2006) for more detail regarding the differences in entry sizes
and entry rates between firm births and the expansion establishments of existing firms.


                                                     11
(1997) find that γ = 0.63 for the fur industry (SIC 237). Many, many industry-pairs
have approximately zero coagglomeration. Negative values of the index arise when pairs of
industries are agglomerated in different areas. The lowest value of -0.065 obtains for the
coagglomeration of the Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles (376) and Railroad Equipment
(374) industries. We imagine that most strong negative coagglomerations like this are
mostly due to coincidence.
    Appendix Table 1 summarizes the mean 1987 coagglomeration between SIC3 pairs
within SIC2 pairwise bins. The matrix confirms that SIC3 pairs within the same SIC2
category are generally positively coagglomerated. Apart from the high coagglomeration
of the subindustries of the textile industry (SIC 22), none of the means are very large.
This further illustrates that there is a great deal of idiosyncratic variation in coagglom-
eration levels across industry pairs. The remainder of this paper attempts to exploit this
variation to provide insight into the relative importance of different theories of geographic
concentration.


4    Why Do Firms Agglomerate? Empirical Methodology

The gains from concentration, whether in cities or geographic clusters, always ultimately
come from reducing some form of transport costs. Marshall emphasized that these transport
costs could be for goods, people, or ideas. Firms locate near suppliers or customers to reduce
the costs of buying or selling goods. Firms concentrate to reap the advantages from a large
pool of potential employees. Firms locate near one another to reduce the costs of accessing
new ideas and innovations. Our primary goal is to assess which of these are relatively more
important.
    Interesting papers by Audretsch and Feldman (1996) and Rosenthal and Strange (2001)
have addressed this question by examining cross-industry variation in the degree to which
industries are agglomerated. The idea of these papers is that even though all three of
Marshall’s theories predict that industries will agglomerate, one might be able to tell them
apart by looking at which industries are more and less agglomerated. Audretsch and Feld-
man examine whether industries that are more R&D intensive are more agglomerated, and
Rosenthal and Strange add proxies for Marshall’s other factors as well, e.g. looking at

                                             12
whether agglomeration is greater in industries with highly educated workers and in which
material input costs are large relative to value-added.
       The motivation for our empirical approach is that there may be a great deal of ad-
ditional information in coagglomeration patterns. For example, we can examine not just
whether input-intensive industries are agglomerated, but whether they are located near
the industries that produce their inputs. There is additional information about location
patterns to explore because industries that are agglomerated will be coagglomerated with
some industries but not with others. There is also additional potentially useful variance in
the explanatory variables at the industry-pair level: each industry has supplier/customer
relationships with some industries and not with others; each industry has labor needs that
are similar to those of some other industries and unlike those of others; and each industry
is more likely to benefit from ideas generated by some industries than others.
       The empirical strategy in this paper is to look at whether industries locate near other
industries that are their suppliers or customers, near other industries that use similar labor,
or near other industries that might share ideas. We do this via regressions with pairwise
coagglomeration as the dependent variable and proxies for the importance of Marshall’s
agglomerative forces as the independent variables. Our goal is to learn not just about co-
agglomeration, but to learn more generally about the relative importance of goods, people,
and ideas in the location decisions of manufacturing firms.
       In the following subsections, we briefly discuss the three agglomeration forces and our
approach to measuring them. Our empirical specification will look at the extent to which
every pair of industries co-locates, so our empirical strategy requires us to construct po-
tential explanatory variables reflecting the extent to which each pair of industries connects
in goods, people, and ideas. We will do this in a single cross-section: we regress the 1987
values of the coagglomeration index on measures of industry-pair connections constructed
using data from as close to 1987 as possible.14
  14
    We did not feel that it was worthwhile to try to do this analysis in a panel setting for several reasons: we
know that industry-pair coagglomeration is very highly correlated over time; we think that the industry-pair
connections also do not change greatly over time; and data limitations would prevent us from calculating
several of our measures at higher frequency.




                                                      13
4.1    Proximity to customers and suppliers: Goods

The most straightforward reason for firms to locate near one another is to reduce the costs of
getting inputs or shipping goods to downstream customers. When inputs are far away from
the eventual market, Marshall (1920) argued that firms will trade off the distance between
customers and suppliers based on the costs of moving raw inputs and finished goods. The
“new economic geography” of Masahisa Fujita, Krugman, and Anthony Venables (1999)
views reducing the costs of transporting goods as the driver behind agglomeration. To
assess the importance of this factor, we must assess the extent to which different industries
buy and sell from one another. We use the 1987 Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis to measure the extent that industries buy and sell from one
another. The input-output tables provide commodity-level flows which we aggregate up to
the three-digit SIC level. We define Inputi←j as the share of industry i’s inputs that come
from industry j. We also define Outputi→j as the share of industry i’s outputs that are sold
to industry j. These shares are calculated relative to all suppliers and customers, some of
whom may be non-manufacturing industries or final consumers.
    Inputi←j and Outputi→j are share variables that could go from zero to one. In fact,
the highest observed value of Inputi←j is 0.39, which represents the share of inputs that
come to Leather Tanning and Finishing (SIC 311) from Meat Products (SIC 201). The
highest relative value of Outputi→j is 0.82, which represents the importance of output
sales from Public Building and Related Furniture (SIC 253) to Motor Vehicles and Equip-
ment (SIC 371).15 For most industry pairs, of course, Inputi←j and Outputi→j are ap-
proximately zero.16 To construct a single proxy for the connection in goods between a
pair of industries, we define undirectional versions of the input and output variables by
Inputij = max{Inputi←j , Inputj←i } and Outputij = max{Outputi→j , Outputj→i }. We
also define a combined input-output measure: Input-Outputij = max{Inputij , Outputij }.
    One significant empirical issue is that these patterns of customers and suppliers may
   15
      The large supplier share for Public Building and Related Furniture is due in part to the relatively small
output of the industry. The largest absolute supplier relationship, Plastic Materials and Synthetics (282)
sales to Misc. Plastic Products (308), has a relative output share of 0.32. The data appendix lists the top
five dependencies for all of the metrics discussed below in both absolute and relative terms.
   16
      Approximately 70 percent are less than 0.0001.




                                                      14
reflect rather than create geographic concentration. If an omitted variable causes two
industries to locate in the same region, they may start selling to each other. To address the
possibility that the vagaries of American geography are responsible for the input-output
measures, we turn to U.K. input-output tables. Keith Maskus, C. Sveikauskas, and Allan
Webster (1994) and Maskus and Webster (1995) use the 1989 Input-Output Balance for
the United Kingdom published by the Central Statistical Office in 1992. The original table
contained 102 sectors, but Maskus et al. (1994) aggregated those into 80 sectors that
could be matched with U.S. industries. We form UKInputij and UKOutputij measures as
described above using the U.K. input-output data and map these measures to the three-digit
SIC code system. We will use these U.K. measures as instruments for the U.S. input-output
relationships.

4.2   Labor market pooling: People

A second reason to coagglomerate is to take advantage of scale economies associated with
a large labor pool. Marshall himself emphasized the risk-sharing properties of a large
labor market. As individual firms become more or less productive, workers can shift across
employers thereby maximizing productivity and reducing the variance of worker wages (see
Diamond and Simon, 1990, for evidence and Krugman, 1991a, for a simple model). A
variant on this theory is that agglomerations make it possible for workers to match better
across firms and industries by providing a wider range of alternatives. Rotemberg and
Saloner (2000) provide yet a third model of labor-market based agglomeration where firms
cluster together so that workers will come and invest in human capital, knowing that they
do not face ex post appropriation. A final model that emphasizes employment sharing is
that new startups locate near older firms so that they can hire away their workers.
   We will not be able to test between these different labor-based theories of agglomeration,
but we can test whether industries that employ the same type of workers locate near one
another. All of these labor market pooling hypotheses suggest that agglomeration occurs
because workers are able to move across firms and industries. These cross-industry moves
will only be likely if the industries use the same type of workers. Therefore we measure
the extent to which different industries hire the same occupations. We start with the 1987


                                             15
National Industrial-Occupation Employment Matrix (NIOEM) published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). This matrix provides industry-level employment in 277 occupations,
and we use this detail to determine for each industry the share of its employment association
with each occupation, which we denote Shareio for industry i and occupation o. We then
construct a measure of the similarity of employment in industries i and j by defining
LaborCorrelationij to be the correlation of Shareio and Sharejo across occupations.
   Table 4 contains summary statistics for this variable. The mean value is 0.470. The
measured correlations of one arise because the industry-occupation matrix reports data
for NIOEM industries, which is a coarser division than three-digit SIC industries. Motor
Vehicles (371) and Motorcycles, Bicycles and Parts (375) have the most similar employment
patterns (0.984) among industries with different NIOEM data.
   As in the case of input-output matrices, reverse causality is a potential concern. In-
dustries may be hiring the same type of workers because they are located in the same
places and those workers happen to be there. To address this issue, we again turn to U.K.
data where employment patterns should not reflect the patterns of American geography.
Since the U.K. does not publish a detailed equivalent of the BLS NIOEM matrix, we con-
structed our own by pooling six years (2001-2006) of the U.K. Labour Force Survey (which
is roughly akin to the U.S. Current Population Survey). We then developed matrices of
the occupation-by-industry distribution of currently employed workers over all six surveys,
which together contained 224,528 employed workers and 42,948 workers in manufacturing.
   We mapped the British industry codes into the American system, but kept the occu-
pation measures in their British format. Using this data, we calculated correlations in
occupation employment shares between every two British industries just as we did for the
American industries. This measure will be used as an instrument for the American labor
correlation measure.

4.3   Intellectual or technology spillovers: Ideas

A final reason that firms co-locate is to speed the flow of ideas. Marshall himself emphasized
the advantages that accrue to firms when workers learn skills quickly from each other
in an industrial cluster. Alternatively, firms may locate near one another so that the


                                             16
firm’s leaders can learn from each other. Saxenian (1994) argues that this is one cause of
industrial concentration in Silicon Valley. Glaeser and Matthew Kahn (2001) argue that
the urbanization of high human capital industries, like finance, is evidence for the role that
density plays in speeding the flow of ideas.
    The potential for intellectual spillovers is harder to identify than the potential for trade
in goods and for sharing a labor pool. We construct proxies using data from two different
sources.
    The first of these is Frederic Scherer’s (1984) technology flow matrix. Scherer’s matrix
is designed to capture the extent to which R&D activity in one industry flows out to ben-
efit another industry. This technology transfer occurs either through a supplier-customer
relation between these two industries or through the likelihood that patented inventions
obtained in one industry will find applications in the other industry. We develop two met-
rics, T echIni←j and T echOuti→j , for these technology flows that mirror Inputi←j and
Outputi→j described above. These dependencies are again directional in nature and are
calculated relative to total technology flows that include non-manufacturing industries and
government R&D. The strongest relative technology flows are associated with Plastic Ma-
terials and Synthetics (282) and its relationships to Misc. Plastics Products (308), Tires
and Inner Tubes (301), and Industrial Organic Chemicals (286).17 Our second data source
is the NBER Patent Database. Using data on patent citations for inventors residing in the
U.S., we develop a measure of the extent to which technologies associated with industry
i cite technologies associated with industry j, and vice versa. The measures P atentIni←j
and P atentOuti→j are normalized by total citations for the industries.18
    For our regression analysis we construct undirectional measures of the intellectual
   17
      Similar to the NIOEM industries, Scherer industries map to multiple SIC3s. Our regressions account
for and are robust to this overlap.
   18
      The NBER Patent Data File was originally compiled by Bronwyn Hall, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Tra-
jtenberg (2001). It contains records for all patents granted by the United States Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO) from January 1975 to December 1999. Each patent record provides information about the
invention (e.g., technology classification, citations of prior art) and the inventors submitting the application
(e.g., name, city). The USPTO issues patents by technology categories rather than by industries. Com-
bining the work of Daniel Johnson (1999), Brian Silverman (1999), and Kerr (forthcoming), concordances
are developed between the USPTO classification scheme and SIC3 industries (a probabilistic mapping). In
practice, there is little directional difference between P atentIni←j and P atentOuti→j due to the extensive
number of citations within a single technology field, in which case the probabilistic citing and cited industry
distributions are the same.



                                                      17
spillovers across an industry pair, T echij and P atentij , in a manner analogous to our
construction of Input-Outputij .
         Many authors have used patent citations to assess intellectual spillovers, but they are
obviously only an imperfect measure of intellectual spillovers.19 As Michael Porter (1991)
emphasizes, much knowledge sharing occurs between consumers and suppliers and this
may be captured more by input-output relationships than by these citations. Idea sharing
through the exchange of workers may be better captured by our occupational employment
correlation than through patent-based metrics. As such, we see our patent citation measure
as a proxy for the importance of exchanging technology rather than as a proxy for all forms
of intellectual spillovers.
         Again there is the concern of endogeneity of intellectual exchanges, as industries may
cite each other’s patents because of locational proximity. To address this issue, we use the
U.K. patents in the NBER patent database to form a citations matrix based entirely on
non-U.S. patents. We use the patent flow numbers across U.K. industries as an instrument
for the U.S. technology flows.


5         Empirical Results

We now present our main empirical results. As described above, we examine the relation-
ships between the coagglomeration metrics calculated from the Census Bureau data and
various inter-industry dependency metrics. We first examine direct partial correlations ev-
ident in the U.S. data, and then we turn to instrumental variable regressions using U.K.
data to confirm a causal interpretation. We find evidence to support all three agglomera-
tion theories, and our results most strongly emphasize the importance of input-output and
labor pooling explanations.
         The core empirical specification is

           Coaggij = α + βL LaborCorrelationij + βIO InputOutputij + βT T echij + εij ,

where Coaggij is our measure of the pairwise coagglomeration between industries i and j
    19
    See Zvi Griliches (1990), Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson (1993), and Jaffe, Trajtenberg,
and Michael Fogarty (2000).



                                                  18
in 1987. The sample contains 7381 industry pair observations: all distinct pairs from a
sample of 122 industries.20
       We perform these analyses with four different versions of the dependent variable: we cal-
culate the coagglomeration measures using state-, PMSA-, and county-level total industry-
employment data, and also with the state-level data on employment in startups.
       To make it easier to assess the magnitude of each variable’s importance, we normalize
both the left- and right-hand side variables in all of our regressions so that they have
standard deviation one.

5.1      Correlations in univariate regressions

Before proceeding to the actual regressions, Table 5 presents results from univariate regres-
sions where coagglomeration is regressed on four different measures of the different theory:
our measure of labor pool similarity (LaborCorrelation), our combined input-output mea-
sure (Input-Output), and the measures of technology flows from the Scherer matrix (Tech)
and from patent citations (Patent). Each cell of the table reports a coefficient from a sep-
arate univariate regression. Each row represents a different explanatory variable. Each
column corresponds to a different measure of coagglomeration. The first column uses the
state-level measures. The second column uses the PMSA-level measures. The third column
uses the county-level measures, and the fourth column uses the startup coagglomeration
measure.
       Column (1) shows that the basic relationships between the first three measures and state
total employment coagglomeration are quite similar. A one standard deviation increase in
the labor correlation measure is associated with a 0.18 standard deviation increase in the
state-level coagglomeration measure. A one standard deviation increase in the input-output
measure is association with a 0.205 standard deviation increase in the coagglomeration
measure. The Scherer technology flow variable yields a 0.18 coefficient. The patent citation
variable yields a somewhat lower coefficient of 0.08.
  20
    The sample omits twelve industries for which we could measure coagglomeration: all Apparel industries
(230s), a portion of Printing and Publishing (277-279), and Secondary Non-Ferrous Metals (334). Some
exclusions are due to an inability to construct appropriate Marshallian explanatory measures and some are
due to outlier concerns.




                                                   19
   At the PMSA and county levels, the gap between the magnitudes of the effects widens.
The coefficient on labor correlation is 0.106 and 0.082 in columns (2) and (3), respectively.
The coefficient on input-output in the same two columns is 0.167 and 0.130. The coefficient
on the Scherer technology flows is 0.148 and 0.107. Coagglomeration relationships are
weaker at the metropolitan level, which can be explained if firms are drawn to counties
because of other firms in neighboring counties.
   The fourth column examines the coagglomeration of startup activity in industry pairs.
The coefficients in these regressions are lower than in the previous regression. Again, input-
output relationships seem to be the most important.

5.2   OLS regression results

Table 6 presents OLS coefficient estimates for our core empirical specification. Each column
reports coefficients from a single regression with a pairwise coagglomeration (measured
using state-level data) as the dependent variable. We find a coefficient of 0.146 for labor
correlation, 0.149 for the input-output measure, and 0.112 for the Scherer technology flows.
   In the second column, we break input-output effects into an input measure and an
output measure. Both effects are quite significant and large.
   The third column excludes all industry pairs involving two industries belonging to the
same two-digit SIC industry. There are both conceptual and methodological reasons for
this exclusion. Conceptually, we might think that industries within the same two-digit SIC
code are more likely to be driven to coagglomerate because of omitted geographic factors
that drive the location patterns of such similar industries. Methodologically, some of our
measures, like the technology flow measure, have variation that straddles the two-digit and
three-digit levels. The coefficient estimates in this regression are slightly lower, but similar
in magnitude to the base regression in the first column.
   The regressions in the fourth, fifth, and sixth columns provide another robustness check.
For these regressions we have redefined the input-output and technology flow variables to
be means (rather than maximums) of the directional variables on which they are based.
In these specifications, input-output measures are generally more important, and labor
correlation is somewhat less important.


                                              20
       Appendix Table 2 presents regressions similar to the base regression in the first column
of Table 6, but with the three alternative coagglomeration measures as the dependent
variables. These substitutions yield similar results.
       Two general conclusions emerge from these regressions. First, all three of Marshall’s
(1920) theories regarding agglomeration find support in the coagglomeration patterns. Sec-
ond, the input-output relationship appears to be the most important contributor. The
labor pooling hypothesis finds the second most support.

5.3      IV regression results

In this section we present our core results using the U.K. instruments. Appendix Table 3
presents the first-stage regression estimates. The t-statistics are over 15 for the relevant
instruments.
       Table 7 presents estimates from sixteen regressions. The regressions reported in Panel
A include the input-output and labor correlation measures of industry relatedness. The
odd regressions (1), (3), (5), and (7) are OLS results. One slight difference from Table 6
is that we exclude all industry-pairs involving two firms in the same two-digit industry.21
The even regressions (2), (4), (6), and (8) are the IV results. We present results for state-,
PMSA-, and county-level coagglomeration and for the coagglomeration of startups.
       Comparing regressions (1) and (2) in Panel A shows that the IV specifications cause
the coefficients on labor correlation and the input-output measures to rise modestly. Both
coefficients remain significant.
       The regressions in Panel B also include the Scherer measure of technology flows (with
U.K. patent flows as the instrument in the IV specifications). The first regression is Panel
B is an exact duplicate of regression (3) in Table 6, repeated to permit easy comparison
between the OLS and IV results. The differences between regressions (1) and (2) are modest
in magnitude, but the coefficients on input-output and technology flows become statistically
insignificant. The labor correlation remains robust.
  21
    We made this change for two reasons. First, the U.K. input-output tables have a relevant limitation. We
explicitly exclude intra-industry flows at the SIC3 level from the U.S. input-output tables. In several cases,
we are required to map the same U.K. industry to multiple SIC3 industries within an SIC2. In these cases,
we are not able to distinguish flows across these SIC3 industries from intra-industry flows. In addition, some
of the instruments have limited variation within two-digit industries.



                                                     21
    The regressions in columns (3) and (4) use PMSA-level coagglomeration as the depen-
dent variable. In both panels there is a reversal in the importance-ranking of the labor
correlation and input-output measures when we move from the OLS to the IV specifica-
tions. In the OLS estimates, input-output relationships look dramatically more important
than labor correlation. In the IV specification, labor correlation is both larger in magnitude
and more statistically significant.
    At the county level in Panel A, input-output measures are more important and signifi-
cant in both the OLS and IV regressions. In Panel B, the IV measures are all statistically
insignificant.
    Finally, regressions (7) and (8) examine the coagglomeration of new firm births in
industry pairs. In both panels the use of instrumental variables makes both the input-
output and labor correlation measures much more important. In each case, these the
coefficients are statistically significant in the IV specifications.
    We interpret Table 7 as indicating that at least the labor correlation and input-output
relationships with coagglomeration are robust to our IV approach. The IV specification
generally causes coefficients to rise, but the increase is generally statistically insignificant.
When we include the technology flows measure, measurement becomes more difficult. Our
instrument for technology flows is highly correlated with the input-output measure, so it
becomes difficult to identify separately input-output effects and technology flow effects.


6    Conclusion

Our first conclusion from our analysis of coagglomeration patterns is that there is support
for the importance of all three theories of agglomeration. In the OLS specifications, all
variables have statistically significant and economically meaningful effects. The IV results
continue to show a robust effect for labor correlation. The input-output coefficients are
similar in magnitude or rise in size, but are less significant when we also include technology
flows. The technology flows measures are less robust when we use our IV measures.
    Which of the theories seems to be more important? Our basic conclusion is that this
work suggests all three are roughly equal in magnitude. A one standard deviation growth
in labor correlation or input-output increases coagglomeration by around one seventh of a

                                                22
standard deviation. In some specifications, the technology flows effect is somewhat weaker,
but in others it is also close in magnitude.
   It is unclear how these results would generalize to non-manufacturing industries. Ser-
vices are more costly to transport since they involve face-to-face interaction and therefore
we might think that input-output relationships are particularly important in that sector
(Jed Kolko, 1997). Ideas may be more important in more innovative sectors, so idea flows
might be more important elsewhere. But at least in manufacturing, transport costs for
goods, people, and ideas all still seem to matter, and all three of Marshall’s theories find
vindication in the data.




                                               23
   References
Audretsch, David B. and Feldman, Maryann P. (1996): “R&D Spillovers and the Geography
of Innovation and Production,” American Economic Review, 86, 630–640.

Autor, David, Kerr, William and Kugler, Adriana (forthcoming): “Do Employment Pro-
tections Reduce Productivity? Evidence from U.S. States,” The Economic Journal.

Davis, Steven, Haltiwanger, John and Schuh, Scott (1996): Job Creation and Destruction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Diamond, Charles and Simon, Curtis (1990): “Industrial Specialization and the Returns to
Labor,” Journal of Labor Economics, 8, 175–201.

Dumais, Guy, Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. (2002): “Geographic Concentration
as a Dynamic Process,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 193–204.

Dunne, Timothy, Roberts, Mark and Samuelson, Larry (1989a): “The Growth and Failure
of Manufacturing Plants in the U.S.,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 671–698.

Dunne, Timothy, Roberts, Mark and Samuelson, Larry (1989b): “Plant Turnover and
Gross Employment Flows in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Journal of Labor Economics,
7, 48–71.

Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. (1997): “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manu-
facturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach, ” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 889–927.

Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. (1999): “The Geographic Concentration of Indus-
try: Does Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?,” Papers and Proceedings, American
Economic Review, 89, 311–316.

Florence, P. Sargant (1948): Investment, Location and Size of Plant. London, U.K.: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Fuchs, Victor (1962): Changes in the Location of Manufacturing in the US Since 1929.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Fujita, Masahisa, Krugman, Paul and Venables, Anthony (1999): The Spatial Economy:
Cities, Regions and International Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Kohlhase, Janet E. (2003): “Cities, Regions and the Decline of
Transport Costs,” Papers in Regional Science, 83, 197–228.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Khan, Matthew (2001): “Decentralized Employment and the Trans-


                                           24
formation of the American City,” NBER Working Paper 8117.

Griliches, Zvi (1990): “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 28, 1661–1707.

Hall, Bronwyn, Jaffe, Adam and Trajtenberg, Manuel (2001): “The NBER Patent Citation
Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper 8498.

Henderson, J. Vernon (2003): “Marshall’s Scale Economies,” Journal of Urban Economics,
53, 1–28.

Holmes, Thomas (1998): “The Effects of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing:
Evidence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 667–705.

Hoover, E.M. (1948): The Location of Economic Activity. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.

Jaffe, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel and Fogarty, Michael (2000): “Knowledge Spillovers and
Patent Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors,” Papers and Proceedings, American
Economic Review, 90, 215–218.

Jaffe, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel and Henderson, Rebecca (1993): “Geographic Local-
ization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108, 577–598.

Johnson, Daniel (1999): “150 Years of American Invention: Methodology and a First
Geographic Application,” Wellesley College Economics Working Paper 99-01.

Johnson, Norman L, Kotz, Samuel and Balakrishnan, N. (1994): Continuous Univariate
Distributions, Vol. 1. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Johnson, Norman L, Kotz, Samuel and Balakrishnan, N. (1995): Continuous Univariate
Distributions, Vol. 2. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Kerr, William (forthcoming): “Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology
Diffusion,” The Review of Economics and Statistics.

Kerr, William and Nanda, Ramana (2006): “Banking Deregulation, Financing Constraints,
and Entrepreneurship,” Harvard Business School Working Paper 07-033.

Kolko, Jed (1999): “Can I Get Some Service Here? Information Technology, Service Indus-
tries, and the Future of Cities,” Harvard University Working Paper.

Krugman, Paul (1991a): Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



                                          25
Krugman, Paul (1991b): “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Polit-
ical Economy, 99, 483–499.

Marshall, Alfred (1920): Principles of Economics. London, U.K.: MacMillan and Co.

Maskus, Keith, Sveikauskas, C. and Webster, Allan (1994): “The Composition of the Hu-
man Capital Stock and Its Relation to International Trade: Evidence from the U.S. and
Britain,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 1994, Band 130, Heft 1.

Maskus, Keith and Webster, Allan (1995): “Factor Specialization in U.S. and U.K. Trade:
Simple Departures from the Factor-Content Theory,” Swiss Journal of Economics and Sta-
tistics, 1, 419–440.

McGuckin, Robert and Peck, Suzanne (1992): “Manufacturing Establishments Reclassified
into New Industries: The Effect of Survey Design Rules,” Center for Economic Studies
Working Paper 92-14.

Porter, Michael E. (1990): The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York, NY: The
Free Press.

Rosenthal, Stuart S. and Strange, William C. (2001): “The Determinants of Agglomera-
tion,” Journal of Urban Economics, 50, 191–229.

Rotemberg, Julio and Saloner, Garth (2000): “Competition and Human Capital Accumu-
lation: A Theory of Interregional Specialization and Trade,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics 30, 373–404.

Saxenian, AnnaLee (1994): Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley
and Route 128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Scherer, Frederic M. (1984): “Using Linked Patent Data and R&D Data to Measure Tech-
nology Flows,” in Griliches, Zvi (ed.) R & D, Patents and Productivity. Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press.

Silverman, Brian (1999): “Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Di-
versification: Toward an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost
Economics,” Management Science, 45, 1109–1124.

von Thünen, Johann Heinrich (1826): Der Isolirte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirthschaft
und Nationalökonomie, oder Untersuchungen über den Einfluss, den die Getreidepreise, der
Reichtum des Bodens und die Abgaben auf den Ackerbau Ausüben. Reprinted in English as
Von Thünen’s Isolated State, Pergamon Press, 1966.




                                           26
   Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1: Note that
                   M
                   X                                           M
                                                               X
      G =                (w1 sm1 + w2 sm2 − xm )2 =                 (w1 (sm1 − xm ) + w2 (sm2 − xm ))2
                   m=1                                        m=1
                       M
                       X                            M
                                                    X                                        M
                                                                                             X
          = w12             (sm1 − xm )2 + w22            (sm2 − xm )2 + 2w1 w2                    (sm1 − xm )(sm2 − xm )
                     m=1                          m=1                                        m=1
                                                  M
                                                  X
          = w12 G1 + w22 G2 + 2w1 w2                    (sm1 − xm )(sm2 − xm ),
                                                  m=1

and that H = w12 H1 + w22 H2 . Hence,
             2
             X                            X                         2
                                                                    X
      (1 −         wi2 )γ c = G/(1 −              x2m ) − H −             γi wi2 (1 − Hi )
             i=1                              m                     i=1
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                  Gi /(1 − m x2m ) − Hi
                                                                                                          P
                                          X                                                X
                             = G/(1 −             x2m )   −   (w12 H1   +   w22 H2 )   −                                      wi2 (1 − Hi )
                                              m                                            i=1
                                                                                                          1 − Hi
                                                                     PM                                          P2
                                 w12 G1   +   w22 G2   + 2w1 w2           m=1 (sm1 − xm )(sm2         − xm ) −         2
                                                                                                                  i=1 wi Gi
                             =
                                                                          1− M        2
                                                                              P
                                                                                m=1 xm
                                          PM
                                 2w1 w2       m=1 (sm1 − xm )(sm2             − xm )
                             =                                                         .
                                               1− M        2
                                                    P
                                                      m=1 xm
                                                                                P2      2
The final formula results from noting that 2w1 w2 = 1 −                            i=1 wi        when w1 + w2 = 1.

Proof of Proposition 2: Part (a) of the theorem follows immediately from backward
induction. The final plant to move must choose in this way. Given that the final plant will
locate in this way, the next-to-last plant maximizes its payoff by choosing the location that
maximizes log(xm ) + km if it has no spillover with a previously located plant, because it
will receive full spillover benefits from the final plant (if such spillovers exist) regardless of
its location choice. The qualification “essentially unique” in the proposition reflects that
the maximizing choice is not unique when the maximizer of log(xm ) + km is not unique.
This occurs with probability zero.
    Part (b) states that we can choose a distribution over partitions that satisfies
                                 (
               0                     γis if plants k and k 0 both belong to industry i
      Prob{k ∈ ω(k)} =
                                     γ0s if plants k and k 0 belong to different industries,
if either of two hypotheses holds.
     The first hypothesis is that 0 ≤ γ0s ≤ γ1s , γ2s . In this case, a four-point distribution
suffices. Let ω0 be the fully disjoint partition: ω0 (k) = {k} for all k. Let ωi be the partition
in which all plants in industry i are in a single cluster with the remaining plants disjoint:
ωi (k) = Ki if k ∈ Ki and ωi (k) = {k} otherwise. Let ω12 be the partition with all plants
in a single cluster: ω12 (k) = K1 ∪ K2 for all k. The distribution that places probability
γ0s on ω12 , probability γis − γ0s on ωi , and the remaining probability on ω0 has the desired
property.

                                                              27
     The second hypothesis is that 0 ≤ γ1s , γ2s and 0 ≤ γ0 ≤ min(1/N1 , 1/N2 ). In this case, it
is simplest to describe the construction of a distribution on the set of partitions on K1 ∪ K2
as a two-step process. Let p1 be a probability distribution over partitions of K1 that satisfies
p1 ({ω|k 0 ∈ ω(k)}) = γ1s for all k, k 0 ∈ K1 . This can be done easily by putting probability γ1s
on the partition with all plants in a single cluster and the remaining probability on a disjoint
partition, and can also be done in many other ways if γ1s is not too large. Similarly, let p2 be a
distribution over partitions of K2 that satisfies p2 ({ω|k 0 ∈ ω(k)}) = γ2s for all k, k 0 ∈ K2 . To
choose a partition of K1 ∪K2 , first draw partitions ω1 of K1 and ω2 of K2 according to p1 and
p2 . Let Ci be the set of clusters in partition i: Ci = {S ⊂ Ki |ω1 (k) = S for some k ∈ K1 }.
Assuming WLOG that |C1 | < |C2 |, let f be a one-to-one function from C1 to C2 chosen
uniformly from the set of all such functions. Then, define a partition ω on K1 ∪K2 by setting
ω(k) = ω1 (k) with probability 1−|C2 |γ0 and ω(k) = ω1 (k)∪f (ω1 (k)) with probability |C2 |γ0
for k ∈ K1 , and defining ω(k) = ω2 (k) if k ∈ K2 and k has not previously been defined
as belonging to some ω(k) with k ∈ K1 . (The randomization in this definition is perfectly
correlated across k and k 0 if k 0 ∈ ω1 (k) and can have any correlation if k and k 0 are not in
the same cluster.) It is straightforward that a partition created this way has the desired
property.
     Part (c) is a corollary of Proposition 0. Let ukm be an indicator for plant k locating in
                                                                                        P
area m. A standard property of the logit model is that Prob{ukm = 1} = xm / m0 xm0 =
xm . The locations of plants k and k 0 are identical if k 0 ∈ ω(k) and independent otherwise,
so
                             (
                                 xm if k 0 ∈ ω(k)
         E(ukm uk0 m |ω) =
                                 x2m otherwise.

The unconditional expectation is E(ukm uk0 m ) = x2m + Prob{k 0 ∈ ω(k)}(xm − x2m ). Using
this we calculate
                               E(ukm uk0 m ) − E(ukm )E(uk0 m )
         Corr(xkm , xk0 m ) =      p
                                     Var(ukm )Var(uk0 m )
                               xm + Prob{k 0 ∈ ω(k)}(xm − x2m ) − x2m
                                2
                             =       p
                                       xm (1 − xm )xm (1 − xm )
                                     0
                             = Prob{k ∈ ω(k)}

Hence, the hypothesis of Proposition 0 is satisfied whenever the condition on the distribution
over partitions in part (b) of Proposition 2 holds.

Proof of Proposition 3: Suppose that the ηm and ξmi are independent χ2 random
              1−γ na           1−γ na      1−γ na
variables with γ na2 2cm xm and γ nai 2xm − γ na2 2cm xm degrees of freedom, respectively,
                      2                  i               2
for some constants cm ∈ [0, 1]. The additive property of χ2 random variables implies that
                                     1−γ na
δmi is a χ2 random variable with γ nai 2xm degrees of freedom. Note that δmi and δm0 i
                                       i
are independent if m 6= m0 . A standard result on Chi-square distributions implies that
                                                           1−γina       1−γina
δmi / Mm0 =1 δm0 i has a Beta distribution with parameters γ na xm and γ na (1 − xm ).
                                                                                       22
     P
                                                                   i               i

  22
       See Chapter 25 of Johnson, Kotz and Balakrishnan (1995).




                                                    28
A Beta distribution with parameters θ1 and θ2 has expectation θ1 /(θ1 + θ2 ) and variance
         θ1 θ2
(θ1 +θ2 )2 (θ1 +θ2 +1)
                       . Using these formulas gives
                                        1−γina
                                         γina xm
                                !
                    δmi
         E    PM                    =    1−γina
                                                         = xm
                  m0 =1 δm0 i              γina

                                                1−γina 2
                                                      
                                                           xm (1   − xm )
                                    !
               δmi                                na
                                                 γi
         Var PM                         =                                       = γina xm (1 − xm ).
                                                      1−γ na 2
                                                           
                    m0 =1   δm0 i                        i         1
                                                      γina        γina

This shows that the distributions have two of the three desired properties given in part (a)
of the Proposition.
    To complete the proof of part (a) it suffices to show that the third property,
                       M
                       X                          M
                                                  X
         Cov(δm1 /              δm0 1 , δm2 /            δm0 2 ) = γ0na xm (1 − xm )
                      m0 =1                      m0 =1

holds for some choice of cm ∈ [0, 1]. The covariance is a continuous function of cm . When
cm = 0, the covariance is zero. Hence, by the intermediate   value theorem we can complete
                                                      1−γ na
the proof by showing that the covariance is equal to 1−γ2na γ1na xm (1 − xm ) when cm = 1.
                                                         1
   When cm = 1 the covariance can be written as
                                                         !                                                           !
               δm1            δm2                                                   ηm    ηm + ξm2
         Cov PM           , PM                                   = Cov PM            , PM                  ,
              m0 =1 δm0 1    m0 =1 δm0 2                                   m0 =1 ηm0    m0 =1 ηm0 + ξm0 2
                                                                            Y0          Y0 + Y1
                                                                                                    
                                                                 = Cov            ,                      ,
                                                                         Y0 + Y00 Y0 + Y00 + Y1 + Y2
where Y0 = ηm , Y00 = m0 6=m ηm0 , Y1 = ξm2 , and Y2 = m0 6=m ξm0 2 . Note that Y0 , Y00 , Y1
                                  P                                                   P

and Y2 are mutually independent Chi-square random variables. By rewriting the last term
                                                         Y0 +Y00
on the right side of the above expression as Y0Y+Y
                                                 0
                                                       0       1  2
                                                                       Y1
                                                                          2 0
                                                                              Y1 +Y2
                                                    0 Y +Y 0 +Y +Y + Y +Y Y +Y 0 +Y +Y we find
                                                                      1            1  2
                                                   0      0                    0
that it is equal to
                Y0      Y0        Y0 + Y00        Y1        Y1 + Y2
                                                                                                                
         Cov          ,                       +
             Y0 + Y0 Y0 + Y0 Y0 + Y0 + Y1 + Y2 Y1 + Y2 Y0 + Y00 + Y1 + Y2
                    0       0       0


                                   Y0      Y0        Y0 + Y00                                            Y0       Y1        Y1 + Y2
                                                                                                                                         
                  = Cov                  ,                                                + Cov               ,
                                Y0 + Y0 Y0 + Y0 Y0 + Y00 + Y1 + Y2
                                       0       0                                                      Y0 + Y00 Y1 + Y2 Y0 + Y00 + Y1 + Y2
                                                                                                                        Y0
Another standard property of Chi-square (and Gamma) random variables is that                                          Y0 +Y00   and
Y0 + Y00are       independent.23
                             This immediately implies that the second covariance in the line
                                                   Y0 +Y00
above is zero. It also implies that Y0Y+Y
                                        0
                                          0 and Y +Y 0 +Y +Y
                                                 0       1  2
                                                              are independent. This implies
                                                             0                  0


                Y0       Y0         Y0 + Y00                                             Y0                       Y0 + Y00
                                                                                                                            
         Cov         ,                                                          = Var          E                                .
             Y0 + Y00 Y0 + Y00 Y0 + Y00 + Y1 + Y2                                     Y0 + Y00               Y0 + Y00 + Y1 + Y2
  23
       See Chapter 17 of Johnson, Kotz and Balakrishnan (1994).


                                                                       29
Plugging in the appropriate degrees of freedom into the formulas for the mean and variance
of Beta-distributed random variables we find that this is equal to
                           1−γ2na
                            γ na                      1 − γ2na na
     γ2na xm (1   −   xm ) 1−γ2 na   = xm (1 − xm )           γ .
                                1                     1 − γ1na 1
                            γ1na




                                                       30
         Table 1: Levels of Geographic Agglomeration and Coagglomeration 1972-1997
                                                    1972         1977        1982        1987        1992         1997

                                                                  A. State-Level Total Employment
EG Agglomeration Index γ Mean                      0.0398      0.0399     0.0392     0.0368   0.0351             0.0342
EG Coagglomeration Index γc Mean                   0.0003      0.0003       0.0002      0.0004      0.0003       0.0003
EG Coagglomeration Index γc SD                     0.0150      0.0139       0.0140      0.0133      0.0129       0.0124

                                                                  B. PMSA-Level Total Employment
EG Agglomeration Index γ Mean                      0.0298      0.0292       0.0286      0.0285      0.0271       0.0299
EG Coagglomeration Index γc Mean                   0.0003      0.0003       0.0002      0.0003      0.0002       0.0002
EG Coagglomeration Index γc SD                     0.0086      0.0075       0.0069      0.0061      0.0054       0.0060

                                                              C. State-Level Employment in Firm Births
EG Agglomeration Index γ Mean                      0.0290      0.0022       0.0121      0.0107      0.0158       0.0285
EG Coagglomeration Index γc Mean                   0.0001      0.0003       0.0003      0.0005      0.0004       0.0003
EG Coagglomeration Index γc SD                     0.0193      0.0172       0.0177      0.0150      0.0187       0.0181

Notes: Measures of industrial agglomeration and coagglomeration calculated from the Census of Manufacturers.
Estimates include all manufacturing SIC3 industries, except those listed in the text, for 134 observations per year.
           Table 2: Correlation of EG Coagglomeration Index
                  1972          1977          1982          1987            1992

    1977          0.953
    1982          0.891         0.944
    1987          0.841         0.889         0.936
    1992          0.791         0.840         0.895         0.959
    1997          0.740         0.789         0.832         0.890           0.941

Notes: See Table 1. EG Coagglomeration Index measured through state total
employments for each industry.
                               Table 3: Highest 1987 Pairwise Coagglomerations
  Rank      Industry 1                                       Industry 2                                    Coaggl.

    1       Broadwoven Mills, Cotton (221)                   Yarn and Thread Mills (228)                   0.207
    2       Knitting Mills (225)                             Yarn and Thread Mills (228)                   0.187
    3       Broadwoven Mills, Fiber (222)                    Textile Finishing (226)                       0.178
    4       Broadwoven Mills, Cotton (221)                   Broadwoven Mills, Fiber (222)                 0.171
    5       Broadwoven Mills, Fiber (222)                    Yarn and Thread Mills (228)                   0.164
    6       Handbags (317)                                   Photographic Equipment (386)                  0.155
    7       Broadwoven Mills, Wool (223)                     Carpets and Rugs (227)                        0.149
    8       Carpets and Rugs (227)                           Yarn and Thread Mills (228)                   0.142
    9       Photographic Equipment (386)                     Jewelry, Silverware, Plated Ware (391)        0.139
   10       Textile Finishing (226)                          Yarn and Thread Mills (228)                   0.138
   11       Broadwoven Mills, Cotton (221)                   Textile Finishing (226)                       0.137
   12       Broadwoven Mills, Cotton (221)                   Carpets and Rugs (227)                        0.137
   13       Broadwoven Mills, Cotton (221)                   Knitting Mills (225)                          0.136
   14       Carpets and Rugs (227)                           Pulp Mills (261)                              0.110
   15       Jewelry, Silverware, Plated Ware (391)           Costume Jewelry and Notions (396)             0.107

Notes: See Table 1. EG Coagglomeration Index measured through state total employments for each industry.
      Table 4: Descriptive Statistics for 1987 Pairwise Coagglomeration Regressions
                                                Mean            Standard         Minimum          Maximum
                                                                Deviation

                                                         A. Pairwise Coagglomeration Measures
State Total Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.               0.000            0.013            -0.065            0.207
PMSA Total Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.                0.000            0.006            -0.025            0.119
County Total Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.              0.000            0.003            -0.018            0.080
State Birth Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.               0.000            0.015            -0.082            0.259

                                                          B. Pairwise Labor Similarities Index
Labor Correlation                                0.470            0.226            -0.046            1.000

                                                    C. Pairwise Input-Output Relationship Indices
Input-Output Maximum                             0.007            0.029            0.000             0.823
Input-Output Mean                                0.002            0.010            0.000             0.240
Input Maximum                                    0.005            0.019            0.000             0.392
Input Mean                                      0.002             0.010            0.000             0.196
Output Maximum                                   0.005            0.026            0.000             0.823
Output Mean                                      0.002            0.013            0.000             0.411

                                                     D. Pairwise Technology Relationship Indices
Scherer R&D Tech Maximum                         0.005            0.026            0.000             0.625
Scherer R&D Tech Mean                            0.002            0.010            0.000             0.263
Patent Citation Tech Maximum                     0.015            0.025            0.000             0.400
Patent Citation Tech Mean                        0.007            0.014            0.000             0.203

Notes: Descriptive statistics for 1987. All pairwise combinations of manufacturing SIC3 industries are included,
except those listed in the text, for 7381 observations. Coagglomeration measures are calculated from the 1987
Census of Manufacturers. Labor Correlation indices are calculated from the BLS National Industry-Occupation
Employment Matrix for 1987. Input-Output relationships are calculated from the BEA Benchmark Input-Output
Matrix for 1987. Technology Flows are calculated from the Scherer (1984) R&D tables for the 1970s and from
the NBER Patent Citation Database for 1975-1997. See the data appendix for further details.
       Table 5: OLS Univariate Specifications for 1987 Pairwise Coagglomeration
Each row and                         Dependent Variable is EG Coagglomeration Index
column reports a            State Total     PMSA Total         County Total     State Firm Birth
separate estimation        Employment       Employment         Employment         Employment
with single regressor     Coagglomeration Coagglomeration Coagglomeration Coagglomeration

                                  (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)

Labor Correlation               0.180                 0.106                 0.082                0.077
                               (0.011)               (0.012)               (0.012)              (0.012)

Input-Output                    0.205                 0.167                 0.130                0.112
                               (0.011)               (0.011)               (0.012)              (0.012)

Technology Flows                0.180                 0.148                 0.107                0.089
Scherer R&D                    (0.011)               (0.012)               (0.012)              (0.012)

Technology Flows                0.081                 0.100                 0.085                0.068
Patent Citations               (0.012)               (0.012)               (0.012)              (0.012)

Notes: Each cell reports a separate regression of pairwise EG Coagglomeration Index on a determinant of
industrial co-location. Coagglomeration measures are calculated from the 1987 Census of Manufacturers using
the employments listed in the column headers. All pairwise combinations of manufacturing SIC3 industries are
included, except those listed in the text, for 7381 observations. Labor Correlation indices are calculated from
the BLS National Industry-Occupation Employment Matrix for 1987. Input-Output relationships are calculated
from the BEA Benchmark Input-Output Matrix for 1987. Technology Flows are calculated from the Scherer
(1984) R&D tables for the 1970s and from the NBER Patent Citation Database for 1975-1997. Maximum
values for the pairwise combination are employed. All variables are transformed to (mean 0, standard
deviation 1) for interpretation. Regressions are unweighted. Standard errors are in parentheses.
                Table 6: OLS Multivariate Specifications for 1987 Pairwise Coagglomeration
Dependent variable             Pairwise Maximum Regressions                            Pairwise Mean Regressions
is EG Coaggl. Index          Base        Separate      Exclude                     Base         Separate      Exclude
calculated with           Estimation      Input &      Pairs in                 Estimation      Input &       Pairs in
state total emp.                           Output    Same SIC2                                   Output      Same SIC2

                               (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)              (6)

Labor Correlation            0.146            0.142            0.110              0.135            0.134            0.108
                            (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.012)            (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.012)
Input-Output                 0.149                             0.108              0.185                             0.117
                            (0.012)                           (0.012)            (0.012)                           (0.012)
Input                                         0.109                                                0.116
                                             (0.014)                                              (0.014)
Output                                        0.095                                                0.098
                                             (0.013)                                              (0.013)
Technology Flows             0.112            0.096            0.050              0.125            0.121            0.032
Scherer R&D                 (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)            (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.012)

Observations                  7381            7381             7000                7381             7381             7000

Notes: See Table 5. Regression of pairwise EG Coagglomeration Index on determinants of industrial co-location.
Coagglomeration measures are calculated from the 1987 Census of Manufacturers using state total employments for each industry.
Columns 3 and 6 exclude SIC3 pairwise combinations within the same SIC2. Appendix Table 2 repeats Column 1 with alternative
coagglomeration metrics.
                             Table 7: OLS and IV Multivariate Specifications for 1987 Pairwise Coagglomeration
                                                                 Dependent Variable is EG Coagglomeration Index
                          State           State              PMSA           PMSA             County         County                  State            State
                       Total Empl.     Total Empl.         Total Empl.   Total Empl.       Total Empl.   Total Empl.             Birth Empl.      Birth Empl.
                        Coaggl.         Coaggl.             Coaggl.         Coaggl.          Coaggl.       Coaggl.                Coaggl.          Coaggl.
                          OLS              IV                 OLS             IV              OLS             IV                    OLS                IV

                            (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)               (5)              (6)                (7)             (8)

                                                    A. OLS and IV Multivariate Specifications with Labor and Input-Output Only
Labor Correlation         0.108            0.140               0.033          0.151              0.029            0.047             0.042            0.187
                         (0.012)          (0.056)             (0.012)        (0.057)            (0.012)          (0.056)           (0.012)          (0.056)
Input-Output              0.121            0.149               0.096          0.078              0.075            0.103             0.051            0.152
                         (0.012)          (0.045)             (0.012)        (0.045)            (0.012)          (0.045)           (0.012)          (0.043)

                                                     B. OLS and IV Multivariate Specifications with Scherer Technology Metric
Labor Correlation         0.110            0.120               0.035          0.136              0.030            0.028             0.042            0.254
                         (0.012)          (0.059)             (0.012)        (0.060)            (0.012)          (0.060)           (0.012)          (0.066)
Input-Output              0.108            0.095               0.085          0.039              0.068            0.051             0.047            0.341
                         (0.012)          (0.121)             (0.012)        (0.123)            (0.012)          (0.123)           (0.012)          (0.136)
Technology Flows          0.050            0.104               0.041          0.076              0.026            0.099             0.015            -0.359
Scherer R&D              (0.012)          (0.181)             (0.012)        (0.183)            (0.012)          (0.183)           (0.012)          (0.204)

Notes: See Tables 5 and 6. OLS and IV Regression of pairwise EG Coagglomeration Index on determinants of industrial co-location. Appendix Table 3 documents the
first-stage coefficients.
                                           App. Table 1: Inter-Industry 1987 Pairwise Coagglomeration Averages
        20       22       23       24       25       26      27       28       29       30       31       32       33       34       35      36       37       38       39

 20   0.002
 22 -0.003 0.102
 23   0.000    0.021    0.012
 24   0.003    0.012    0.003    0.013
 25 -0.001 0.016        0.002    0.002    0.000
 26   0.001    0.012    0.004    0.006 -0.001 0.005
 27   0.001 -0.001 0.001 -0.003 -0.004 0.000                0.004
 28   0.001    0.004    0.001    0.000 -0.002 0.002         0.001    0.007
 29   0.004 -0.018 -0.003 0.000 -0.006 -0.002 0.001                  0.008    0.013
 30 -0.001 0.003 -0.003 -0.001 0.001               0.000 -0.001 0.001 -0.001 0.002
 31   0.000 -0.005 0.006 -0.001 -0.003 0.005                0.006    0.001 -0.003 -0.003 0.019
 32   0.001    0.001    0.002    0.000 -0.002 0.000         0.000    0.003    0.006   0.001 -0.001 0.003
 33 -0.001 -0.012 -0.006 -0.002 -0.004 0.001 -0.001 0.001                     0.002   0.004 -0.003 0.004         0.010
 34 -0.001 -0.014 -0.007 -0.004 -0.002 -0.002 0.000 -0.001 0.001                      0.002 -0.003 0.000         0.005    0.004
 35   0.000 -0.011 -0.006 -0.003 -0.002 -0.001 0.001 -0.001 0.000                     0.001 -0.001 -0.001 0.003           0.004    0.001
 36   0.001 -0.007 -0.001 -0.002 0.000 -0.003 0.001 -0.002 0.000                      0.000    0.002 -0.001 -0.001 0.000           0.000    0.000
 37 -0.001 -0.017 -0.008 -0.001 0.001 -0.004 -0.002 -0.004 0.000 -0.002 -0.008 -0.002 0.004                               0.004    0.001 -0.001 -0.004
 38 -0.002 -0.010 0.005 -0.005 -0.003 -0.002 0.006 -0.003 -0.005 -0.005 0.009 -0.003 -0.005 -0.002 0.000                                    0.002 -0.004 0.008
 39 -0.001 -0.007 0.005 -0.004 -0.004 0.000                 0.005 -0.001 -0.003 -0.003 0.010 -0.002 -0.002 -0.001 0.000                     0.003 -0.006 0.012         0.014

Notes: Table entries are the weighted-average pairwise SIC3 coagglomerations within the pairwise SIC2 cell. EG Coagglomeration Index measured through state total employments
for each industry.
  App. Table 2: OLS Multivariate Specifications for 1987 Pairwise Coagglomeration
                                    Dependent Variable is EG Coagglomeration Index
                           State Total     PMSA Total         County Total     State Firm Birth
                          Employment       Employment         Employment         Employment
                         Coagglomeration Coagglomeration Coagglomeration Coagglomeration

                                 (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)

Labor Correlation               0.146                0.078                0.060                 0.060
                               (0.011)              (0.012)              (0.012)               (0.012)
Input-Output                    0.149                0.125                0.101                 0.086
                               (0.012)              (0.012)              (0.012)               (0.013)
Technology Flows                0.112                0.098                0.067                 0.054
Scherer R&D                    (0.012)              (0.012)              (0.012)               (0.012)

Notes: See Table 6. Column 1 repeats the first column of Table 6 with coagglomeration measured through
state total employments for each industry. Columns 2-4 substitute alternative metrics of coagglomeration.
 App. Table 3: Univariate and Multivariate First-Stage Specifications for UK IV of Determinants of Co-Locations
Dependent variable                                                      Multivariate First-Stages             Multivariate First-Stages
is the explanatory        Univariate First-Stage Specifications           without Technology                      with Technology
regressor listed in         Labor         Input-   Technology             Labor         Input-            Labor        Input-     Technology
the column header         Correlation    Output       Scherer           Correlation     Output          Correlation    Output       Scherer

                              (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)            (8)

UK Labor IV                  0.278                                         0.262          0.095            0.247          0.041          0.048
                            (0.011)                                       (0.012)        (0.011)          (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)
UK Input-Output                             0.345                          0.070          0.323            0.064          0.300          0.159
IV                                         (0.011)                        (0.012)        (0.011)          (0.012)        (0.011)        (0.012)
UK Technology                                             0.237                                            0.054          0.202          0.195
Flows IV                                                 (0.012)                                          (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)
Notes: First-stage regressions of U.S. pairwise determinants of industrial co-location on similarly constructed U.K. instruments. All pairwise
combinations of manufacturing SIC3 industries are included, except those listed in the text, for 7000 observations. The decline in observations
from Table 5 is due to the exclusion of pairwise combinations within the same SIC2. Variable constructions are described in the data appendix.
Maximum values for the pairwise combination are employed. All variables are transformed to (mean 0, standard deviation 1) for interpretation.
Regressions are unweighted. Standard errors are in parentheses.
     Data Appendix to Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2007)
        Glenn Ellison             Edward Glaeser                       William Kerr
            MIT                  Harvard University               Harvard Business School
                                               April 2007


                                                 Abstract
         This appendix provides additional details about the data employed in Ellison, Glaeser
      and Kerr (2007).




    Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu. We are grateful to Jim Davis, Alex Bryson,
Keith Maskus, and Debbie Smeaton for data assistance. The research in this paper was conducted while the
authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data
Center (BRDC). Support for this research from NSF grant (ITR-0427889) is gratefully acknowledged. Research
results and conclusions expressed are our own and do not necessarily re‡ect the views of the Census Bureau or
NSF. This paper has been screened to insure that no con…dential data are revealed.


                                                     1
1       Overview
This note provides more detail about the coagglomeration dataset developed for Ellison, Glaeser,
and Kerr (2007). It …rst outlines the Census Bureau data employed for the construction of the
Ellison and Glaeser (1997) coagglomeration metrics. It then outlines the development of the
U.S.-based metrics of Marshall’s agglomeration theories. The note closes with the design of the
U.K.-based instrumental variables.

2       US Coagglomeration Metrics
Our estimates of industrial coagglomeration patterns are developed through con…dential data
housed by the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census of Manufacturers is conducted every …ve years
(those ending with 2 or 7) and surveys the universe of manufacturing plants operating in the U.S.
With appropriate clearance, researchers can analyze the microdata of these Censuses, which is
essential for estimating coagglomeration levels of detailed industries as public reports suppress
values that risk disclosing the operating details of individual …rms. Moreover, as the microdata
for plants can be linked longitudinally across Censuses, we can compare the coagglomeration
of existing establishment with that of new entrants. We focus on the six Census of Manufac-
turers conducted from 1972 to 1997, providing approximately 300k establishment observations
employing 17 million workers in each census year.1
    Following Proposition 1, the pairwise coagglomeration between industry pair 1 and 2 can be
analyzed with the simple formula
                                     PM
                                 c         (sm1 xm )(sm2 xm )
                                   = m=1         PM               ;
                                            1             2
                                                    m=1 xm

where M indexes geographic regions. s1i ; s2i ; : : : ; sM i are the shares of industry i’s employment
contained in each of these areas. x1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xM are some other measure of the size of these areas,
such as each area’s share of population or aggregate employment. We model xm in this paper
through the mean employment share in the region across manufacturing industries.2
    We operationalize this coagglomeration measure among manufacturing industries using the
three-digit level of the 1987 Standard Industrial Classi…cation (SIC3). Our primary measure of
the economic activity in an industry j in a given geographic area m is the total employment in
all manufacturing establishments excluding auxiliary units. The smj measure is then the share
of the industry j’s employment in region m. Throughout the paper, we simultaneously report
coagglomeration metrics calculated at the state-level (including the District of Columbia), the
    1
     The 2002 Census of Manufacturers recently became available. It employs the NAICS industry codes, however,
that make it di¢ cult to compare to earlier years. Ellison et al. (2006) discusses the calculation of coagglomeration
measures under the NAICS framework. Dunne et al. (1989), McGuckin and Peck (1992), Davis et al. (1996),
Kerr and Nanda (2006), and Autor et al. (2007) provide detailed accounts of the Census Bureau data.
   2
     While the Ellison and Glaeser (1997) formula allows for the xm to vary across industries, the equivalency
formula in Proposition 1 requires that they be the same.

                                                         1
PMSA-level, and the county-level. These variants only adjust the M demarcations on which s
and x are calculated.
    The regression sample includes the pairwise combinations of 122 SIC3 industries. Tobacco
(210s), Fur (237), and Search and Navigation Equipment (381) are excluded throughout the
paper due to major industry reclassi…cations at the plant-level in the Census of Manufacturers
that are di¢ cult to interpret. In the empirical estimations in Section 5, the remainder of Apparel
(230s), a portion of Printing and Publishing (277-279), and Secondary Non-Ferrous Metals (334)
are also excluded due to either an inability to construct appropriate Marshallian explanatory
matrices or outlier concerns in the explanatory data. Finally, we exclude same-industry pairs
for a total of 7381 unique pairwise industry combinations per Census of Manufacturers.

3     US Coagglomeration Determinants
We use industry attributes to design coagglomeration-oriented metrics that mirror each of Mar-
shall’s three theories of industry agglomeration: (1) labor market pooling, (2) proximity to input
suppliers or industrial customers to save on transportation costs, and (3) intellectual or technol-
ogy spillovers. Data Appendix Table 1 documents the summary statistics for these metrics, and
Data Appendix Table 2 lists the extreme pairwise values. A condensed version of this section
appears in the main text.

3.1     Labor market pooling
One of Marshall’s theories of industrial location is that …rms locate near one another to shield
workers from the vicissitudes of …rm-speci…c shocks. Workers are willing to accept lower wages
in locations where other …rms stand by ready to hire them (see Diamond and Simon (1990)
for evidence and Krugman (1991) for a formalization). Rotemberg and Saloner (2000) present
an alternative theory in which workers gain not because of insurance from shocks, but because
multiple …rms protect workers against ex post appropriation of investments in human capital.
Both theories predict that plants that use the same type of workers will locate near one another.
    To test the labor pooling theory, we construct a metric of the similarity in the occupational
labor requirements for pairwise industries. We build from the 1987 National Industry-Occupation
Employment Matrix (NIOEM) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The NIOEM
provides industry-level employments (at the national level) in 277 occupations. We convert the
occupational employment counts into occupational percentages for each industry and map the
BLS industries to the SIC3 framework. 52 of the 185 broadly-de…ned BLS industries are within
manufacturing. Each SIC3 industry is assumed to possess the same occupational composition
of employment as that of the NIOEM industry to which it belongs.3
   3
     The BLS has recently released a 1983-1998 longitudinal version of the NIOEM. Users should note that the
occupations employed in the standardized version di¤er slightly from those in the 1987 NIOEM we employ.
Metrics calculated from the new panel are very close to those used in this paper.


                                                     2
    Our metric of labor similarity, LaborCorrelationij , is a vector correlation of occupational
percentages between two industries. LaborCorrelationij averages 0.47 across the pairs of manu-
facturing industries, with a range of -0.05 to 1.00. The least correlated industry pair is Logging
(241) and Aircrafts and Parts (372) at -0.046. The perfect correlation maximum value re‡ects
that some NIOEM industries map to two or more SIC3 industries; the empirical speci…cations
in the main paper account for this multiplicity. The most correlated industry pair, not by con-
struction, is Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371) and Motorcycles, Bicycles, and Parts (375)
at 0.984. Finally, note that the labor pooling metrics are symmetrical for a pairwise industry
combination i,j: LaborCorrelationij = LaborCorrelationji . This is not generally the case for
the next two factors discussed, where directional ‡ows are evident.

3.2    The presence of suppliers and customers
Marshall (1920) also argues that transportation costs should induce plants to locate close to
their inputs, close to their customers, or most likely at some point optimally trading o¤ distance
between inputs and customers. To test this theory, we construct metrics of the importance of
customer or supplier relationships for pairwise industries. We build our metrics from the 1987
Benchmark Input-Output Accounts published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The “Use
of Commodities by Industries” table provides commodity-level make and use for ‡ows for very
detailed industries at the national level, which we aggregate to the SIC3 framework. While some
commodities can partly be produced by other industries than the one associated with these
commodities, we ignore this distinction and therefore interpret the numbers from the table as
providing an estimate of how much of an industry’s production is used as an input to other
industries.
   We de…ne Inputi j as the share of industry i’s inputs that come from industry j, and
Outputi!j as the share of industry i’s outputs that go to industry j. These measures run
from 0 (no input or output purchasing relationship exists) to 1 (full dependency on the paired
industry). These shares are calculated relative to all input-output ‡ows, including those to
non-manufacturing industries or to …nal consumers.
   The strongest relative customer or input dependency is Leather Tanning and Finishing’s
(311) purchases from Meat Products (201) at 0.39. The highest absolute customer dependency
(with a relative share of 23%) is Misc. Plastics Products (308) purchases from Plastic Materials
and Synthetics (282). The strongest relative output or supplier dependency is Public Building
and Related Furniture’s sales to Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371) at 82%. The highest
absolute supplier dependency (with a relative share of 32%) is Plastic Materials and Synthetics
(282) sales to Misc. Plastics Products (308). Approximately 70% of pairwise combinations have
an input-output dependency less than 0.01%.
   This construction results in four potential metrics for a pairwise industry i,j combination:
Inputi j , Inputj i , Outputi!j , and Outputj!i . Unlike the labor pooling metrics, customer and

                                                3
supplier ‡ows are not symmetrical (Inputi j 6= Inputj!i ). Moreover, the ‡ows between the
plastics industries highlights how di¤erences in industry size and the importance of ‡ows to or
from non-manufacturing industries and …nal consumers result in asymmetries between pairwise
customer and supplier dependencies (Inputi j 6= Outputj!i ). To operationalize these metrics
for the pairwise coagglomeration regressions, we take either the maximum or the mean of the
Input and Output relationships for the pairwise i,j combination. We also examine jointly the
input-output role by calculating means and maximums across all four metrics.

3.3     Intellectual or technology spillovers
Firms may also locate where they are likely to learn from other …rms. This learning can take the
form of workers learning skills from one another (as Marshall argued) or industrial innovators
copying each other (as Saxenian (1994) reports for Silicon Valley). Firms will group near one
another either because of the gains from continued presence or because the idea leading to the
opening of a new establishment came from an existing concentration of employment in nearby
plants. To test this third theory, we develop two metrics of intellectual spillovers that focus
speci…cally on the sourcing of technological innovations. The primary metric is derived from
technology ‡ow matrices developed by Scherer (1984); the second metric is derived from patent
citations.
    Of Marshall’s three theories, intellectual spillovers are the most di¢ cult to quantify and
to assess empirically. We …rst note that our metrics focus only technology spillovers. Other
intellectual or information spillovers may exist between industries that are not captured by
our design, although technology sourcing is a very important form of knowledge sharing for
the manufacturing sector. Second, the discussion below highlights that technology ‡ows are
not mutually exclusive to Marshall’s …rst two theories. Technologies embodied in products and
machinery can be transferred directly through input-output exchanges. Likewise, industries that
share similar labor pools may also be industries between which there is a greater possibility for
intellectual spillovers. Our empirical exercises attempt to isolate technology spillovers by joint
testing with these other two factors, but it is important to note that intellectual spillovers do
occur within these channels too.

3.3.1   Scherer Technology Flows

Scherer (1984) develops a technology ‡ow matrix that estimates the extent to which R&D
activity in one industry ‡ows out to bene…t another industry. This technology transfer occurs
either through a supplier-customer relationship between these two industries or through the
likelihood that patented inventions obtained in one industry will …nd applications in the other
industry. We develop two metrics, T echIni j and T echOuti!j , for these technology ‡ows that
mirror Input and Output described above. These dependencies are again directional in nature
and are calculated relative to total technology ‡ows that include non-manufacturing industries.

                                                4
The strongest relative technology ‡ows are associated with Plastic Materials and Synthetics
(282) and its relationships to Misc. Plastics Products (308), Tires and Inner Tubes (301) and
Industrial Organic Chemicals (286).
    The raw technology ‡ows are taken from Table 20.1 of Scherer (1984). Each entry in that
table is a dollar amount of 1974 R&D spending in a given industry that is estimated to ‡ow
out to bene…t another industry. We converted the 38 manufacturing industries reported by
Scherer (1984) to the SIC3 framework by apportioning entries through total value of shipments
(obtained from the 1987 Census of Manufactures). For instance, if Tmn is the entry in Scherer’s
table corresponding to the dollar ‡ow of bene…ts from industry m to industry n, and j (resp., i)
is a three-digit industry that is part of industry group m (resp., n) and accounts for a fraction
wj (resp, wi ) of all shipments in that industry group, then Tji = wi wj Tmn .

3.3.2   Patent Citation Flows

The NBER Patent Data File was originally compiled by Hall et al. (2001). This dataset
o¤ers detailed records for all patents granted by the United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce
(USPTO) from January 1975 to December 1999. Each patent record provides information about
the invention (e.g., technology classi…cation, citations of prior art) and the inventors submitting
the application (e.g., name, city). Patent citation patterns can be informative about technology
di¤usion and knowledge exchanges. Griliches (1990) and Ja¤e et al. (2000) further discuss
employing patent citations in this context.
    We construct our second knowledge spillovers metric through the patent citations. We restrict
the citations data to be citations where both the citing and cited patents are a) applied for after
1975 and b) …led within the U.S. This sample includes 4,467,625 citations. These citations are
…rst collapsed into a citation matrix using the USPTO technology categories, over 400 in number.
Combining the work of Johnson (1999), Silverman (1999) and Kerr (forthcoming), concordances
are developed between the USPTO classi…cation scheme and SIC3 industries (a probabilistic
mapping).
    The resulting metrics estimate the extent to which technologies associated with industry i
cite technologies associated with industry j, and vice versa. These P atInij and P atOutij are
normalized by total citations for the industries. In practice, there is little directional di¤er-
ence between P atInij and P atOutij due to the extensive number of citations within a single
technology …eld, in which case the probabilistic citing and cited industry distributions are the
same. These patent-based metrics have the advantage of covering the 1975-2000 period, but
inventor-to-inventor communication patterns represent a subset of the technology ‡ows Scherer
(1984) attempts to encompass.
    We primarily use the patent citations data to construct the U.K. instrument for technology
‡ows in the U.S. As further noted below, using the same technology-to-industry concordance
structurally relates the U.S. and U.K. citation matrices. Thus, it is better to use the U.K.


                                                5
citation matrices with the Scherer (1984) technology ‡ows.

4     UK Instrumental Variables
The above U.S. metrics are useful for examining correlations in the data regarding the determi-
nants of coagglomeration. A clear interpretation of the results, however, is limited by concerns
of reverse causality. Take our observed importance of customer relationships as an example. Our
exposition suggests …rms are choosing their geographic locations to be near their customers in
order to minimize transportation costs. An alternative explanation of the …ndings, however, is
that these …rm locations are determined by other factors (e.g., historical accidents). After these
locations are determined, …rms choose to sell to nearby industries. These sales are subsequently
re‡ected in the BEA Benchmark Input-Output Accounts, leading to our observed correlations.
    To recover a causal assessment, we develop instruments for our explanatory variables from
equivalent data in the U.K. Their sources and construction mirror those described for the U.S.
and are described below. The identifying assumption is that the observed input-output, labor
pooling, and technology sourcing relationships among industries in the U.K. are correlated with
the natural inter-industry dependencies but are orthogonal to any endogenous industry inter-
dependencies present in the U.S. data that arise from reverse causality. The instruments may
have applications in other contexts too.

4.1     Labor market pooling
The U.K. does not publish a detailed equivalent of the BLS’National Industry-Occupation Em-
ployment Matrix. To construct a similar matrix for the U.K., we pooled six years of the U.K.
Labour Force Survey (LFS), akin to the U.S. Current Population Survey. We then developed ma-
trices of the occupation-by-industry distribution of currently employed workers by summing over
the survey. The included surveys are March-May 2001, June-August 2002, September-November
2003, December 2004-February 2005, and April-June 2006. This pooled dataset contains 224,528
employed workers out of 520,952 respondents; 42,948 work in manufacturing. We maintained
the occupation codes Soc2km (353 classi…cations) and Sc2kmmn (84 classi…cations) at their
detailed level for estimating labor similarities. We mapped the industry code Indm92m (461
classi…cations, 265 in manufacturing) into the SIC3 system.4

4.2     The presence of suppliers and customers
The input-output matrices are taken from Maskus et al. (1994) and Maskus and Webster
(1995). These researchers began with the 1989 Input-Output Balance for the United Kingdom,
   4
     We employ a later period than our typical 1987 date to increase the available LFS sample size and ques-
tionnaire detail. The period starts after occupation classi…cations changed in 2001. The staggered surveys avoid
double counting as one-…fth of the LFS’ respondents rotate out each quarter. From 2005, the data collection
periods shift from (mar-may, jun-aug, sep-nov, dec-feb) to (jan-mar, apr-jun, jul-sep, oct-dec).


                                                       6
published by the Central Statistical O¢ ce, London, in 1992. The original table contained 102
sectors; Maskus et al. (1994) aggregated the table into 80 sectors that formed the least common
denominator with the U.S. tables they were also employing. These tables again include ‡ows
out of the manufacturing sector that are used for normalizations. We mapped the 80 Maskus et
al. sectors that corresponded to the SIC3 system. The empirical analysis in the text accounts
for this multiplicity.

4.3     Intellectual or technology spillovers
The U.K. technology ‡ows matrices are calculated through the NBER patent citations data.
The construction mirrors the U.S. citation development documented above, except that we limit
the raw sample to those citations where both the citing and cited patents are …led from the U.K.
28,134 citations from 1975-1999 are used for these metrics. It is important to note that U.K.
citations are converted from the USPC classi…cation system to the SIC3 framework using the
same technology concordances as used for converting the U.S. data. Using the U.K. citations
as an instrument for spillovers measured through the U.S. citations will deliver overstated …rst-
stages by construction. The U.K. citations are better suited as an instruments for the Scherer
(1984) technology ‡ow matrices.5
   5
     The core element of the USPC-to-industry concordances comes from Canadian data that jointly classi…ed
patents into technologies and industries. Thus combining the U.K. citations with the industry concordances
is still excludable for an instrument of U.S. technology ‡ows. By themselves, the U.K. citations can serve as
instruments for U.S. citations when using just the USPC codes; it is the industry conversion that introduces the
common structural forms.




                                                       7
References
 [1] Autor, David, Kerr, William and Kugler, Adriana (forthcoming): “Do Employment Pro-
     tections Reduce Productivity? Evidence from U.S. States,”The Economic Journal.
 [2] Davis, Steven, Haltiwanger, John and Schuh, Scott (1996): Job Creation and Destruction.
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 [3] Diamond, Charles and Simon, Curtis (1990): “Industrial Specialization and the Returns to
     Labor,”Journal of Labor Economics, 8, 175–201.
 [4] Dumais, Guy, Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. (2002): “Geographic Concentration
     as a Dynamic Process,”Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 193–204.
 [5] Dunne, Timothy, Roberts, Mark and Samuelson, Larry (1989): “Patterns of Firm Entry
     and Exit in U.S. Manufacturing Industries,”The RAND Journal of Economics, 19, 495–515.
 [6] Ellison, Glenn and Glaeser, Edward L. (1997): “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manu-
     facturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach, ”Journal of Political Economy, 105, 889–927.
 [7] Ellison, Glenn, Glaeser, Edward L., and Kerr, William (2007): “What Causes Industry
     Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns,”Working Paper.
 [8] Ellison, Glenn, Glaeser, Edward L., and Kerr, William (2006): “The Impact of the SIC-
     NAICS Conversion on Industrial Organization Metrics: Evidence Building from Establish-
     ment Data,”Census Bureau Technical Paper.
 [9] Griliches, Zvi (1990): “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
     Economic Literature, 28, 1661–1707.
[10] Hall, Bronwyn, Ja¤e, Adam and Trajtenberg, Manuel (2001): “The NBER Patent Citation
     Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,”NBER Working Paper 8498.
[11] Ja¤e, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel and Fogarty, Michael (2000): “Knowledge Spillovers and
     Patent Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors,”Papers and Proceedings, American
     Economic Review, 90, 215–218.
[12] Johnson, Daniel (1999): “150 Years of American Invention: Methodology and a First Geo-
     graphic Application,”Wellesley College Economics Working Paper 99-01.
[13] Kerr, William (forthcoming): “Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology
     Di¤usion,”The Review of Economics and Statistics.
[14] Kerr, William and Nanda, Ramana (2006): “Banking Deregulations, Financing Constraints,
     and Entrepreneurship,”HBS Working Paper 07-033.
[15] Krugman, Paul (1991): Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[16] Marshall, Alfred (1920): Principles of Economics. London, UK: MacMillan and Co.
[17] Maskus, Keith, Sveikauskas, C. and Webster, Allan (1994): “The Composition of the Human
     Capital Stock and Its Relation to International Trade: Evidence from the U.S. and Britain,”
     Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 1994, Band 130, Heft 1.
[18] Maskus, Keith and Webster, Allan (1995): “Factor Specialization in U.S. and U.K. Trade:
     Simple Departures from the Factor-Content Theory,”Swiss Journal of Economics and Sta-
     tistics, 1.

                                               8
[19] McGuckin, Robert and Peck, Suzanne (1992): “Manufacturing Establishments Reclassi…ed
     into New Industries: The E¤ect of Survey Design Rules,”Center for Economic Studies (U.S.
     Bureau of the Census).
[20] Rotemberg, Julio and Saloner, Garth (2000): “Competition and Human Capital Accumu-
     lation: A Theory of Interregional Specialization and Trade,” Regional Science and Urban
     Economics, 30, 373–404.
[21] Saxenian, AnnaLee (1994): Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley
     and Route 128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[22] Scherer, Frederic M. (1984): “Using Linked Patent Data and R&D Data to Measure Tech-
     nology Flows,” in Griliches, Zvi (ed.) R & D, Patents and Productivity. Chicago, IL: The
     University of Chicago Press.
[23] Silverman, Brian (1999): “Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Di-
     versi…cation: Toward an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost
     Economics,”Management Science, 45, 1109–1124.




                                             9
                           Data App. Table 1: 1987 Descriptive Statistics
                                                Mean            Standard         Minimum          Maximum
                                                                Deviation

                                                         A. Pairwise Coagglomeration Measures
State Total Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.               0.000            0.013            -0.065            0.207
PMSA Total Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.                0.000            0.006            -0.025            0.119
County Total Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.              0.000            0.003            -0.018            0.080
State Birth Empl. Pairwise Coaggl.               0.000            0.015            -0.082            0.259

                                                          B. Pairwise Labor Similarities Index
Labor Correlation                                0.470            0.226            -0.046            1.000

                                                    C. Pairwise Input-Output Relationship Indices
Input-Output Maximum                             0.007            0.029            0.000             0.823
Input-Output Mean                                0.002            0.010            0.000             0.240
Input Maximum                                    0.005            0.019            0.000             0.392
Input Mean                                      0.002             0.010            0.000             0.196
Output Maximum                                   0.005            0.026            0.000             0.823
Output Mean                                      0.002            0.013            0.000             0.411

                                                     D. Pairwise Technology Relationship Indices
Scherer R&D Tech Maximum                         0.005            0.026            0.000             0.625
Scherer R&D Tech Mean                            0.002            0.010            0.000             0.263
Patent Citation Tech Maximum                     0.015            0.025            0.000             0.400
Patent Citation Tech Mean                        0.007            0.014            0.000             0.203

Notes: Descriptive statistics for 1987. All pairwise combinations of manufacturing SIC3 industries are included,
except those listed in the text, for 7381 observations. Coagglomeration measures are calculated from the 1987
Census of Manufacturers. Labor Correlation indices are calculated from the BLS National Industry-Occupation
Employment Matrix for 1987. Input-Output relationships are calculated from the BEA Benchmark Input-Output
Matrix for 1987. Technology Flows are calculated from the Scherer (1984) R&D tables for the 1970s and from
the NBER Patent Citation Database for 1975-1997.
                      Data App. Table 2A: Highest Labor Correlation Metrics
Industry 1                                 Industry 2                                     Labor Cor.

Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)         Railroad Equipment (374)                         0.984
Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)         Motorcycles, Bicycles, and Parts (375)           0.984
Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)         Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment (379)     0.984
Musical Instruments (393)                  Toys and Sporting Goods (394)                    0.979
Toys and Sporting Goods (394)              Pens, Pencils, Office & Art Suppliers (395)      0.979


                      Data App. Table 2B: Lowest Labor Correlation Metrics
Industry 1                                 Industry 2                                     Labor Cor.

Logging (241)                              Aircrafts and Parts (372)                        -0.046
Logging (241)                              Engines and Turbines (351)                       -0.029
Logging (241)                              Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)               -0.029
Logging (241)                              Guided Missiles, Space Vehicles, Parts (376)     -0.029
Logging (241)                              Metalworking Machinery (354)                     -0.021
                        Data App. Table 2C: Highest Relative Customer Dependencies Metrics
Using Industry                                 Source Industry                                Input Vol.   Input Share

Leather Tanning and Finishing (311)            Meat Products (201)                               872         0.392
Sawmills and Planing Mills (242)               Logging (241)                                     6811        0.360
Leather Gloves and Mittens (315)               Leather Tanning and Finishing (311)                58         0.345
Yarn and Thread Mills (228)                    Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)           2154        0.309
Wood Containers (244)                          Sawmills and Planing Mills (242)                  548         0.271


                       Data App. Table 2D: Highest Absolute Customer Dependencies Metrics
Using Industry                                 Source Industry                                Input Vol.   Input Share

Misc. Plastics Products (308)                  Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)          13,999       0.229
Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)             Metal Forgings and Stampings (346)               11,378       0.055
Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)        Industrial Organic Chemicals (286)                9903        0.243
Fabricated Structural Metal Products (344)     Blast Furnace and Basic Steel Products (331)      7607        0.196
Metal Forgings and Stampings (346)             Blast Furnace and Basic Steel Products (331)      7011        0.249


                        Data App. Table 2E: Highest Relative Supplier Dependencies Metrics
Source Industry                                Using Industry                                 Output Vol. Output Share

Public Building and Related Furniture (253)    Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)                1681        0.823
Cement, Hydraulic (324)                        Concrete, Gypsum, and Plaster Products (327)      3380        0.819
Primary Nonferrous Metals (333)                Nonferrous Rolling and Drawing (335)              5750        0.504
Metal Cans and Shipping Containers (341)       Beverages (208)                                   5768        0.491
Logging (241)                                  Sawmills and Planing Mills (242)                  6811        0.440


                        Data App. Table 2F: Highest Absolute Supplier Dependencies Metrics
Source Industry                                Using Industry                                 Output Vol. Output Share

Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)        Misc. Plastics Products (308)                    13,999       0.322
Metal Forgings and Stampings (346)             Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371)               11,378       0.401
Industrial Organic Chemicals (286)             Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)           9903        0.179
Blast Furnace and Basic Steel Products (331)   Fabricated Structural Metal Products (344)        7607        0.153
Blast Furnace and Basic Steel Products (331)   Metal Forgings and Stampings (346)                7011        0.141
                   Data App. Table 2G: Highest Relative Technology Input Dependencies Metrics
Using Industry                              Source Industry                                 Input Vol.   Input Share

Misc. Plastics Products (308)               Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)            104         0.217
Rubber and Plastics Footwear (302)          Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             1          0.200
Tires and Inner Tubes (301)                 Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             48         0.165
Fabricated Rubber Products (306)            Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             11         0.131
Hose, Belting, Gaskets, and Packing (305)   Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             5          0.116


                   Data App. Table 2H: Highest Absolute Technology Input Dependencies Metrics
Using Industry                              Source Industry                                 Input Vol.   Input Share

Misc. Plastics Products (308)               Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)            104         0.217
Tires and Inner Tubes (301)                 Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             48         0.165
Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)     Industrial Organic Chemicals (286)                  24         0.040
Aircrafts and Parts (372)                   Computers and Office Equipment (357)                21         0.039
Petroleum Refining (291)                    Computers and Office Equipment (357)                19         0.043


                  Data App. Table 2I: Highest Relative Technology Supplier Dependencies Metrics
Source Industry                             Using Industry                                  Output Vol. Output Share

Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)     Misc. Plastics Products (308)                      104         0.172
Textile Finishing (226)                     Misc. Plastics Products (308)                       2          0.146
Ordnance and Accessories (348)              Guided Missiles, Space (Vehicles,
                                                                       )      Parts (376)       3          0.133
Broadwoven Mills, Fiber (222)               Misc. Plastics Products (308)                       2          0.086
Industrial Organic Chemicals (286)          Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             24         0.081


                  Data App. Table 2J: Highest Absolute Technology Supplier Dependencies Metrics
Source Industry                             Using Industry                                  Output Vol. Output Share

Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)     Misc. Plastics Products (308)                      104         0.172
Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)     Tires and Inner Tubes (301)                         48         0.080
Industrial Organic Chemicals (286)          Plastics Materials and Synthetics (282)             24         0.081
Computers and Office Equipment (357)        Aircrafts and Parts (372)                           21         0.018
Computers and Office Equipment (357)        Petroleum Refining (291)                            19         0.017
