                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN CHRONIC DISEASE CARE:
           WHY IS ADOPTION SO SLOW AND IS SLOWER BETTER?

                                       Michael C. Christensen
                                          Dahlia Remler

                                        Working Paper 13078
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13078


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




We thank Lawrence D. Brown, Sherry Glied, and Joshua Graff Zivin, for comments on a much earlier
version of this paper. We thank Mark Schlesinger, the editor for an earlier version of this paper and
the referees for very useful comments and suggestions. We also thank several physicians and other
researchers in health care services for conversations providing a general background for the article.
Finally, the authors would also like to thank the Danish Research Agency, Danish Ministry of Science,
Technology and Innovation, for the funding provided to conduct the research for this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Michael C. Christensen and Dahlia Remler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Information and Communications Technology in Chronic Disease Care: Why is Adoption
So Slow and Is Slower Better?
Michael C. Christensen and Dahlia Remler
NBER Working Paper No. 13078
May 2007
JEL No. I1,I10,I11,I18,IO

                                              ABSTRACT

Unlike the widespread adoption of information and communications technology (ICT) in much of
the economy, adoption of ICT in clinical care is limited. We examine how a number of not previously
emphasized features of the health care and ICT markets interact and exacerbate each other to create
barriers for adoption. We also examine how standards can address these barriers and the key issues
to consider before investing in ICT. We conclude that the ICT market exhibits a number of unique
features that may delay or completely prevent adoption, including low product differentiation, high
switching costs, and lack of technical compatibility. These barriers are compounded by the many interlinked
markets in health care, which substantially blunt the use of market forces to influence adoption. Patient
heterogeneity also exacerbates the barriers by wide variation in needs and ability for using ICT, by
high demands for interoperability, and by higher replacement costs. Technical standards are critical
for ensuring optimal use of the technology. Careful consideration of the socially optimal time to invest
is needed. The value of waiting in health care is likely to be so much greater than in other sectors because
the costs of adopting the wrong type of ICT are so much higher.

Michael C. Christensen
Columbia University
INCHOIR
600 West 168th Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10032
mcc153@columbia.edu

Dahlia Remler
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
1 Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-0916
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
Dahlia_Remler@baruch.cuny.edu
       I. Introduction

       The information and communications technologies (ICT) that have dramatically

changed the way we work, interact, and entertain ourselves also offer tremendous

opportunities in clinical care. Potential applications of ICT include remote surgery,

transmission of radiological images, interactive video visits, and continuous remote

analysis of self-monitored data. Chronic disease management can be greatly improved

from the use of ICT given the clinical importance of continuous monitoring and

adjustment of care (Shea et al 2002). For example, health care providers can have real-

time access to patients´ blood sugar measurements to adjust medications and offer advice

on lifestyle changes. Such care potentially improves short-term health outcomes and

prevents long-term complications. In an era of data beamed to personal digital assistants

and spreadsheets attached to e-mail, the technological requirements for receipt and

analysis of such biometric data are comparatively small (Starren et al 2002).



       While many commentators have heralded the great potential of ICT in health care

(Goldsmith 2000; Kassirer 2000; Lehoux et al 2000; White House 2005), others have

bemoaned the backwardness of health care and history of unmet expectations with regard

to ICT (Kleincke 2000, Ortiz & Clancy 2003; BrailerA 2005). Recently, ICT has been

lionized as a potential cure for our health care crisis (Newshour with Jim Lehrer,

February 8, 2007). While ICT adoption has been disappointing in several parts of the

economy, for example in many business-to-business firms (firms whose main customers

are other businesses), there is no industry that as a whole seems to lag as far behind as

health care (Shortliffe 2005). The most frequently cited and celebrated form of ICT for




                                                                                            4
almost two decades – the electronic medical record (EMR) – is used by only 23.9% of

physicians in the ambulatory care setting, and only 5% of all hospitals for computerized

physician order entry (Jha et al 2006).



       Why do we see so little adoption of ICT by health care providers, especially

hospitals? Some very obvious obstacles include a general lack of demonstrated cost-

effectiveness of ICT (Whitten et al 2002), which limits insurers’ willingness to reimburse

for the use of the technology. Furthermore, without direct reimbursement, few providers

are prepared to take on the financial risk of adopting new technologies (Cutler, Feldman,

and Horwitz 2005). The extent of behavioral change involved in technology adoption

also affects both the rapidity and extent of adoption (Hall 2003). Some innovations in

medical care, such as the switch to an EMR involve major behavioral changes and

potentially imply temporary efficiency losses. Because medical errors can have severe

and irreversible consequences, errors made in the transition to new technologies are also

less tolerated than in other sectors. Finally, there are significant legal issues concerning

adoption such as licensure, liability, malpractice, confidentiality and compliance with the

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (Kuszler 1999; Spielberg 1999;

Stanberry 2000; Gottlieb et al 2005).



       In this paper we examine how several not previously emphasized features of the

ICT and health care markets interact and exacerbate each other to act as barriers for

adoption of ICT in clinical care. Adoption of ICT is generally plagued by problems of

high switching costs, technical compatibility in the system(s) of IT, and low product




                                                                                               5
differentiation. In health care, these adoption problems are compounded by the many

interlinked markets across payers, providers and consumers which produce a significant

mismatch in the financial incentives for adoption. The heterogeneity of consumers with

regard to their needs, ability and motivation to use ICT is greater than in other industries.

In particular the motivation and ability to use ICT is likely to vary widely across chronic

diseases and among patients with the same disease conditional on age, disease severity,

and socio-economic status. The greater heterogeneity raises the demands for the

interoperability of the ICT systems for information storage and exchange and

consequently the costs of such technologies. The greater heterogeneity also raises the

costs of replacing technologies, which may effectively lock patients and providers into

suboptimal technologies. The fact that decisions to adopt ICT are not easily reversible

raises the bar for the technological requirements for both hard-and software in clinical

applications.



       We also examine the important policy questions of what it will require to achieve

adoption of ICT in health care and when adoption of ICT ideally should take place. To

arrive at interoperable ICT systems, a set of specific communication and technology

standards in health care are needed. Such standards need to allow systems of ICT to

"speak to each other" to facilitate a socially optimal use of technology. What should be

the principles guiding the development of such standards? What should be the process for

setting them? Who are the stakeholders, and what role should they play? Because

decisions to adopt ICT in health care are not easily reversible it is also crucial to consider

the optimal pace of ICT adoption given the uncertainty about its value. Too early




                                                                                              6
adoption of ICT may not be socially optimal as the health care system is likely to be

stuck with the technology once adopted.



       In our analysis we take a societal perspective to determine how we can make the

most cost-effective use of health care ICT to benefit society. Others have considered the

potential role of ICT in health care and in the economy more generally (Danzon and

Furukawa 2001), the health and economic benefits of ICT in health care (Hillestad et al

2005), and the role of standards to accomplish such benefits (Halamka et al 2005;

BrailerB 2005). The potential of ICT to affect quality of care has also been considered,

and it has been suggested that quality improvement itself should be the primary

motivation for adopting ICT as opposed to direct cost savings (Goodman 2005; Taylor,

Manzo, and Sinnett 2002). Our analysis, however, highlights how a number of not

previously emphasized features of the health care and ICT markets create barriers for the

usual economic incentives to adopt technology that benefit consumers. It also discusses

how standards can address these barriers and the key issues to consider before investing

in ICT. While our analysis focuses on the role of ICT adoption to support chronic disease

care, many of the analytical insights presented apply to health care ICT more generally.



       The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II briefly discusses information

and communications technology in health care and its potential to alter and improve

clinical care, especially in the context of chronic diseases. Section III looks at the issue of

technology adoption, first in the standard competitive market and secondly in the special

ICT market. Section IV then considers the unique features of the health care market in




                                                                                              7
regards to barriers for ICT adoption, and how these features interact with the special

features of the ICT market to exacerbate these barriers. Section V delineates the

principles that should guide the design of ICT standards to ensure an optimal use of ICT,

the minimum requirements for such standards, and the process of setting standards.

Finally, section VI discusses the socially optimal timing of investments in ICT. Section

VII concludes by summarizing the key insights presented on how adoption of ICT in

health care can be achieved and when the adoption ideally should take place.



       II. Information and Communications Technologies in Medical Care

       The use of ICT in the practice of medicine is generally referred to as telemedicine

and medical informatics. While the terms are often used together, they are actually

distinct. In formal terms telemedicine is defined as “the use of electronic information and

communications technology to provide health care when distance separates the

participants” (Institute of Medicine 1996; Grigsby and Sanders 1998). Telemedicine

therefore comprises all forms of electronic communication, including interactive video,

the phone, the fax, text messages and images transmitted through cell phones, and all

types of web-based communication. Any communication between patients and providers

and among providers, whether real-time or “store and forward”, is covered by the

definition of telemedicine. The National Library of Medicine (2001) defines medical

informatics as “the field of information science concerned with the analysis and

dissemination of medical data through the application of computers to various aspects of

health care and medicine”. The central difference between medical informatics and

telemedicine is the integration and analysis of electronic data. When a primary care




                                                                                           8
physician (PCP) sends an e-mail to the patient with the result of a clinical test this is an

example of telemedicine only, whereas any form of computer-assisted and initiated

analysis of electronic data to support health care delivery is an example of medical

informatics at work.



       A taxonomy of four categories roughly describes the many potential applications

of ICT for chronic disease care. From the lowest to the highest level of technology, they

are: 1) technologies that support patient self-care and education, 2) patient-provider and

provider-provider communication, 3) electronic data storage and data sharing across

providers, and 4) technologies that combine all of the applications above.



       In the first category, both medical devices for self-monitoring and interactive web

sites for education on chronic diseases represent long-standing use of ICT. Numerous

firms, including most insurers and some pharmacy benefits management companies,

maintain web sites to support people living with chronic conditions (e.g. Medco Health

www.medcohealth.com, accessed January 31, 2007). Through this medium, patients can

enter and store personal health data, and the site provides summary reports and simple

graphics to inform about disease status and offer advice for enhanced self-care. Medical

devices to support self-care of chronic diseases also exist in a large variety. For instance,

an annual guide for all people living with diabetes, the Diabetes Forecast, listed in

January 2006 eight different software packages that accept and analyze data from blood

glucose meters.




                                                                                                9
       The very hallmark of telemedicine, communication by the phone,

videoconferencing or e-mails between patients and providers and between providers, falls

in the second category. Disease management of heart disease brings a number of

examples of how such means of communication potentially bring significant clinical and

economic benefits (Bondmass et al 1999; Jerant et al 2001). In a population of patients

with congestive heart failure (CHF), Roglieri et al (1997) for instance examined the effect

of a weekly phone call from a nurse obtaining information about the patient’s health by

administrating a standardized health questionnaire. The nurse also sent targeted

educational mailings and potential alerts to PCPs depending on patients´ responses. They

found a reduction in readmissions for all subjects of 63% over a one-year period together

with lower average length of stay and use of the emergency room. In a more advanced

telemedicine application in the management of CHF, the use of a two-way interactive

video technology for home care reduced hospital admissions by 82% and use of the

emergency room by 77% (Chetney 2003).



       In the third category, the EMR probably represents the most well-known example

of software that provides for communication and data integration among providers. The

Veterans Health Administration (VA) has been a leader with an advanced system of

electronic medical records linking pharmacy, laboratories, and all medical providers

(Perlin, Collins and Kaplowitz 1999). The system has been considered instrumental for

the impressive outcomes achieved for people living with diabetes and other chronic

diseases in the VA (Sawin et al 2004). In economic terms, the system has increased

productivity by nearly 6% per year since it was fully implemented in 1999 (Evans,




                                                                                          10
Nichol and Perlin 2006). Another example of an integrated delivery system adopting the

EMR is Kaiser Permanente (2002). Physicians in this network can order patient

medication online and receive clinical results from laboratory and radiology departments

at desktop computers in their own office or in the exam room. Other professionals in the

network such as nurses and pharmacists can also lock into the system and read up-to-date

clinical information about all patients in the network. Through a company website, the

insured population can search for health information and request appointments, refill

prescriptions or send questions to a nurse or pharmacy. There are few economic

evaluations of the potential of the EMR, yet recent evidence seems to suggest that the

value to the individual health care provider can be substantial. In an evaluation of the

integrated delivery network of Brigham and Women´s hospital and Massachusetts

General Hospital, the net financial benefits of the EMR was estimated at $86,4000 per

provider over a five-year period (Wang et al 2003). The cost-savings were primarily

attributed to lower drug expenditures, improved utilization of radiology tests, enhanced

capture of charges and reduced billing errors.



       The most advanced form of ICT in chronic disease care – provider and insurer

software that continuously integrates and analyzes provider and self-monitored patient

data coupled with communication technology, represents the fourth category. The

opportunities for rapid, effective and inexpensive interventions by providers and patients

seem endless. Computers that automatically and continuously monitor patient status,

treatment protocols and care provided is not technically an unrealistic example of how

ICT can deliver entirely new forms of care in the future. The technology has so far been




                                                                                           11
applied to continuous remote clinical monitoring with significant benefits to patients and

payers. In management of hypertension, home blood pressure monitoring has been

effective in controlling blood pressure, diagnosing “white coat” hypertension, targeting

organ damage, improving prediction of hypertension-related morbidity, improving patient

compliance, and allowing faster therapy adjustment (Asmar and Zanchetti 2000; Artinian

et al 2001). The technology is also used by major health insurers to ensure an optimal use

of pharmaceuticals among its members. By applying a “clinical algorithm engine”,

Aetna´s MedQuerySM program for instance searches through pharmacy, laboratory, and

medical claims data, which the software then combine with demographic information to

identify problems and gap in the use of medications among its members

(www.aetnapharmacy.com, Accessed March 15, 2007).



       All the examples provided of ICT in chronic disease care potentially carry one or

more societal benefits from better health outcomes, lower direct use of health care and/or

lower indirect costs. As evident from the CHF program, fast and frequent communication

between patients and providers allow for better monitoring of patient adherence to

disease management. The evidence from remote monitoring of hypertension illustrates

how frequent collection of data allows the provider to act more quickly and adjust

treatment regimens. The experience of the EMR in the VA program demonstrates how

assembly of information from different sources, such as laboratory tests, hospital, and

self-monitored data allows for a better overview of patient status. In general, the wider

and more rapid dissemination of information and data analysis, presentation and

interpretation allow many more health care professionals to provide quick input to the




                                                                                            12
chronic care of the patient. Additionally, because ICT may reduce the time needed for

patient self-care, a lower non-financial benefit, “compliance” may be enhanced with

better health outcomes as a result. Equally important such improvement in short-term

outcomes, e.g. a lower blood pressure or cholesterol level, may reduce the risk of long-

term cardiovascular complications and premature death (Lloyd-Jones et al 2002).



       The cost-savings demonstrated from better management of drug expenditures and

use of radiology tests by use of the EMR also indicate that lower direct resource use may

be possible. The example of quicker detection and prevention of acute problems among

individuals living with heart disease also lowered costs by avoidance of emergency room

visits and hospitalizations. A potentially very important, yet unmeasured, cost-saving

aspect of ICT relates to time spent on patient care. For instance, patients and providers

can save time through avoidance of phone tag. Physicians and nurses can save time in

collecting and disseminating information by avoiding repeated handwriting,

photocopying, searching paper files and deciphering handwriting. Case management

economies of scale may exists as nurses can communicate much more efficiently with

patients than through in-person office visits. Coordination of care may also be less time-

consuming given the ability to communicate quickly all relevant information in easy to

digest form to specialist consultants and other providers while at the same time improve

the quality of care and hence treatment outcomes. The Institute of Medicine (2003a,

2003b) recently described in a series of reports how many providers communicate

inefficiently with each other with implications for health care quality and outcomes.




                                                                                            13
       For the individual provider or hospital, the initial cost of adopting and

implementing technologies such as the EMR may appear prohibitive (Burton, Anderson

and Kues 2004), and the economic savings from avoided hospitalization and reduction in

unnecessary tests may not benefit them financially. However, from a societal perspective,

and in the payer community, ICT offers potential for lowering direct resource use both in

the short and long-term through avoidance of hospitalizations and emergency care and

improved intermediate outcomes. In a recent estimation of the potential health and

financial benefits of health care ICT, Hillestad et al (2005) estimated that use of the EMR

in prevention and management of asthma, CHF, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

and diabetes could result in $139 billion in total savings per year, a total of 400,000 fewer

deaths, and 42 million fewer days lost from work, if fully implemented and utilized.

Walker et al (2005) evaluated the financial benefits of completely standardized health

care ICT across providers (hospitals and medical group practices), independent

laboratories, radiology centers, pharmacies, payers, public health departments and other

providers. Their most optimistic projection implies net financial savings of $77.8 billion

per year if fully implemented on a national scale.



       Finally, the greatest societal benefits may accrue directly to people living with

chronic diseases, their families and their employers, rather than payers or even providers.

The reduction in indirect costs from less travel time, less waiting time, and less time off

work can be considerable – both for patients and family members who accompany them

during hospital and office visits. All of the examples of telemedicine described

potentially imply less time needed for patient-provider interaction. As evident from the




                                                                                           14
examples of ICT in management of CHF and hypertension, software that allows for

quicker and more efficient disease management also holds the same time saving potential

through avoided office and ER visits.



        Overall, ICT applied to chronic disease care offer the potential of “more for less”

from a societal perspective. The technology may make it possible to produce more health

without increasing the cost per patient treated or alternatively generate the same health

outcomes at a lower cost. It is also possible that the technology can generate previously

unattainable levels of health. However, the health economic potential of ICT will not

necessarily result in lower total health care expenditures (Goodman 2005). Rather,

because it is now cheaper to achieve a given amount of health improvement, it may be

worth buying so much more health improvement that total health care spending increases.

In general, while technological improvement can allow us to provide the same level of

health at a lower cost, it can potentially also make it worthwhile to spend even more

resources on health care to greatly improve health (Weisbrod 1991). Indeed, this is one

very reasonable interpretation of society’s growing health care expenditures (Glied 1997;

Cutler and McClellan 2001). Of course, if payers only consider the cost of providing such

care and not the benefits provided, the value of many ICT applications will be highly

uncertain (Cutler, Feldman and Horwitz 2005). The great heterogeneity of ICT – from

interactive web sites to the completely integrated EMR – also implies an equal variation

in the value of the technology to society. Technologies that simply shifts costs across

providers or among providers and payers do not offer “more for less” and carry no value

to society.




                                                                                            15
       III. Technology Adoption

       In standard competitive markets, economic forces automatically push for adoption

of technologies that are socially beneficial. In this section, we first briefly summarize the

adoption that economic theory would predict of technology used as input to production of

goods and services in the standard competitive market. Secondly, we contrast this

adoption pattern with the adoption patterns that can be expected for ICT, both for the type

of ICT used as input into the production of goods and services and the ICT used directly

by private consumers.



       Standard Market: Adoption of Technology

       In a standard competitive market, consumers who comparison shop and “vote

with their feet” provide the pressure for lower prices, higher quality and more desirable

products. Producers have an automatic incentive to adopt a technology that lowers

production costs as they can charge lower prices and attract more consumers.

Consequently, even if a technology requires a substantial investment, implementation or

transition costs, a firm will make that investment if there is a net reduction in production

costs. For example, in the last decades the banking industry has spent enormous sums

transferring existing data into new information systems and providing on-line financial

services to private consumers and companies (Cavallo and Rossi 2001).




                                                                                            16
       In general, consumers will chose a higher price and higher quality product over a

lower price, lower quality product if they find the added value greater than the added

cost. Again, firms have an incentive to adopt a technology that increases quality if the

additional amount consumers are willing to pay exceeds production costs of the new

product, including adoption costs. Of course, uncertainty about consumer preferences and

risk aversion by firms somewhat reduces this optimal response by firms. Finally, if an

entirely new product is created, consumers will choose to purchase it if its value to them

exceeds its price. Once again, firms will have an automatic incentive to adopt the

technology to produce that product if consumers’ willingness to pay exceeds their total

production costs, including the costs of technology adoption.



       More generally a standard perfectly competitive market with no increasing returns

to scale will result in every firm adopting the amount and type of technology needed to

operate in the most efficient way. In the short-run, firms increase profits by investing in

new technology and producing more efficiently. In the long run, inefficient firms are

priced out of the market. Thus, the optimal mix of labor and capital is achieved through

exit and investment in new technology. When there are economies of scale, as when there

are large fixed costs, firms still have every financial incentive to adopt technology that

will provide additional profits. However, new technology may alter the optimal scale of

the firm adopting the technology. For example, technological advances in the retail

sector, such as inventory management software, are difficult for small firms to adopt.

Larger retailers adopt the new technology and consequently enjoy a cost advantage.




                                                                                             17
Through exit and entry and mergers, the retail market has become more concentrated

(Hosken and Simpson 2001).



       ICT Market: Adoption of IC Technology

       A critical issue in technology adoption is whether or not the technology interacts

with the technology of other producers or consumers. For example, to be valuable, a

travel agent’s software must interact with the computer systems of airlines and other

agents in the travel industry. This is known as a network effect (Rohlfs 1974; Farrell and

Saloner 1985; Katz and Shapiro 1985; Katz and Shapiro 1994; Shy 2001). The

importance of network effects varies from case to case, but potentially they slow down or

completely halt the adoption of a new technology if they are large enough. In general, the

private benefits consumers derive from joining a network do not include the benefits that

accrue to other existing consumers in the network. This may imply that the private

marginal benefits are smaller than the social marginal benefits, and that the equilibrium

network size as a result is smaller that the socially optimal network size. Network effects

can also influence the optimal scale of the firm by providing an incentive to bring more

or all producers into one firm, so that the network effect is internal to the firm.



       In contrast to the importance of economies of scale in the standard competitive

market, the ICT market is primarily driven by economies of networks (Shapiro and

Varian 1999). Networks, in this context, are understood as both physical networks such

as telephone or airline networks and virtual networks such as networks of compatible fax

machines or networks of compatible software programs for personal computers. The




                                                                                            18
value of networks fundamentally depends on the number of existing users in the

networks. This key economic characteristic is also known as network externalities and

demand-side economies of scale. Network externalities are normally positive in the sense

that when one consumer joins a network, the network gets bigger and all existing

consumers in the network – whether companies or private consumers using ICT – benefit

from this expansion.



       An additional, and intrinsically related, principle of economies of networks is a

phenomenon known as positive feedback (Katz and Shapiro 1994). Positive feedback is

based on the premise that large networks are more attractive to users than smaller ones

and that customers seek the network they expect to offer the best connection. This implies

that expectations of a network effect may eventually lead to the realization of that

network effect. For instance, in the early days of the market for fax machines the value of

existing fax machines increased as one new customer bought a fax machine and thereby

joined the network. Furthermore, other potential customers were now more tempted to

buy a fax machine and join the network as the value of the network had increased. This

phenomenon, known as Metcalfe´s law (Shapiro and Varian 1999), mathematically states

that the value of a network goes up as the square of the number of users. Positive

feedback is driven by the “bigger is better” aspect of networks and positive feedback

drives the network externalities.



       The concept of positive feedback is crucial for understanding the adoption of ICT.

The dynamics of positive feedback imply that ICT manufacturers with large market




                                                                                           19
shares are likely to get even bigger while smaller manufacturers are likely to eventually

disappear. This may imply dominance of a single firm with little diversity in the

technologies available. A number of historic examples exist in the ICT market where

manufacturers have competed for the same market characterized by strong positive

feedback and only one of them have emerged as the winner (Katz and Shapiro 1994;

Shapiro and Varian 1999). A case in point was the replacement of Atari with Nintendo as

the preferred home video game back in the 1980s. In 1985 Atari dominated the market

for home video games, and the company had shown little interest in bringing new

innovative products to the market. However within a year after launch, Nintendo was the

most popular game on the market, and the very popularity of Nintendo attracted more

game developers to write games specifically for the Nintendo systems which further

increased the popularity of Nintendo systems among the consumers. The positive

feedback that occurred with more users enticing more product development, which

attracted even more users and more development, illustrates a market dynamic where

consumer demand for the “winning technology” drives the choice of technology and

network. This also implies that the competing network and technology with the smallest

number of users may exit the market completely.



       Positive feedback generally implies fewer suppliers and hence less product

differentiation due to this winner-take-all characteristic (Katz & Shapiro 1994). While

positive feedback can occur in the standard market, such positive feedback rest on

supply-side economies of scale, i.e. large firms typically have lower unit costs. As

competition sets a limit to the size of market players (i.e. it is harder to efficiently manage




                                                                                            20
large corporations) there are also limits to the benefits of supply-side economies of scale.

In the standard market we therefore expect more suppliers and hence more product

differentiation than in markets marked by network externalities such as the ICT market.

The effect of low production differentiation on the decision to adopt ICT eventually

depends on consumers and their user requirements, but in general slower and possibly

lower adoption of ICT can be expected than for other technologies.



       The cost of ICT adoption is also more complicated than the adoption costs of

other forms of technology. Aside from the pure acquisition costs, training is frequently

needed in how to use the new technology, which may imply significant short-term costs

in terms of the time spent away from other productive activity. For the type of ICT where

new electronic communication technologies replaces old paper records, old electronic

systems, or the merger of existing electronic systems with new systems, there is also the

switching cost of such technology adoption. In fact, switching costs are the norm rather

than the exception in the ICT market (Shapiro and Varian 1999). Because information is

stored, manipulated, and communicated using a “system” consisting of multiple pieces of

hardware and software and because specialized training is required for using each

specific system, there are switching costs associated with each of these interlinked

technologies. Furthermore, when a company has made significant durable investments in

complementary technologies that are specific to a brand machine and when these

investments have different economic lifetimes there may not be any easy time to start

using a new incompatible system. In these situations, consumers face switching costs

which may effectively prevent adoption of new technologies.




                                                                                           21
       The cost of ICT, and in particular the switching costs of ICT, also needs to be

understood as more than just an economic barrier for adoption. When the costs of

switching from one brand of technology to another are substantial, consumers may in fact

be locked-in to a specific form of ICT, either at the system or vendor level. Additionally,

depending on the industry, the risk of using a new vendor or technology, especially an

unproven one, can be huge given the potentially very high costs of system disruption or

break-down. Such break-down may imply irreversible damage to the company or

individual consumer. Because the decision to adopt a new technology is not easily

reversible, adopters of ICT need to think carefully about the added value of adopting the

technology far into the future. When there is uncertainty about the future requirements of

the technology consumers may be very reluctant to adopt a new technology and this can

also halt the adoption process more generally. In summary, when there are substantial

switching costs associated with ICT users may be locked into to a specific technology

and infrastructure for long periods of time, which may inhibit adoption of new forms of

ICT.



       Technology compatibility (or interoperability) also plays a much more prominent

role in the adoption of ICT than other forms of technology. The value of any information

and communication technology is fundamentally linked to the ability to connect through

a common technical standard with other electronic means of data storage and

communication. From the perspective of an ICT manufacturer a fundamental trade-off

therefore exists in developing new products and technologies for the ICT market; should




                                                                                         22
the products be compatible with existing products and thereby accept old performance

standards or should they bring about a completely new technology platform that offer

vastly superior performance? When new products are compatible with older forms of

technology, and thereby allow for their continued usage, the opportunity to drastically

improve overall ICT performance will be less than when introducing a completely new

technology. However, the costs of adopting compatible technologies will be lower as

well. Conditional on the type of consumer, the size of switching costs can be the

determining factor for whether adoption of completely new forms of ICT takes place at

all. The trade-off basically highlights the conflict that exists when innovative

technologies clashes with network externalities and their associated switching costs

(Shapiro & Varian 1999). Lack of compatibility represents a unique barrier for adoption

of ICT technology, and potentially delays the adoption of vastly superior technology for

long periods of time.



       Finally, while problems of compatibility can be addressed by common technical

standards it is not obvious that these will develop in the competitive market place. In fact,

incompatible technologies often compete in a high-stakes winner-take-all battle, where

the market outcome can either be a truce with multiple producers, a duopoly with only

two competing producers or a fight to death where no technology survives commercially

(Katz and Shapiro 1994). A critical element in such competition is the magnitude of the

switching costs for each rival technology. A case in point is the AM stereo radio, which

never became a success in broadcasting (Shapiro & Varian 1999). Having failed to

endorse one stereo standard in the early 1980s, the Federal Communications Commission




                                                                                          23
decided to let the market choose the best standard and hence bring about the next

generation of stereo radios. Four rival systems competed for the interest of radio

broadcasters and receiver manufacturers, yet the substantial costs of the new AM

compatible radios, the uncertainty about the winning technology, and their incremental

value to existing radios implied little interest in any of the systems among consumers.

The case illustrates that rival, incompatible, technologies can slow down or stop the

adoption of ICT completely, and that a new technology must offer significant value-

added to initiate positive feedback. The experience also illustrates that ICT adoption may

be especially difficult when multiple groups of adopters need to coordinate and agree on

a common technical standard.



       To summarize, the ICT market has a number of unique features compared to the

standard competitive market, which may delay or completely prevent the adoption of

beneficial technologies. The main barriers to ICT adoption as compared to adoption of

other forms of technology include low product differentiation due to positive feedback

and market dominance, high switching costs with resulting lock-in to potentially

suboptimal technologies, and lack of technical compatibility of all the different

components of an ICT system.



IV: Health care and the ICT Market

       Interlinked Markets and Bundled Goods:

       It is well known there are many market failures in health care (Arrow 1963; Pauly

1974; Rice and LaBelle 1989; Dranove and White 1987; Aaron 1991). We will only




                                                                                          24
discuss the market failures and structural characteristics of the health care market relevant

for the economic incentives to adopt ICT that benefits patients. Indeed, many of the

relevant barriers to ICT adoption are not related to moral hazard (the tendency of

individuals, once insured, to behave in a way that makes use of health care more likely)

or adverse selection (the tendency of those experiencing greater health risks to apply for

more health care coverage), the two most commonly stressed market failures in health

care. As in the analysis of the ICT market, we examine adoption by firms (providers) and

consumers (patients). Provider ICT is understood as technologies that enhance medical

care, while patient ICT consists of the various technologies that support self-care and

management of chronic diseases.



       Most health care services are covered through medical insurance. Thus, any

discussion of the economic incentives for technology adoption among patients and

providers in the health care market must consider both the operations of the insurance

market as well as how insurers and health care providers interact. To make things even

more complicated, health insurance is most commonly purchased or provided by either

employers or the government. Consequently, there are three interlinked markets in health

care: health care services, health care insurance and the labor market (or the political

economy). The result of all these complicated linkages is that market forces from

consumers to the health care providers are far more indirect and blunter than are the

market forces in most industries. The forces must be transmitted through each stage and

each stage brings its own transaction costs.




                                                                                           25
       Health care services that are not covered by insurance but purchased directly out-

of-pocket are not subject to the same “clunky” market forces but to more direct

conventional market forces. Consequently, producers have more forceful and direct

incentives to innovate based on consumer preferences. For example, there has been rapid

growth in psychotherapy via e-mail and other internet media. Psychotherapy is often not

covered by conventional insurance with approximately forty-percent of all mental health

care expenditures paid out-of-pocket among the privately insured (Zuvekas 2001). There

is even an e-therapy consumer information web site (http://www.metanoia.org/imhs/,

accessed January 31, 2007) to provide independent information and help consumers.

Another example is the “boutique” medical practices that do not accept insurance and

have relatively wealthy clients who can afford to pay for regular health care out-of-

pocket (Belluck 2002). Long-term care is also not covered by conventional private health

insurance and there is emerging use of “smart technologies” for communications and

monitoring of the elderly living alone (Wallace 2003). Finally, out-of-pocket payments in

primary care for simple technologies such as e-mail have also seen the light of day, and

patients appear increasingly willing to pay for such services (Andrews 2003).



       Most health care services, however, are covered by insurance and are therefore

subject to the interlinked market forces. For services covered by standard health care

coverage, patients cannot demand that physicians provide new services or change the

form in which services are provided. Consider what is involved in trying to persuade

physicians to substitute e-mail for in-person visits if the physicians are only paid for in-

person visits. The usual market mechanism transmits preferences of consumers into




                                                                                           26
incentives for producers through consumers “voting with their feet” or the fear that

consumers will vote with their feet. Few patients will decide to switch primary care

physicians just for the option to use e-mail. Too many aspects of health care services are

bundled together in one primary care physician for a perfectly competitive market

outcome. More importantly, to the extent that e-mail substitutes for reimbursed services,

no physician paid fee-for-service will want to substitute too much e-mail, even as a

means of attracting more patients, because of the loss in financial profits. The phone is an

excellent example of how payment drives the use of technologies. Physicians generally

hesitate to use the phone in today’s practice of medicine as a phone call potentially

substitutes for a reimbursed in-person visit. Some use of the phone does occur, in

particular for follow-up visits and emergency situations (Spielberg 1998; Car and Sheikh

2003) and in some medical specialties more than others. However, limited use of the

phone to situations where the quality of the care is otherwise compromised or the

opportunity cost to the patient is excessive stand in sharp contrast to its widespread use in

the rest of the economy.



       In principle, the market forces that are at work in the health care system should

work through insurers. In order to persuade the insurer to change payment policy, and

hence persuade providers to adopt ICT, an individual would lobby the insurer or simply

change insurer. But due to the highly bundled nature of health care insurance, switching

insurer has a myriad consequences and it is difficult to imagine consumers able to

effectively target such a small and narrow piece of insurance as payment for e-mail for

instance through this mechanism. Additionally, many individuals with employer-




                                                                                           27
sponsored insurance only have one or two health plans to choose from, making the option

of switching illusive.



       Using the example of payment for e-mails, employers could pressure insurers to

change their e-mail payment policies if enough employees felt strongly enough about the

subject and indeed we do observe market forces at work through this mechanism, such as

the push for point-of-service plans. However, the employer motivation for doing this is

ultimately rooted in the labor market and the fear of losing employees if they are unhappy

with their health care. Since a job is much more than simply a source of health care

benefits, employees are unlikely to leave a job merely because their physicians do not use

e-mail, and hence simple employee pressure is not likely to initiate adoption. An

additional employer motivation for caring about health care benefits is that employee

dissatisfaction may lead to lower productivity or lost work days, even if it does not result

in employee departure or higher wage demands. If the employer is large enough and

cares enough about the availability of health care ICT for employees, the traditional

market forces should work as the employer can state a credible threat of switching sales

to another insurer. However, given the low use of ICT in health care today it appears that

large employers simply do not see these benefits as significant enough to pressure

insurers. In addition, many small employers, constituting approximately three-quarters of

all businesses in the U.S. and employing one-third of the private sector workforce (U.S.

General Accounting Office 2001), have little market power and will be unlikely to have

any real leverage in negotiating with insurers.




                                                                                          28
       Government provided insurance, such as Medicare, requires effective lobbying

from consumers (as voters) and providers to change government payment policy. As is

well known, the political economy favors the preferences of the median voter and is

subject to a variety of market failures in the political economy (Congleton 2002).

Historical examples do exist of successful political lobbying such as the repeal of the

Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 following a hefty chase of the chairman of

the House Ways and Means Committee down the streets of Chicago by angry senior

citizens (Sparer 1996). However on issues of less fundamental nature, the road from the

consumer to the politician to the political compromise and the eventual impact on

provider behavior is generally a strenuous one. Health care provider associations, such as

the American Academy of Family Physicians and the American Hospital Association,

have much stronger means for influencing government policy, and indeed we have seen

limited changes to Medicare payment policy for the type of ICT that directly benefits

health care providers in rural areas (Puskin 2001).



       Private and public insurers will be motivated to provide payment for ICT if its

adoption results in sufficient net cost-savings by lowering use of other forms of care.

Insurers may also adopt ICT to improve the quality of health care and hence improve

patient outcomes. In these cases, there is no market failure. The barrier right now is a lack

of demonstrated cost-effectiveness of ICT in chronic disease care from the insurers’

perspective (Whitten et al 2002). Even if payment for ICT enhances quality of care,

improves health outcomes, and as a result lowers health care costs over the life span of

patients, such long-term cost-effectiveness potential is not relevant to many private




                                                                                           29
insurers. Both existing health care payment designs and the usual time horizon for private

health coverage prevent many insurers from internalizing the resource savings resulting

from the use of ICT. While payment rates in theory should adjust in the long-run to

technology driven changes in medical care, any form of payment designed as a fee-for-

service is bound to always be one step behind the technological progress (Christensen

and Remler 1997). Without significant changes in current payment mechanisms and

coverage designs private insurers have good reasons to be more skeptical of the cost-

effectiveness of ICT than companies in other industries.



       Finally, health care providers may have an economic incentive to adopt ICT if the

technology results in sufficient savings of other resources to provide a reasonable rate of

return or if they are reimbursed directly for the use of ICT in clinical applications. As for

insurers, the problem now is a lack of demonstrated cost-effectiveness of ICT in chronic

disease care. In addition, without direct payment for use of ICT, the economic barrier for

use of ICT is even higher for providers than insurers, since existing payment forms

(predominately fee-for-service) are tied to the volume of services provided rather than the

overall health care delivered within a given time period.



       The traditional basis of payment in chronic disease care also interferes with ICT

adoption (Miller et al 2005; Christensen and Remler 2007). The contrast with the rapid

and extensive adoption of other new medical technologies reveals the problem (Gelijns,

Zivin, and Nelson 2001). Telemedicine and medical informatics are new ways of

delivering care, not simply another procedure. Decisions about adopting another




                                                                                           30
procedure are very different. For example, the MRI was just another diagnostic test and

existing payment methods and benefits schemes covered diagnostic procedures. In

contrast, repeated monitoring of data and its analysis through software is a new form of

“care” that cannot easily be added to existing payment systems or benefits. E-mail, like

telephone calls, is another way of providing the same kind of care that is normally

provided in an office visit.



       The size of the development and implementation costs of ICT can vary from

industry to industry, yet they are likely to be particularly large in health care in general,

and in chronic disease care in particular. Compared to banking services, health care is

much more heterogeneous in the type of consumers encountered and the type of services

required. Health care and resource requirements vary immensely across chronic diseases.

Moreover, even patients with the same type of chronic disease vary significantly

depending on the disease severity, age and socioeconomic status. The development and

adoption of the EMR for instance is intrinsically complicated due to clinical complexity

and the need to serve many purposes. Implementing a new medical record involves

entering existing data from paper medical records, an extremely time-consuming task. If

existing data is not entered, then providers must work with parallel paper and electronic

records for an extended transition period. Additionally, much of the value of having

provider data in electronic form results from integration of data across providers. The

magnitude of the network effect can be enormous, yet its realization requires a collective

decision to adopt ICT among many providers who may stand to gain very differently

from this adoption.




                                                                                                31
       Finally, as in much of health economics, selection really undermines the societal

benefits of the competitive process (Newhouse 1994). An insurer does not want to

provide a service that disproportionately attracts more expensive individuals. Thus,

payment for e-mails that are particularly attractive in chronic disease management can

have adverse financial repercussions if they disproportionately attract people with chronic

diseases without providing sufficient additional compensation through risk adjustment.

Alternatively, payment for e-mail could disproportionately attract relatively young and

non-severe patients, because they are more likely to be computer-literate. Thus, the

impact of selection on incentives for ICT adoption is ambiguous and clearly depends on

the specific form of payment (Christensen and Remler 2007).



       In summary, bundling at the health care service level, bundling at the insurance

plan level, the many interlinked markets, transaction costs, patient heterogeneity, the

traditional basis of payment, and selection interfere with the economic incentives to adopt

new ICT.



       Interaction of Barriers to Adoption: ICT Market and Health Care

       The interlinked markets in health care, combined with great consumer

heterogeneity, significantly intensify the problems relating to ICT adoption in all markets

– low product differentiation, high switching costs and technical compatibility. The usual

market framework of consumers and producers in the standard competitive market is

much more complicated in the market for ICT in that producers also encompass




                                                                                          32
complementors, information goods producers, systems producers, component producers

and infrastructure operators. Facing this vast array of manufacturers is an equally

diversified consumer group in health care, including patients of all ages, education levels,

and disease severity, a myriad of different types of health care providers using ICT as

input to the delivery of health care, including PCPs, hospitals, hospital physicians, and

outpatient providers, different insurers (private and government), the insured and those

paying out-of-pocket. The many actors makes the question of who will benefit from ICT

adoption in health care and who will pay for the adoption significantly harder to answer

than in other sectors of the economy. All the barriers identified to adoption of ICT

compared other forms of technology needs to be overcome by a highly diversified group

of consumers with vastly different needs and resources for adopting ICT. In addition,

consumers in health care require very different types of ICT depending on whether they

are a patient, provider or payer, and within each of these three general types of consumers

there is immense variation in specific needs and requirements for ICT capability. Such

high demands for product diversity in ICT stand in sharp contrast to an ICT market

equilibrium typically characterized by low production differentiation.



       The many actors in health care complicate the issue of switching costs. In addition

to patients, providers and insurers, there are the producers of software and hardware and

those providing the communication infrastructure. Each actor depends on other actors –

directly or indirectly – in the use of the same or associated technologies. Replacement of

one or more components of the overall communication and data sharing infrastructure –

due to technological change or change in user requirements – implies switching costs for




                                                                                            33
all agents. In addition, patients are different from the typical consumers of ICT who buy

and use the technology for reasons of business or pleasure. Not only are patients likely to

be older and less savvy in using ICT, which raises the operational requirements for “user

friendliness” of any software, but their needs for ICT are also likely to be more disease-

specific. One type of ICT will not fit all patients and any change to the operating platform

of health care ICT will imply changes, and hence switching costs, to many disease-

specific types of patient software.



       Overall, there are three major sources of switching costs must be addressed by all

consumers before adoption of a new ICT can take place in chronic disease care. First,

there is the cost of adopting new durable hardware such as mainframe computers and

operating systems to store information and the costs of complementary products such as

system management software to manage the information and database itself. The durable

hardware may dictate the follow-on products that a customer must buy in order to work

with the hardware. Secondly there is the cost of information storage in databases and the

cost of moving information from one database to another, including the cost of additional

data storage (e.g. old medical records that need to be store for legal reasons). Consumers,

such as hospitals and insurers, with massive information encoded in specialized formats

need to spend the time and money of transferring such data to new systems. Furthermore,

switching costs tend to rise with time as more and more information is stored in historical

databases. Any new system of information storage makes them vulnerable if and when

they require new hardware or software to work with the data. In fact, computer software

programs and data files represent a critical component of format-specific information as




                                                                                         34
any system in which information is collected over time in specific format cause lock-in to

grow over time. Third, there is the cost of the training involved in using the new ICT.

This training is often brand-specific and considerable additional time will be required to

learn to work with a new technology with even the same level of efficiency. With brand

specific training switching costs are likely to rise over time as personnel become more

and more familiar with the existing system.



       A key challenge in health care for adoption of new ICT is how to ensure a

network of a size that overcomes the collective switching costs. Adoption of new ICT

may be further complicated when switching costs stem from durable complementing

assets, e.g. one person’s investment in a network is complementary to another person’s

similar investment. As described, when such investments have different economic

lifetimes and when they are brand specific, then there may not be an easy time to start

using a new incompatible system. Equally important, switching costs are non-linear

(Shapiro & Varian 1999). For instance, persuading 5 hospital networks to switch to a new

IT platform is more than 5 times as hard as getting one hospital network to switch, yet all

5 of the hospitals need to switch as no single hospital wants to be the first to give up

network externalities. Because of the many different consumers of health care ICT it will

be highly difficult to coordinate a switch to a new, incompatible, technology.



       Finally, given the interlinked markets technical compatibility will be paramount.

To fully utilize the potential of ICT, patients will need to be able to communicate and

exchange data with providers and payers, and providers will need to be able to




                                                                                           35
communicate with other providers and payers, and payers need to communicate with

each other. Each consumer will have different needs for information and data exchange

and the ICT will need to use a technical standard that accommodates all these different

needs.



V: Technology Standards in Health care

         Common technical standards have the potential to facilitate and accelerate the

adoption of the most optimal ICT (Farrell and Saloner 1985; Hammond 2005; Pedersen

and Fomin 2005). First of all, standards play an important role for enhancing

compatibility, and hence generating greater value to users by making the size of the

network externality larger. The 3½ standard for computer disks, for example, sidestepped

the need for data conversion from one format to the other and hence made easy data

sharing across a larger network possible (Shapiro & Varian 1999). By enhancing the

ability to share data, the 3½ standard also attracted more consumers, which further

expanded the network externality. Secondly, technical standards also reduce the

technology risk faced by consumers as they are less likely to end up stranded with an

incompatible technology (Katz and Shapiro 1994). A standard endorsed by many

stakeholders can increase the credibility of a technology, and through adoption and

expanded network externalities, the standard may in fact become self-fulfilling. By the

same token, consumer confidence and fear of stranding may delay adoption of

incompatible products. Finally, technical standards also reduce switching costs and

thereby lock-in to specific technologies. Switching costs created by training in specific




                                                                                            36
computer software programs can also be limited by standardized formats and user

interfaces before transition to new technological platforms.



       However, the socially optimal level of standardization in health care will depend

on consumer heterogeneity. The greater the heterogeneity among consumers and their

needs for ICT, the more important it will be to have flexibility in the design of ICT to

meet those needs. Since there is much greater heterogeneity in health care – across

medical conditions and among patients with a given medical condition – than among

producers and their customers in other parts of the economy, product differentiation is

particularly desirable. In fact, standardization can have greater negative consequences if

the standards do not accommodate this heterogeneity. A tradeoff therefore exists between

seeking more standardization to allow for greater adoption and less standardization to

allow for greater product differentiation.



       A tradeoff also exists between ICT performance and interoperability (Katz and

Shapiro 1994; Govindaraju et al 2004; Sang-Hoon and Sungjoon 2004). ICT

manufacturers need to consider whether to introduce technologies with the necessary

interfaces and specifications to ensure compatibility with existing technologies or

introduce incompatible, yet superior, technologies to increase their market share. Their

financial reward is defined as the total value added to market of the new technology (e.g.

the improvement it offers over existing technologies and how widely it is adopted) times

their share of the market (Shapiro and Varian 1999). However, from a societal

perspective the reward of introducing a new technology is simply the value added to the




                                                                                           37
market regardless of who controls that market share. Due to the complicated switching

costs in health care, standards that ensure backwards compatibility, and hence quicker

adoption of new technologies, are likely to result in the greatest societal value of a new

technology. In addition, to avoid market dominance of any one vendor and hence inspire

competition to improve the available technologies, the standards for interoperable ICT

should be as non-proprietary as possible.



       Given the many possible applications of ICT to chronic disease care it is critical

to consider the type of ICT for which we should have standards. There are multiple ICT

applications where compatibility is essential for an optimal use such as medical devices

that capture patients´ biometric data, software that transmit such data, the operations of

the EMR with multiple interactions with different software and databases across

providers, and the different user interfaces that read and present such data. For instance,

applications of medical informatics in diabetes care that aim to integrate blood sugar data

with data on food consumption, medication and exercise for transmission to the EMR

effectively require a standard for the patient’s device, a standard for communicating to

the software that analyzes this data and a standard for the software to communicate with

EMR. There are multiple possible places for standardization and multiple interoperability

issues. The type of information that needs to be recorded, manipulated and analyzed is

also much more heterogeneous, which makes the standard setting particularly

challenging.




                                                                                             38
       The ideal ICT standard will vary across chronic diseases. The technology that will

be optimal for diabetes care is not likely to be optimal for the treatment of heart disease

and it is therefore not obvious what technical standard to work for given the possible ICT

applications. Envision a standard EMR adopted in all hospitals without regard to the

specific infrastructure, medical specialties and patient populations treated at each

hospital. Such an EMR could do more harm than good in medical care. However, a

common operating platform could establish the communication standard if it allows for

disease-specific modifications to address diversity in ICT needs. For example, the ability

to add new modules and to add new variables and data structures for those new modules

is critical, because new medical tests and new ways of analyzing data will be developed.

Flexible means of communicating across new modules will also be essential. A common

operating platform expandable on a flexible basis to address ICT needs for specific

diseases will ensure use of ICT across providers, and thereby provide network

externalities. The practicalities of how much of the operating platform that should be

universal and how much should be idiosyncratic is clearly an open question. Due to the

heterogeneity and idiosyncrasies in health care and among chronic diseases, we need

flexibility to ensure disease-specific technical modifications around the communication

standard and therefore we cannot have full ICT compatibility. An open non-proprietary

technical platform that allows others to write for it and develop specific ICT systems will

go along way for addressing the need for product differentiation.



       Many of the standards needed for interoperable health care ICT already exist in

some form today, and many organizations have been involved in developing specific




                                                                                              39
standards for health care (Hammond 2005). The Certification Commission for Health

Information Technology (CCHIT) has worked on the key health information technology

functionalities and requirements necessary for certification (Rosenfeld et al 2005).

Private standard-setting organizations (SDOs) such as Health Level Seven/Institute of

Medicine collaboration, Integrated Healthcare Enterprise, and ASTM International are

working to facilitate development and integration of uniform standards. As work on

standards for electronic health records has expanded over the last couple of years, the

vendor community has also formed a trade alliance (the Electronic Health Record

Vendor´s Association) to protect their propriety interests. Finally, the American National

Standards Institute (ANSI), a private non-profit organization that administers and

coordinates the U.S. voluntary standards activities, has set up the Healthcare Information

Standards Board to coordinate efforts among SDOs working for standards in health care.



       Despite all these initiatives there exists no overall plan for how standards should

be defined and the overall principles that should guide their design to ensure an optimal

societal use of ICT. Equally important, no one has identified all the standards needed to

support interoperability of health care ICT. The initiative by Connecting for Health is

promising in this regard (Halamka et al 2005). The organization proposes a minimum set

of standards that aims to protect privacy, patient control and data security, while allowing

timely access to data across information networks. These standards will facilitate

interoperability of standard interfaces and transactions at local, regional and national

levels and address secure transport of data, provide the essential components required for

the infrastructure, including secure connectivity, reliable authentication, and formats for




                                                                                           40
health data. By focusing on a minimum set of standards that provides for interoperability,

the approach recognizes the heterogeneity in technology needs and applications that is

crucial in health care ICT.



       However, to reach agreement on specific standards, including the policy guiding

data use and exchange, a formal standard setting process is needed. Most standard setting

for new technologies in the U.S. today takes place through formal balloting processes

defined by the ANSI (Hammond 2005). This process is governed by a set of rules and

procedures for reaching consensus on technical decisions, including a requirement that

the ballot is open to anyone to avoid dominance of any single group of stakeholders.

While the formal process is often criticized for being slow, cumbersome, and political

(David & Shurmer 1996), it has historically been absolutely critical to launching new

technologies (Shapiro and Varian 1999). The process will need to involve the SDOs

already engaged in standard setting as well as the vendor community to ensure a critical

mass of technical expertise while providing a vendor-neutral solution. Medical input will

also be needed, including all major patient advocacy groups for chronic diseases (e.g. the

American Diabetes Association, the American Heart Association, and the American

Cancer Society), to specify the right unique standard for the each disease and ensure

interoperability with other health care ICT. Other key stakeholders include all major

types of providers (e.g. represented by the American Academy of Family Physicians and

the American Hospital Association), all major health insurers (e.g. represented by

American Health Insurance Plans and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services).

Involvement of all these stakeholders does predict a slow and cumbersome process, and




                                                                                         41
thereby short-term static losses, however in the long-run it is likely to produce the most

optimal solution.



       To coordinate the process, a public-private or non-profit entity will be necessary

(Halamka et al 2005; Hammond 2005). With a representation and consultation structure

involving all stakeholders, the entity should identify, specify, and disseminate the policies

and standards necessary for sharing electronic health information. It should also develop

detailed technical specifications for implementation to ease adoption by providers. The

policies will govern the rules on privacy, security, user authorization, and application of

patient data, while the standards will enable data recording and data sharing in

compliance with these specific policies. The policies and standards should be designed in

a flexible way that enables adjustment to technological progress.



       The role of the government should also be considered bigger than just setting

standards. The importance of “influentials” for ensuring technology adoption has been

debated in the business literature for quite some time (Chakravorti 2003; Berry & Keller

2003), but for health care ICT the role of the government is likely to be critical. By

financing, endorsing and adopting technologies, the government can help achieving a

critical mass of consumers for ICT, which subsequently leads to rapid uptake and

widespread use (Rosenfeld et al 2005; Middleton 2005). Network externalities imply that

for many forms of ICT there will be a long, slow, increase in their use until some critical

mass is reached and after which growth explodes. The internet, which was initially

developed and financed by the U.S. Department of Defense, is a good example of how




                                                                                             42
the government facilitated a critical mass of consumers for use of ICT. The internet is

also a good example of how for certain types of technologies a clear technical platform is

needed in order to develop new forms of ICT. The interlinked markets and resulting

mismatch in financial incentives for ICT adoption is a strong argument for government

involvement. The fragmentation of the markets in health care, and the fragmentation

within the markets (among providers and insurers), also argue for the government to play

a leading role in setting standards to bridge these markets. However, the government, in

lending support for particular standard, need to take into account all private interests. Due

to their sheer size, ICT decisions by public insurers such as Medicare and Medicaid have

consequences far beyond their beneficiaries and tax-payers. For instance, if Medicare

decided to endorse one specific EMR to fit the Medicare population but not other patient

groups, then this could be a huge obstacle for more widespread adoption of the EMR.



VI: The Value of Waiting

       The slow adoption of ICT in health care relative to other industries clearly implies

societal losses in a static framework; potentially valuable adoption opportunities are

missed. However, in a dynamic context with great uncertainty about the optimal health

care ICT, the picture is less clear. As described, the future value of specific ICT systems

is highly uncertain, not only due to rapid technological change but also the uncertainty

relating to adoption decisions by other providers and insurers—and hence uncertainty

about the network externality. Moreover, decisions to adopt ICT are irreversible, because

not only are the costs sunk but a variety of lock-in effects occur. Once system-wide

technology adoption has occurred in health care, it is hard, if not impossible, to turn back




                                                                                           43
to previous systems of communication and information storage. Though the combination

of uncertainty and irreversibility of ICT investment generally reduce the value of ICT

investments, these two factors are likely to substantially affect the value of ICT in health

care.



        Recent advances in investment theory, referred to as the real option value theory

of investment, have stressed the value of waiting to invest when there is uncertainty and

investments are irreversible (Dixit and Pindyck 1994; Luerhman 1998). This theory, used

to value capital investments in the corporate world, has recently been applied in the social

sector as well, including ICT adoption in higher education (Oslington 2004). The theory

makes the general point that if one invests now, when the future value of the investment

is uncertain, the return on the investment may be either high or low depending on future

market conditions, yet investing now destroys the option to invest at a later time point.

However, if one waits until the uncertainty is resolved, the value of the investment will

be known and the optimal decision—whether to invest or not and the specific type of

investment—can be made. Consider a provider’s decision to invest in a particular health

care ICT without knowing whether a much better technology will come along and/or

before he knows what specific type of ICT other providers will adopt. If the provider

maintains his option to invest at a later time point, he can invest when other providers

have made clear the type of ICT they consider acceptable. The option value theory

directly conjoins with the theory of technology adoption when network externalities and

the positive feedback are present. While network externalities in general may delay or




                                                                                            44
completely prevent adoption of technologies, this effect can be compounded by the effect

of uncertainty and irreversibility of investment.



         Formally, the option value of an investment is defined as the difference between

the present value of the investment if delayed and the present value of the investment

now. This value increases with uncertainty (Dixit and Pindyck 1994). In particular, the

greater the uncertainty about technological progress and future technologies available,

market demands, and the regulatory requirements for technologies adopted, the more

valuable the option to delay investments will be when these are irreversible.1 To the

extent that uncertainty is greater in health care, due to technological change in the

medical information required and changing regulatory requirements, the value of waiting

will be higher in health care.



         The value of delaying investment also increases with the cost of adopting the

wrong technology. Due to network externalities and positive feedback, the cost of

adopting the wrong ICT is generally higher than other kinds of technology. In health care,

the value of delaying investments in ICT is likely to be so much greater than in other

sectors because the costs of adopting the wrong type of ICT will be so much higher.



         What are the reasons that the penalty for the wrong ICT adoption is so much

greater in health care? First, relative to other industries (such as banking), the

consequences of technical errors in medical care are likely to be larger in magnitude,


1
  Of course there may be situations, where investment now is a prerequisite for investing later, such as IT
infrastructure to even maintain current clients, but in general the value of waiting is positive.


                                                                                                          45
more salient, more attention-getting, and engender stronger emotions. Most importantly,

some errors in medical care are completely irreversible, such as permanent disability and

death. While certain consequences of technical errors are private to the providers (such as

salience and attention-getting), others are genuinely societal, in particular premature

death. Therefore, if technical problems exist in the operations of ICT, for reasons of poor

interoperability or data storage, the consequences for both the early adopters and society

at large can be severe. Second, the much more complicated and larger switching costs in

health care, due to the large number of actors and the coordination problems among them,

makes the financial losses resulting form the wrong ICT adoption so much greater in

health care. The mere fragmentation of the health care markets and fragmentation within

the markets may imply substantial financial losses to any individual provider and insurer

if their particular ICT system is not compatible with the future standards and

requirements for health care ICT. Third, the federal regulation protecting the

confidentiality of health information introduced by Health Insurance Portability and

Accountability Act of 2003 implies that being stranded with an incompatible technology

or losing information due to system failure and breakdown is simply not an option (U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services 2003). Many states have introduced

legislation that set even higher standards for how patient data should be protected and the

extent to which it can be shared across providers (Gottlieb et al 2005). The effect of these

federal and state regulations is an increase in the cost of adopting the wrong technology.

As noted above, if providers adopt ICT too early, they are likely to be locked to that

technology. In medical practice this kind of lock-in is simply not a clinical or legal option

as medical records must be accessible at all times.




                                                                                          46
       The uncertainty in returns of ICT investments and the irreversibility of these

investments may imply that there are real advantages to going slowly and waiting for the

right technology to come along before system-level adoption takes place. Take the

example of the EMR for instance, currently adopted by approximately 5% of all U.S.

hospitals for computerized physician order entry (Jha et al 2006). The fact that no

widespread adoption of the EMR took place ten years ago when the first versions were

introduced may actually, from a societal perspective, have been the right decision. The

technical standards available at the time did not provide for the kind of interoperability

needed today for an optimal use of the technology. If half of all U.S. hospitals had

adopted the EMR back then they may have been locked into a technology that could not

be used for all the clinical applications needed today. Given the large collective switching

costs providers need to be careful about the technologies they lock into and going slowly

may in fact not only be a good idea but also the optimal approach in health care.



       The risk of lock-in is also important for understanding the likely adoption path of

health care ICT. The greater the cost of adopting the wrong kind of ICT, the more

tendencies the system will exhibit towards incrementalism. The system also faces a

specific challenge in how to overcome collective switching costs and create a network of

users. To what extent does one provider in a given integrated care network benefit from

the adoption of the same ICT by another provider in another network? To what extent

does one payer benefit from another payer adopting a particular form of ICT? Among the

two basic paths for technology adoption – the evolution path of incremental adoption




                                                                                             47
versus the revolution path of rapid adoption of superior, yet incompatible, technology –

the evolution path may be the only realistic option in health care given uncertainty in the

value of existing technologies and the irreversibility of investment. Finally, if one accepts

that U.S. health care is characterized by a lagging effect in which its history influences its

current structure – by hysteresis – then there will be limits to how far and how fast we

can go in adopting ICT. This may also imply that the best technology solution will never

be adopted. In summary, there does not seem to be something like an ideal time for ICT

adoption, but rather due to the inherent uncertainties in the value of new technology,

irreversibility of the investments, lack of standards, and the many interlinked markets,

slow incremental adoption seems to be not only the optimal but also the realistic way

forward.



VII. Conclusions

       ICT in chronic care potentially brings large societal benefits through improved

patient outcomes, and lower direct and indirect resource use. Evident from a great deal of

experimental use, ICT facilitates such benefits through rapid and frequent communication

and collection of patient data allowing better monitoring and provider intervention. Easy

assembly of information from different sources through the EMR, such as laboratory

tests, self-monitored and hospital data also provides a better overview of patient status.

More generally, wider and more rapid dissemination of information and information

analysis, presentation and interpretation allow many more health care professionals to

provide quick input to the chronic care of the patient. Finally, ICT may make disease

management less time consuming. Patient self-care may be easier and more convenient,




                                                                                             48
while the ability to communicate quickly and share all relevant information in easy to

digest form eases the burden on coordinating care.



       Unlike a standard perfectly competitive market where every firm adopt the

amount and type of technology needed to operate in the most efficient way, the ICT

market has a number of unique features which may delay or completely prevent the

adoption of beneficial technologies. The main barriers to ICT adoption include low

product differentiation, high switching costs in replacing technologies, and lack of

technical compatibility of all the different components of ICT. In contrast to most

markets in the economy where suppliers have incentives to adopt technologies that

improve service and/or make production more efficient, health care providers and payers

do not have such incentives due to bundling of health care services and insurance, the

traditional basis of payment, selection issues and most importantly, the myriad of

interlinked markets. The people who are really interested in ICT adoption are the

patients, yet they lack direct means of influence. Employers will be motivated if their

employees care sufficiently to affect employment decisions or if productivity is affected.

Government will be motivated if there is sufficient voter interest. Both government and

employers need to influence insurers´ payment policies; however insurers will only be

interested if the technologies offer sufficient cost-effectiveness potential.



       The interlinked market forces in health care combined with great consumer

heterogeneity significantly intensify the barriers to ICT adoption. The many actors on the

consumer side compared to the usual ICT market, and the many more actors on both the




                                                                                          49
producer and consumer side compared to the standard market makes the question of who

will benefit from ICT adoption and who will pay for the adoption significantly harder to

answer than in other sectors of the economy. Switching costs exist for all actors in the

health care market and those switching costs are exacerbated not only by the many

different types of consumers, but also their highly varying needs.



       The value of any ICT is fundamentally linked to the ability to connect with other

users and share that information. When manufacturers develop new forms of ICT they

need to consider whether the products should be compatible with existing products and

thereby accept old performance standards or bring about completely new, yet

incompatible, technologies offering vastly superior performance. Given the myriad of

consumers in health care and the resulting significant and complicated switching costs,

major and rapid changes in the type of ICT applied in heath care cannot be expected.

Even if all initial barriers to ICT adoption should be addressed, slow incremental change

in health care ICT is likely to be the future norm rather than exception. This pace of ICT

adoption basically reflects a trade-off that exists when innovative technologies clashes

with the network externalities and their associated switching costs.



       Standards that ensure interoperability will be critical for adoption of health care

ICT. By enhancing interoperability, common technical standards also generate greater

value to users by expanding the network, and hence increase the network externality. In

addition, they reduce the likelihood of being stranded with an incompatible technology,

and they reduce the switching costs and hence risk of lock-in to old technologies.




                                                                                             50
However, the socially optimal level of standardization in health care will depend on

consumer heterogeneity, which implies a tradeoff between seeking more standardization

to allow for greater adoption and less standardization to allow for greater product

differentiation. A tradeoff also exists between ICT performance and interoperability.

Given the complicated switching costs in health care, standards that ensure backwards

compatibility are likely to results in the greatest societal value of ICT, even if implies

sacrificing some productivity gains. Due to the heterogeneity and idiosyncrasies in health

care, the ideal ICT standard will vary across chronic diseases. An open non-proprietary

technical platform that allows others to write for it and develop disease-specific ICT

systems will be crucial for product differentiation.



       To reach agreement on specific standards, a formal, yet open, standard setting

process is needed. This approach will need to involve the SDOs already engaged in

standard setting and the vendor community to provide the technical expertise while

ensuring a vendor-neutral solution. Medical input will also be needed, including all major

patient advocacy groups, the different kinds of health care providers and health insurers

to specify the right unique standard for the each disease and ensure interoperability with

other health care ICT. The resulting policies and standards should be designed to enable

adjustment with future development and technologies. The government should play a

leading role in the standard setting process given its ability to bridge the many

fragmented, yet interlinked, markets in health care.




                                                                                             51
        Rapid change in ICTs available, the uncertainty of the network externalities

associated with any specific ICT, and the irreversible nature of the ICT investment in

general implies a reduction in the present value of ICT. The uncertainty about the optimal

form and type of health care ICT and the legal framework regulating its use indicates that

the value of waiting to invest in ICT is likely to be greater in health care than in other

sectors. However, the value of waiting is also likely to be greater in health care because

the costs of adopting the wrong type of ICT are so much higher. In particular, the risks of

technical errors are much more prominent in health care, and in some instances the

consequences are irreversible, placing great demands on the reliability of the system. The

risk and consequences of lock-in to a suboptimal technology are also greater in health

care. The many layers of ICT adoption in health care and the resulting significant

switching costs implies that once system-wide adoption has occurred, it will be hard if

not impossible to turn back to previous systems of communication and data storage.

However, federal and state legislation implies that being stranded with an incompatible

technology or losing information due to system failure is simply not an option.



       In addition to the special features of ICT and the health care market, and the

critical importance of standards, many other factors significantly influence adoption,

including reimbursement. From our analysis of the health care system, we now know

who the players are who have an interest in ICT adoption; patients, employers and

insurers, from most to least motivated. In order to get providers to actually adopt, we

believe that payment in some form is crucial. The specific form of payment is also likely

to affect the type of ICT adopted and the extent to which an optimal use of ICT will take




                                                                                             52
place (Christensen & Remler 2007). A separate motivation for adopting ICT in chronic

disease care is clearly the potential to improve quality and thereby patient outcomes.

However all the barriers relating to interoperability, high switching costs, and

irreversibility of investment still need to be overcome even when the adoption is not

financially motivated.



       ICT is here to stay and certainly will be important in the future of health care: it’s

potential for improving health and decreasing both direct and indirect costs seems

impressive. While much of that potential is clearly not being met at this time, the slow

adoption may not be as sub-optimal as one may think, because the costs of adopting the

wrong ICT are so much higher in health care. Many of the barriers to adoption can be

overcome, and overcome in a way that ensures a better final outcome, by an open and

reflective standards setting process that includes all relevant stakeholders. While such a

process will be slow and cumbersome, it will avoid lock-in to sub-optimal ICTs and help

ensure sensitivity to the wide variety of private and societal interests.




                                                                                             53
Acknowledgements:



We thank Lawrence D. Brown, Sherry Glied, and Joshua Graff Zivin, for comments on

a much earlier version of this paper. We thank Mark Schlesinger, the editor for an

earlier version of this paper and the referees for very useful comments and suggestions.

We also thank several physicians and other researchers in health care services for

conversations providing a general background for the article. Finally, the authors would

also like to thank the Danish Research Agency, Danish Ministry of Science, Technology

and Innovation, for the funding provided to conduct the research for this paper.




                                                                                           54
References



Aaron HJ. Economic Issues in Health care in Serious and Unstable Condition: Financing

America's Health care”. Chapter 2, p. 8-37. 1991. Washington DC: Brookings.


Andrews, M. Money & Medicine: Access Fees for Doctors? Some Test the Waters. New

York Times, November 16, 2003.


Arrow, K. Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American Economic

Review 1963; 53(5): 941-973.



Artinian, N.T., O.G. Washington, and T.N. Templin. Effects of Home Telemonitoring

and Community-Based Monitoring on Blood Pressure Control in Urban African

Americans: A Pilot Study. Heart and Lung 2001; 30: 191-199.



Asmar, R, and A. Zanchetti. Guidelines for the Use of Self-Blood Pressure Monitoring: A

Summary Report of the First International Consensus Conference. Journal of

Hypertension 2000; 18: 493-508.


Belluck P. Doctors' New Practices Offer Deluxe Service for Deluxe Fee. New York Times

National Desk, Late Edition, Section A, Page 1, Column 5, January 15, 2002..


Berry J, Keller E. The Influentials: One American in Ten Tells the Other Nine How to

Vote, Where to Eat, and What to Buy. 2003. Free Press.




                                                                                       55
Bondmass, M, Bolger N, Castro G, Avitall B. The Effect of Physiologic Home

Monitoring and Telemanagement on Chronic Heart Failure Outcomes. The Internet

Journal of Asthma, Allergy and Immunology 1999; 3(2): XX.


Brailer DJA. Economic Perspective on Health Information Technology. Business

Economics July 2005; 6-11.


Brailer DJB. Interoperability: The Key To The Future Health Care System. Health Affairs

2005; 24, Supplement 1: W5-19 to W5-21.


Burton LC, Anderson GF, Kues IW. Using Electronic Health Records to Help Coordinate

Care. Milbank Quarterly 2004; 82(2): 457-481.


Car J, Sheikh A. Telephone Consultations. British Medical Journal 2003; 326: 966-969.


Cavallo L, Rossi S. Scale and Scope Economies in the European Banking Systems.

Journal of Multinational Financial Management 2001; 11 (4-5): 515-31


Chakravorti B. The Slow Pace of Fast Change: Brining Innovations to Market in a

Connected World. Harvard Business School Press. 2003.



Chetney R. Home Care That Dosen´t Miss A Beat. Home Healthcare Nurse 2003;

21(10): 681-686.


Christensen MC, Remler DK. Information and Communication Technology in Chronic

Disease Care: What Are the Implications for Payment? Medical Care Research and

Review 2007; 64 (2): 123-147.




                                                                                     56
Congleton R. The Median Voter Model. In C. K. Rowley (Ed.); F. Schneider (Ed.) The

Encyclopedia of Public Choice. Kluwer Academic Press, 2003.


Cutler DM, McClellan M. Is Technology Change in Medicine Worth it? Health Affairs

2001; 20(5): 11-29.


Cutler DM, Feldman NE, Horwitz JR. U.S. Adoption Of Computerized Physician Order

Entry Systems. Health Affairs 2005; 24(6): 1654-1663.


Dranove D, White WD. Agency and the Organization of Health Care Delivery. Inquiry

1987; 24: 405-415.


Danzon PM, Furukawa MF. Health care: Competition and Productivity in The Economic

Payoff from the Internet Revolution, Robert E. Litan and Alice M. Rivlin, eds.

Washington DC: Brookings. 2001.


David PA, Shurmer M. Formal Standards-Setting for Global Telecommunications and

Information Services. Telecommunication Policy 1996; 20(10): 789-815.


Diabetes Forecast. Pairing your Meter with Software. January 2006, p. RG42.


Dixit AK, Pindyck R. Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton: Princeton University

Press. 1994.


Evans DC, Nichol PW, Perlin JB. Effect of the Implementation of an Enterprise-wide

Electronic Health Record on Productivity in the Veterans Health Administration. Health

Economics, Policy and Law 2006;1: 163-169.




                                                                                     57
Farrell J, Saloner G. Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation. RAND Journal of

Economics 1985; 16: 70-83.



Gelijns AC, Zivin JA, Nelson RR. Uncertainty and Technological Change in Medicine.

Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 2001; 26(5): 913-924.



Glied S. Chronic Condition: Why Health Care Reform Fails. Cambridge, Mass. Harvard

University Press. 1997.



Govindaraju M, Slominski A, Chiu K, Liu P, van Engelen R, Lewis MJ. Toward

Characterizing the Performance of SOAP Toolkits. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE/ACM

International Workshop on Grid Computing, Pittsburg, Short paper: 365-372. 2004.



Goodman C. Savings in Electronic Medical Record Systems? Do It For The Quality.

Health Affairs 2005; 24(5): 1124-1126.



Gottlieb LK, Stone EM, Stone D, Dunbrack LA, Calladine J. Regulatory and Policy

Barriers to Effective Clinical Data Exchange: Lessons Learned From MedsInfo-ED.

Health Affairs 2005; 24(5): 1197-1203.



Goldsmith, J. The Internet and managed care: A new wave of innovation. Health Affairs

2000; 19(6): 42-56.




                                                                                        58
Grigsby J, Sanders JH. Telemedicine: Where It Is and Where It´s Going. Annals of

Internal Medicine 1998; 129: p.123-127.


Halamka J, Overhage M, Ricciardi L, Rishel W, Shirky C, Diamond C. Exchanging

Health Information: Local Distribution, National Coordination. Health Affairs 2005; 24

(5): 1170-1179.


Hall BH. Adoption of New Technology. NBER Working Paper Series. Working paper

9730. 2003.


Hammond EW. The Making and Adoption of Health Data Standards. Health Affairs

2005; 24 (5): 1205-1213.


Hillestad R, Bigelow J, Bower A, Girosi F, Meili R, Scoville R, Taylor R. Can Electronic

Medical Record Systems Transform Health Care? Potential Health Benefits, Savings and

Costs. Health Affairs 2005; 24(5): 1103-1117.


Hosken D, Simpson JD. Have Supermarket Mergers Raised Prices? An Event Study

Analysis. International Journal of the Economics of Business 2001; 8(3): 329-42.


Institute of Medicine, Committee on Evaluating Clinical Applications of Telemedicine.

Telemedicine: A Guide to Assessing Telecommunications in Health care. Washington,

D.C.: National Academy Press. Marilyn J. Field, Editor. 1996.



Institute of Medicine. Key Capabilities of an Electronic Health Record System: Letter

Report. 2003a. Available at http://www.nap.edu. Accessed January 8, 2006.




                                                                                        59
Institute of Medicine. Priority Areas for National Action: Transforming Healthcare

Quality”. In Committee on Identifying Priority Areas for Quality Improvement, edited by

K. 2003b. XX



Jerant A, Rahman A, Thomas NS. Reducing the Cost of Frequent Hospital Admissions

for Congestive Heart Failure: A Randomized Trial of a Home Telecare Intervention.

Medical Care 2001; 39(11):1234-1245.


Jha AK, Ferris TG, Donelan K, DesRoches C, Shield A, Rosenbaum S, Blumenthal D.

How Common Are Electronic Health Records in the United States? A Summary of the

Evidence. Health Affairs 2006, Web Exclusive, p: W496 – W507.



Kaiser Permanente. Kaiser Permanente Annual Report. Quality You Can Trust. 2002.

Available on-line at: http://xnet.kp.org/annualreport/2002/kp_report_2001_2.pdf .

Assessed January 2006.


Kassirer JP. Patients, physicians, and the Internet. Health Affairs 2000; 19(6): 115-23.


Katz M, Shapiro C. Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility. American

Economic Review 1985; 75(3): 424-440.


Katz ML, Shapiro C. Systems Competition and Network Effects. Journal of Economic

Perspectives 1994; 8(2): 93-116.


Kleinke JD. Vaporware.com: The Failed Promise of the Health Care Internet. Health

Affairs 2000; 19(6): 57-69.



                                                                                           60
Kuszler PC. Telemedicine and Integrated Health care Delivery: Compounding

Malpractice Liability. American Journal of Law & Medicine 1999; 25: 297-326.


Lehoux P, Battista RN, Lance J-M. Telehealth: Passing Fad or Lasting Benefits?

Canadian Journal of Public Health 2000; 91(4): 277-280.


Lloyd-Jones DM, Larson MG, Leip EP, Beiser A, D´Agostino RB, Kannel WB, Murabito

JM, Vasan RS, Benjamin EJ, Levy D. Lifetime risk for developing congestive heart

failure – the Framingham heart study. Circulation 2002; 106(24): 3068-3072.


Luehrman TA. Strategy As A Portfolio of Real Options. Harvard Business Review,

September-October 1998: 89-99.


Middleton B. Achieving U.S. Health Information Technology Adoption: The Need For A

Third Hand. Health Affairs 2005; 24(5): 1269-1272.


Miller RH, West C, Brown TM, Sim I, Ganchoff C. The Value Of Electronic Health

Records in Solo Or Small Group Practices. Health Affairs 2005; 24 (5): 1127-1137.


National Library of Medicine. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). 2001. Available at:

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/cgi/mesh/2K/MB_cgi?term=Medical+Informatics&field=entry#

TreeL01.700. Accessed March 2, 2007.


Newhouse JP. Patients At Risk: Health Reform And Risk Adjustment. Health Affairs

1994; Spring (I): 132-145.




                                                                                     61
Newshour with Jim Lehrer. John Castellani, president of Business Roundtable in Wal-

Mart, Union Leaders Collaborate on Health Care. February 8, 2007. Transcript available

at: http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/health/jan-june07/healthcare_02-08.html

Accessed March 5, 2007.


Ortiz E, Clancy CM. Use of Information Technology to Improve the Quality of Health

care in the United States. Health Services Research 2003; 38(2): 11-22.


Oslington P. The Impact of Uncertainty and Irreversibility on Investments in Online

Training. Distance Education 2004; 25(2): 233-242.


Pauly M. Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The of Moral Hazard and

Adverse Selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics 1974; 88: 44-62.


Pedersen MK, Fomin VV. The Economics of Standards and Standardization in

Information and Communication Technologies. Open Standards and Their Early

Adoption. Open Standards Research Report. 2005. Available on-line at:

http://ir.lib.cbs.dk/download/ISBN/x656517335.pdf. Accessed March 15, 2007.


Perlin JB, Collins DA, Kaplowitz LG. Telemedicine. Hospital Physician 1999; 36: 26-34.


Puskin DS. Telemedince: Follow the Money. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing. 2001.

Available at: http://nursingworld.org/ojin/topic16/tpc16_1.htm. Accessed March 2,

2007.




                                                                                      62
Rice T, Labelle R. Do Physicians Induce Demand for Medical Services? Journal of

Health Politics, Policy and Law 1989; 14: 587-600.


Roglieri JL, Futterman R, McDonough KL, Malya G, Karwath KR, Bowman D, Skelly J,

Warburton SW. Disease Management Interventions to Improve Outcomes in Congestive

Heart Failure. Journal of American Managed Care 1997; 3(12): 1831-1839.


Rohlfs J. A Theory of Interdependent Demand for a Communication Service. Bell

Journal of Economics 1974; 5: 141-156.


Rosenfeld S, Bernasek C, Mendelson D. Medicare´s Next Voyage: Encouraging

Physicians to Adopt Health Information Technology. Health Affairs 2005; 24(5): 1138-

1158.


Sawin CT, Walder DJ, Bross DS, Pogach LM. Diabetes Process and Outcome Measures

in the Department of Veterans Affairs. Diabetes care 2004; 27, Suppl 2; B90. XX


Sang-Hoon K, Sungjoon N. Across the Threshold: Role of Performance and

Compatibility in Innovative New Products´ Market Penetration. Industrial Marketing

Management 2004; 33: 689-699.


Shapiro C, Varian HR. Information Rules. Boston, Mass. Harvard Business School Press.

1999.


Shea S, Starren J, Weinstock R, Knudson P, Teresi J, Holmes D, Palmas W, Field L,

Goland R, Tuck C, Hripcsak G, Capps L. Columbia University’s Informatics and




                                                                                     63
Telemedicine (IDEATel) Project: Rationale and Design. Journal of the American

Medical Informatics Association 2002; 9(1): 49-62.


Shortliffe EH. Strategic Action in Health Information Technology: Why The Obvious

Has Taken So Long. Health Affairs 2005; 24(5): 1222-1231.


Shy O. The Economics of Network Industries. Cambridge: University of Cambridge

Press. 2001.


Sparer MS. Medicaid and the limits of state health reform”. Philadelphia : Temple

University Press. 1996.


Spielberg AR. On Call and Online. Journal of the American Medical Association 1998;

280(15): 1353-1359.


Spielberg AR. Online Without a Net: Physician-Patient Communication by Electronic

Mail. American Journal of Law & Medicine 1999; 25: 267-295.


Stanberry B. Telemedicine: Barriers and Opportunities in the 21st Century. Journal of

Internal Medicine 2000; 247: 615-628.


Starren J, Hripscak G, Sengupta S, Abbruscato CR, Knudson PE, Weinstock R, Shea S.

Columbia University’s Informatics and Telemedicine (IDEATel) Project: Technical

Implementation. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 2000; 9(1):

25-36.


Taylor R, Manzo J, Sinnett M. Quantifying value for physician order-entry systems: a

balance of cost and quality. Healthcare Financial Management 2002; 56(7): 44-48.



                                                                                        64
Wang SJ, Middleton B, Prosser LA, Bardon CG, Spurr CD, Carchidi PJ, Kittler AF,

Goldszer RC, Fairchild DG, Sussman AJ, Kuperman GJ, Bates DW. A Cost-Benefit

Analysis of Electronic Medical Records in Primary Care. American Journal of Medicine

2003; 114(5): 397-403.



Walker J, Pan E, Johnston D, Adler-Milstein J, Bates DW, Middleton B. The Value of

Health Care Information Exchange and Interoperability. Health Affairs 2005; 24,

Supplement 1: W5-10 to W5-18.


Wallace DJ.Gadget Knows Grandma Inside Out. New York Times, October 23, 2003,

http://www.nytimes.com/2003/10/23/technology/circuits/23elde.html, Accessed March 2,

2007.


Weisbrod BA. The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological Change,

Insurance, and Cost Containment. Journal of Economic Literature 1991; 29 (2): 523-552.


White House, Office of the Press Secretary. Fact Sheet: Improving Care and Saving

Lives Through Health IT. 2005. Available on-line at:

http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2005/01/20050127-2.html. Accessed March

2, 2007.


Whitten PS, Mair FS, Haycox A, May CR, Williams TL, Hellmich S. Systematic review

of cost effectiveness studies of telemedicine interventions. British Medical Journal 2002;

324: 1434-1437.




                                                                                        65
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Protecting the Privacy of Patient´s

Health Information. 2003. Available at:

http://www.hhs.gov/news/facts/privacy.html. Accessed March 8, 2007.


U.S. General Accounting Office. Private Health Insurance: Small Employers Continue to

Face Challenges in Providing Coverage. 2001. Available at:

http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d028.pdf. Accessed March 2, 2007.


Zuvekas SH. Trends In Mental Health Services Use And Spending, 1987-1996; While

access to mental health services has greatly increased, high out-of-pocket costs still deter

many from seeking treatment. Health Affairs 2001; 20(2): 214-225.




                                                                                          66
