                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WHY DO EMERGING ECONOMIES BORROW SHORT TERM?

                                       Fernando A. Broner
                                        Guido Lorenzoni
                                       Sergio L. Schmukler

                                       Working Paper 13076
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13076


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2007




We are grateful to Marina Halac, Tatiana Didier, Juan Carlos Gozzi Valdez, and Lishan Shi for superb
research assistance. For valuable comments, we thank Mark Aguiar, Ricardo Caballero, Olivier Jeanne,
Roberto Rigobon, Jaume Ventura, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and participants at presentations held at the
AEA Meetings (Washington, DC), the Conference on Sovereign Debt at the Dallas Fed, CREI-Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, George Washington University, the Inter-American Development Bank, the IMF Annual
Research Conference, the LACEA Meetings (Madrid and Puebla), MIT, the NBER Summer Institute,
the SED Meetings (Vancouver), and the XII Finance Forum (Barcelona). For financial support, we
thank the World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Research Studies Program and Research Support
Budget and the IMF Research Department. Broner thanks the Spanish Ministry of Education and Sciences
(grant SEJ2005-01126), the Generalitat de Catalunya (DURSI, SGR2005 0049), and CREA-Barcelona
Economics. This paper was finished while Schmukler was visiting the IMF Research Department.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Fernando A. Broner, Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow Short Term?
Fernando A. Broner, Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 13076
May 2007
JEL No. E43,F30,F34,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

We argue that emerging economies borrow short term due to the high risk premium charged by bondholders
on long-term debt. First, we present a model where the debt maturity structure is the outcome of a
risk sharing problem between the government and bondholders. By issuing long-term debt, the government
lowers the probability of a rollover crisis, transferring risk to bondholders. In equilibrium, this risk
is reflected in a higher risk premium and borrowing cost. Therefore, the government faces a trade-off
between safer long-term debt and cheaper short-term debt. Second, we construct a new database of
sovereign bond prices and issuance. We show that emerging economies pay a positive term premium
(a higher risk premium on long-term bonds than on short-term bonds). During crises, the term premium
increases, with issuance shifting towards shorter maturities. The evidence suggests that international
investors' time-varying risk aversion is crucial to understand the debt structure in emerging economies.

Fernando A. Broner                                 Sergio L. Schmukler
CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra                  The World Bank
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27                          MSN MC3-301
08005 Barcelona                                    1818 H Street, N.W.
Spain                                              Washington, DC 20433
fabroner@gmail.com                                 Sschmukler@worldbank.org

Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
1        Introduction

During the last two decades, emerging economies have experienced recurring financial crises. A
common factor across many of these crises has been a maturity mismatch between assets and
liabilities, which has led to rollover problems.1 When governments (or the private sector) have
large stocks of short-term liabilities to repay and prospects deteriorate, it becomes very costly to
renew their debt, sometimes triggering outright default. Even worse, excessive reliance on short-
term debt can open the door to self-fulfilling liquidity crises, which may be simply triggered by a
shift in expectations. The risks associated with short-term debt have prompted several authors to
suggest that countries should decrease their vulnerability to capital inflow reversals by lengthening
the maturity structure of their liabilities.2 However, if it is so clear that short-term borrowing is
risky, why do emerging economies borrow short term?
        The conventional view is that emerging economies borrow short term to alleviate a moral hazard
problem that exists on the demand (debtor) side.3 The early literature, such as Calvo (1988) and
Blanchard and Missale (1994), focuses on the government incentive to lower the real value of public
debt by creating inflation. These papers show that this incentive is lower when the debt is indexed,
in foreign currency, and short-term. More recent work by Rodrik and Velasco (1999) and Jeanne
(2004) shows that, when they have to meet early debt repayments, opportunistic governments have
ex-post a lower incentive to default on their debt and a higher incentive to carry out revenue-
raising reforms. In this context, short-term debt serves as a commitment device for the debtor and
increases its welfare ex-ante.4
        In this paper, we propose an alternative view based on supply (lender) side factors. In particular,
we argue that investor risk aversion makes short-term borrowing cheaper, thus providing incentives
    1
      For example, large amounts of short-term debt had been accumulated by governments prior to the crises of
Mexico 1994-95, Russia 1998, and Brazil 1998-99, and by the private sector in Indonesia, South Korea, and Thailand
before the 1997 East Asian crisis. According to central bank sources, the average maturity of outstanding government
bonds in Brazil was 1.7 years in 1998. In the cases of South Korea and Thailand, short-term debt (maturing at most
in five years) was, respectively, 97 and 60 percent of total corporate bonds outstanding in 1997.
    2
      This view is presented, among others, by Sachs, Tornell, and Velasco (1996), Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Obstfeld
(1998), Radelet and Sachs (1998), Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (1999), Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999), Feldstein
(1999), and Cole and Kehoe (2000).
    3
      Throughout the paper we refer to the supply and demand sides of the market for loanable funds. Thus, investors
are on the supply side, while the government is on the demand side.
    4
      The role of short-term debt as a commitment device in the context of international lending has also been empha-
sized by Diamond and Rajan (2001), Rochet and Vives (2004), and Tirole (2002, 2003). Dell’Ariccia, Schnabel, and
Zettelmeyer (2002) present some evidence consistent with the conventional view based on moral hazard.



                                                          1
for emerging economies to rely on short-term debt.5 What do we mean by short-term borrowing
being cheaper than long-term borrowing? The cost of borrowing is given by the expected repayment
for each borrowed dollar and it equals the diﬀerence between the spread a country pays and the
probability of default.6 Since the cost of borrowing at a given maturity is captured by the risk
premium on bonds of that maturity, the diﬀerence between long-term and short-term risk premia
(i.e. the term premium) measures the extent to which borrowing short term is cheaper.7
       Our main arguments are illustrated using a simple model, where the optimal debt maturity
structure and borrowing cost at diﬀerent maturities are determined as the result of a risk sharing
problem between a debtor country and risk averse investors with a short horizon. On the one hand,
since investors may need to liquidate long-term bonds before maturity and the price of these bonds
fluctuates over time, investors are subject to more risk when holding long-term bonds. They thus
require higher returns on long-term bonds to compensate for this “price risk.”8 On the other hand,
long-term debt is safer for the government because it reduces the probability of a rollover crisis. As a
result, emerging economies have to balance the rollover costs associated with short-term borrowing
against the higher borrowing cost associated with long-term borrowing. This model allows us to
clarify the diﬀerence between bond prices, bond spreads, and risk premia and illustrate the role of
the supply side on the risk premium and the maturity of bond issuance.
       The model has several implications. First, it shows that, when investors are risk averse, the
term premium is positive on average and increases during crises. Moreover, the model explores
the eﬀects of diﬀerent types of shocks on the optimal maturity choice and risk premia at diﬀerent
maturities. A negative shock to government resources leads to an increase in the risk premium on
long-term bonds and an increase in the maturity of bond issues. This is analogous to a positive
demand shock on the market for international loans, leading to higher risk premia and higher
quantities of long-term bonds. A negative shock to investor wealth also leads to an increase in the
   5
      The literature on emerging market borrowing has already stressed the importance of the supply side of interna-
tional capital markets. See, for example, Calvo and Mendoza (2000), Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2001, 2003), Chang and Velasco (2001), Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2004), Broner, Gelos,
and Reinhart (2005), and Pavlova and Rigobon (2005).
    6
      In other words, the cost of borrowing equals the diﬀerence between actual spreads and “actuarially fair” spreads.
    7
      A positive term premium should not be confused with spreads on long-term bonds being higher than spreads on
short-term bonds. The latter may also be due to a higher probability of default at longer horizons. For example, this
is the case in the model of Chang and Velasco (2000), in which long-term spreads are higher than short-term spreads
even though bondholders are risk neutral and the term premium is thus zero.
    8
      On the investor side, the model has the features of a model of liquidity provision in the tradition of Diamond
and Dybvig (1983).


                                                          2
risk premium on long-term bonds but, on the other hand, leads to a decrease in the maturity of
bond issues. This is analogous to a negative shock to the supply of funds, leading to higher risk
premia and lower quantities of long-term bonds.
       We then study two questions related to the behavior of sovereign bond prices and issuance
patterns. First, how big is the premium that investors require to hold long-term bonds instead of
short-term bonds? Second, can this premium explain the maturity structure? To address these
questions, we construct a new database on emerging market sovereign bonds. We then analyze the
properties of conditional and unconditional risk and term premia for emerging countries. These
are estimated by computing average ex-post excess returns on long-term and short-term bonds,
held over the same horizon. Excess returns are computed relative to those of two “safe” countries,
Germany and the United States. Finally, we study the behavior of bond issuance by emerging
economies.
       Our main results can be summarized in three stylized facts. First, when compared with Germany
and the United States, the excess returns from holding emerging market long-term bonds are, on
average, higher than those from holding emerging market short-term bonds. This implies that, on
average, the term premium is positive. When comparing 3-year and 12-year maturities, the term
premium is four percentage points per year.9 This positive term premium reflects the risk premium
required by investors to be exposed to the price risk associated with long-term bonds. Second, the
term premium increases significantly during crises. When comparing 3-year and 12-year maturities,
the term premium is 30 percentage points during crises and close to zero during non-crisis periods.
Furthermore, this increase cannot be accounted for by the observed changes in the volatility of
returns, i.e. the Sharpe ratio increases during crises. Third, emerging economies issue relatively
more short-term debt during periods of financial turmoil, and wait for tranquil times to issue long-
term debt. Thus, there is a negative relation between the term premium and the maturity of debt
issuance.
       This evidence suggests that time-varying investor risk aversion plays an important role in the
   9
    To be precise, the term premium is equal to the diﬀerence between the risk premium an emerging economy pays
on long-term debt (relative to Germany and the U.S.) and the risk premium it pays on short-term debt (again,
relative to Germany and the U.S.). This diﬀerence can be called “excess term premium,” due to the comparison with
Germany and the U.S. To simplify, however, we will just use the expression term premium throughout the paper,
with the understanding that we study the yields that emerging economies pay on top of those charged to Germany
and the U.S.




                                                       3
debt markets of emerging economies. During crises, investors demand higher term premia, while
they reduce their exposure to long-term debt. These two observations indicate the presence of a
negative shift in the supply of funds and cannot be explained by models that focus only on the
debtor side. If investors had constant risk aversion, they would require a lower term premium when
they reduce their holdings of long-term debt and are less exposed to the associated price risk. In
sum, while moral hazard considerations could still play a relevant role in determining the optimal
maturity structure, the results in this paper show that supply side factors appear necessary to
understand why emerging economies borrow short term.
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 describes
the data. Section 4 studies the behavior of risk and term premia. Section 5 provides more evidence
studying long- and short-term bond issuance. Section 6 concludes.


2         The model

In this section, we present a model of the joint determination of the debt maturity structure and the
risk premium at diﬀerent maturities. The model describes the government of an emerging economy
that borrows from a set of international investors.10 We assume that it is more costly for the
government to raise fiscal revenues in the short run than in the long run. This assumption implies
that short-term borrowing may result in a costly fiscal adjustment, or “rollover crisis.”11 This
happens if the government is forced to raise taxes to cover the shortfall between debt repayments
and new debt issues. We also assume that international investors are risk averse and have short
horizons. This makes investors sensitive to the price risk associated with long-term bonds.12
         In this environment, the maturity structure of sovereign debt can be interpreted as the outcome
of a risk sharing problem between the government and bondholders. By issuing long-term debt,
the country lowers the expected cost of a rollover crisis but, at the same time, it transfers risk to
    10
      In the model we refer to bondholders as “international investors.” It would be easy to extend the model to allow
for local investors. The case of international investors is simpler because their utility does not enter the government’s
objective function.
   11
      In Cole and Kehoe (2000), this diﬀerence in the cost of fiscal adjustment in the short run and long run plays a
crucial role in generating self-fulfilling debt crises.
   12
      Assuming short horizons is an easy way of having investors care about price risk. Liquidity shocks would lead
to similar results. Since we abstract from coordination problems among investors, the assumption of short horizons
is a useful simplification. For a discussion on the type of environment where price risk matters, see Holmström and
Tirole (2001).



                                                           4
bondholders. In equilibrium, this risk is reflected in a higher risk premium and lower bond prices,
thereby increasing the cost of borrowing for the country. Thus, the model allows us to analyze the
trade-oﬀ between safer long-term borrowing and cheaper short-term borrowing.
       The model can be interpreted as a model of liquidity provision in the tradition of Diamond and
Dybvig (1983). The government finances its debt by selling claims to its long-run fiscal revenues.
However, long-run revenues are random and investors need to liquidate their claims before the
final period. Investors are risk averse and the government can oﬀer them partial insurance by
issuing short-term debt with a fixed rate of return. Our model diﬀers in two main respects from
existing models that follow Diamond and Dybvig (e.g., Chang and Velasco, 2001). First, it features
exogenous aggregate risk, due to the shocks to long-run fiscal revenue. While models following
Diamond and Dybvig focus on arrangements that allow investors to share their idiosyncratic shocks,
we focus on arrangements that allow the government and investors to share aggregate risk. This is
reflected in the fact that in a model a la Diamond and Dybvig allowing for retrading of long-term
liabilities (as we do in our model) completely eliminates the need of risky short-term liabilities.13
Second, our model abstracts from coordination problems and multiple equilibria.14
       The model predicts that the term premium (i.e. the diﬀerence between the risk premium on
long-term and short-term bonds) should be positive on average. Moreover, the term premium
should be higher during financial crises. The model also predicts that debt issuance should shift
towards shorter maturities when crises are due to an increase in investor risk aversion, and towards
longer maturities when crises are due to a decrease in the country’s expected repayment capacity.


2.1      Debtor country

There are three periods, dated 0, 1, and 2. In period 0, the government must borrow D0 to finance
old debt coming to maturity. The government can sell either short-term (one-period) or long-term
(two-period) bonds. In period 1, the government pays oﬀ the short-term bonds issued in period 0
and issues new short-term bonds. The diﬀerence between the two is covered by a short-run fiscal
adjustment. In period 2, which represents the long run, the government has access to a stochastic
  13
    See Hellwig (1994) on the role of aggregate risk in models of liquidity provision.
  14
    In this paper there can be no “runs” in the intermediate period since we assume that the ability to raise revenue
in the future is not aﬀected by what happens in that period. This is assumed for simplicity and is not important for
our qualitative results. Allowing for runs would introduce an additional type of supply side “shock,” which would
increase the incentives to borrow long term.



                                                         5
and exogenous amount of fiscal revenue. This revenue is used to pay back maturing long- and
short-term bonds, to reduce taxation, or for public spending. We abstract from strategic default
by assuming that the government repays its debt whenever feasible.15
       In period 0, the government’s budget constraint is


                                               D0 = pS DS + pL DL ,


where DS and DL are the amount of short- and long-term bonds issued in period 0, with pS and
pL being their respective prices.
       In period 1, the government has to roll over the stock DS of short-term bonds. The government’s
budget constraint in period 1 is
                                                DS = x + pS,1 DS,1 ,

where DS,1 is the amount of short-term bonds issued in period 1, pS,1 is their price, and x is the
government’s primary surplus in period 1. Short-term bonds issued in period 1 are junior to existing
long-term bonds.
       In period 2, the government’s potential revenue equals Ỹ , which is a random variable that can
take two values, Y in the good state and 0 in the bad state. The extreme case of zero realization
in the bad state simplifies the analysis because it eliminates the possibility of partial default. As
of period 0, the probability of being in the good state is π0 . In period 1, there is a shock that
aﬀects the probability of being in the good state. The updated probability is denoted by π. As
of period 0, π is a random variable distributed on [π, π], with mean π0 . As we show below, the
volatility of π introduces uncertainty in the government’s ability to borrow in period 1 and, thus,
on the required fiscal adjustment. Issuing long-term bonds in period 0 is a way for the government
to insure against this uncertainty.
       The government’s objective function is


                               W = E0 −C (x) + max Ỹ − DL − DS,1 , 0                  ,


where C(x) is a strictly convex function that represents the cost of the short-term fiscal adjustment.
  15
    We rule out the possibility of strategic default. This is done for simplicity and also because strategic default can
be thought of as a form of moral hazard and we want to focus on the role of investor risk aversion.



                                                           6
We assume that C (0) = 0 and C (0) = 1. Since C is strictly convex, C (x) > 1 for x > 0.16 This
assumption, together with the assumption that in the long run the government’s marginal utility
is always equal to 1, results in short-run fiscal adjustments being more costly than long-run fiscal
adjustments. This diﬀerence can be explained by the fact that, in the long run, the government
can spread the adjustment over a longer period of time and thus achieve better tax smoothing, or
that by better preparing for the adjustment its associated cost can be reduced.
       We assume that government resources satisfy π0 Y − D0 > 0, so that, at risk neutral prices,
the government is solvent with no need of fiscal adjustment in period 1. We also assume that the
government can carry out a fiscal adjustment large enough and faces a cost of default high enough,
such that it never defaults in period 1.17 When x > 0, the country faces a rollover crisis.


2.2      Investors and bond prices

There are two overlapping generations of investors, period-0 and period-1 investors. Period-t in-
vestors invest in period t and consume in period t + 1. Both generations have mass 1. Period-0
investors have initial wealth w. They invest in three assets: an international risk-less asset with
zero net returns (e.g. U.S. Treasury bills), and short- and long-term bonds issued by the govern-
ment in period 0. Their preferences are represented by the utility function E0 [u(c)], where u(·) is
increasing, concave, and displays decreasing absolute risk aversion.18 Their budget constraint is


                                             w = b + pS dS + pL dL ,

                                              c = b + dS + pL,1 dL ,


where b denotes holdings of the international risk-less bond, and dS and dL denote holdings of short-
and long-term bonds issued by the country. Note that the period 1 budget constraint reflects the
assumption that the government never defaults on short-term bonds issued in period 0.
  16
      We are implicitly assuming that optimal smoothing of fiscal distortions between periods 1 and 2 is attained at
x = 0. It is easy to generalize the model to the case where C (x) = 1 is satisfied for x = 0.
   17
      This is the simplest setup in which the trade-oﬀ emphasized in this paper can be studied. The fact that default
never takes place in period 1 simplifies the pricing of bonds in period 0. However, even if default in period 1 was
allowed, short-term bonds would remain less risky than long-term bonds from the point of view of investors, since
the default would aﬀect both short- and long-term bonds. In addition, the fact that the fiscal adjustment in period 1
does not aﬀect fiscal resources in period 2 rules out multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling runs.
   18
      This implies that lower levels of wealth are associated with higher levels of investor risk aversion. When referring
to negative shocks to the supply of funds, we use the two indistinctly.



                                                            7
       Period 1 investors can purchase the international risk-less asset, short-term bonds issued in
period 1, and long-term bonds issued in period 0, with remaining maturity of one period. We make
the simplifying assumption that period 1 investors are risk neutral. As a result, bond prices in
period 1 are equal to the probability of the good state


                                                  pL,1 = pS,1 = π,


which does not depend on the debt maturity structure chosen by the government in period 0. This
simplifies the government’s problem in period 0.
       This setup reflects an environment where the market for emerging market debt is segmented
and investors are specialists, subject to liquidity shocks. Segmented markets result in bondholders
being more aﬀected by movements in the country’s bond prices than would be suggested by the
size of this market as a fraction of world assets. Therefore, the cost of borrowing is aﬀected by the
wealth and risk aversion of specialized investors.19 In addition, the existence of short investment
horizons makes investors sensitive to the price risk of long-term bonds, since they need to liquidate
their portfolios in period 1.
       Using the market clearing conditions dS = DS , dL = DL , and bond prices in period 1, we obtain
the consumption level of period 0 investors,


                                      c = w + (1 − pS ) DS + (π − pL ) DL .


       The period 0 first order conditions are E [u (w + (1 − pS ) DS + (π − pL ) DL ) (π − pL )] = 0 and
1 − pS = 0. These conditions imply that bond prices satisfy E [u (w + (π − pL ) DL ) (π − pL )] = 0,
what defines implicitly the price of long-term bonds as a function of DL , p(DL ). This leads us to
the following lemma.

  19
    How reasonable is the assumption of specialized investors? The assumption would probably be too strong if it
required a separate pool of specialists for each emerging economy. However, we just need to assume that there is
a subset of investors who specialize in emerging economies. The reason is that the returns of emerging economy
assets are highly correlated across countries, so the degree to which investors can diversify away risk within this
asset class is quite limited. This assumption can be justified given the existence of dedicated emerging market
funds and dedicated emerging market departments within institutional investors. Also, the existence of home bias
suggests that domestic bondholders are especially exposed to domestic bond returns. Finally, the assumption that
emerging economies borrow from investors which are not equal to the “world representative investor” is common
in the literature. This assumption is made, explicitly or implicitly, in all papers that highlight the role of financial
channels in the transmission of crises across emerging economies.


                                                           8
Lemma 1. The price of long-term bonds, p(DL ), satisfies p(DL ) ≤ π 0 , where the condition holds
as an equality if and only if DL = 0. Furthermore, p(DL ) is decreasing in DL .

Proof: See Appendix A.
                                                                                                        E0 [pL,1 ]−pL       π0 −pL
       The lemma implies that the risk premium on long-term bonds, which equals                              pL         =     pL ,

is generally positive. Since the risk premium on short-term bonds equals zero (they are risk-less),
the lemma also implies the existence of a positive term premium. The intuition behind this result
is straightforward. Shocks to expected revenues make the price of long-term bonds in period 1
volatile. Since investors care about short-run returns, they require a positive risk premium to
hold long-term bonds to compensate for this price risk. Since the degree of exposure to price risk
increases with DL , higher levels of DL lead to a higher risk premium and a lower price p(DL ).20
       It is useful to discuss the importance of diﬀerent assumptions for the results. The two as-
sumptions necessary for the existence of a positive term premium are: the presence of a shock to
expected revenues in period 1 and the fact that investors have a short horizon. If the shock to
expected revenues occurred after period 1, the price of long-term bonds would not change between
periods 0 and 1, pL,1 = pL , so investors would not require a positive risk premium to hold them.
In addition, if investors did not care about short-run returns, they would require the same risk
premium to hold long-term bonds (between periods 0 and 2) as they would to hold short-term
bonds (between periods 0 and 1, and then between periods 1 and 2). The reason is that both
strategies would pay out the same amount in all states of nature in period 2. On the other hand,
the assumptions that no default takes place in period 1 and that investors are risk neutral between
periods 1 and 2 substantially simplify the analysis of the model, but are not necessary for the
results. In a more general setting where the country can default in the intermediate period, the
risk premium on short-term bonds would also be positive. However, it would still be lower than
the risk premium on long-term bonds, since the risk premium on long-term bonds would reflect not
only the default risk in the intermediate period, but also the price risk.
  20                                   1−pL                                             π 0 −pL
       The yield on long-term bonds,    pL
                                            ,   equals the sum of their risk premium,      pL
                                                                                                ,   plus their default premium,
1−π 0
 pL
      .




                                                               9
2.3      Optimal maturity and risk sharing

We turn now to the choice of DL by the government. Using the bond prices derived in the previous
section, the government problem can be written as,21


                              max           E0 [−C (x) + π (Y − DL − DS,1 )] ,
                          DL ,DS ,DS,1 ,x

                                   s.t.     D0 = DS + pL DL ,

                                            x = DS − πDS,1 ,

                                            DS,1 ≤ Y − DL ,

                                            E u (w + (π − pL ) DL ) (π − pL ) = 0.


       We can solve this problem backward, solving first the optimization problem in period 1. The
maximum amount of short-term debt that the government can issue in period 1 is given by Y − DL ,
which is valued at π (Y − DL ). If π (Y − DL ) ≥ DS , the government can raise enough funds to
repay maturing short-term bonds without any fiscal adjustment. In this case, it sets x = 0 and
issues an amount DS,1 = DS /π of short-term bonds in period 1. The value of short-term liabilities is
constant over time and the government expected payoﬀ is π (Y − DL ) − πDS,1 = π (Y − DL ) − DS .
       When π (Y − DL ) < DS , a fiscal adjustment is needed to avoid default. Since C (x) > 0 for
x > 0, it is optimal to set DS,1 to its maximum level to minimize the fiscal adjustment. The
government then sets x = DS − π (Y − DL ) and the expected payoﬀ is −C(x).
       The government’s objective function as of period 1 depends only on the value of its net resources
π (Y − DL ) − DS . We thus define the government’s indirect utility function, V (·), as
                                       
                                               π (Y − DL ) − DS             if π (Y − DL ) − DS ≥ 0
           V (π (Y − DL ) − DS ) =
                                        −C (− (π (Y − D ) − D )) if π (Y − D ) − D < 0
                                                        L     S              L     S


The function V (·) is increasing and concave. Using the fact that D0 = DS + pL DL , we can rewrite
  21
    The constraint on DS,1 is due to the fact that short-term bonds issued in period 1 are junior to long-term bonds.
Without this constraint, the government could pledge all period 2 output to short-term bond holders. As a result, in
equilibrium the government would not be able to issue any long-term bonds in period 0.




                                                         10
the government’s problem in period 0 as


                            max      E [V (πY − D0 − (π − pL ) DL )]
                             DL
                            s.t.     E u (w + (π − pL ) DL ) (π − pL ) = 0.


   Written in this form, the government’s maturity choice in period 0 has the features of a risk-
sharing problem. The problem can be thought as one in which the government has a utility function
V (·) over period 1 “consumption,” needs to invest D0 in period 0 to finance a risky project that
pays πY in period 1, and borrows from risk averse investors by issuing bonds that pay 1 in every
state (i.e. short-term bonds) and bonds that pay π (i.e. long-term bonds). The government’s
“consumption” level is given by


                                     CG = πY − D0 − (π − pL )DL .


If the government issued only short-term bonds, it would hold all the risk and CG would be very
sensitive to π. Given the concavity of V (·), this volatility of CG would be costly, reflecting a higher
likelihood and size of fiscal adjustment. Thus, the government has incentives to issue long-term
bonds to transfer some of this risk to investors.22 However, investors require a risk premium to
bear the price risk associated with long-term bonds. Since investors’ period 1 consumption equals
w + (π − pL )DL , their exposure to π is proportional to DL . The higher DL , the higher the risk
premium required by investors and the lower the price pL . This implies that the expected level of
government consumption, which equals E[CG ] = π0 Y − D0 − (π 0 − pL )DL , is decreasing in DL . As
a result, the government trades-oﬀ the insurance benefits associated with long-term bonds against
the lower borrowing cost associated with short-term bonds.


2.4    Comparative statics: Supply and demand factors

We now characterize how the optimal maturity structure and the risk premium on long-term bonds
depend on the characteristics of investors and the borrower country. We refer to supply and demand
as supply and demand of funds in international capital markets: international investors are on the
  22
     Note that dCG /dπ = Y − DL is decreasing in DL . In particular, when π(Y − DL ) − (D0 − pL DL ) ≥ 0 the
government is fully insured since CG ≥ 0 for all realizations of π.



                                                    11
supply side and the debtor country is on the demand side. In particular, we consider the eﬀect
of investor risk aversion (captured in the model by their wealth w) and the eﬀect of the country’s
expected repayment capacity (captured in the model by Y ). We focus on four limit cases.


Case I: Risk neutral investors, high expected revenues

Assume that investors are risk neutral and government resources satisfy πY − D0 ≥ 0. Investor risk
neutrality implies that pL = π0 . In addition, the condition on government resources implies that


              π(Y − DL ) − (D0 − pL DL ) = π(Y − DL ) − (D0 − π0 DL ) ≥ (π0 − π)DL ≥ 0,


with the last inequality following from π 0 ≥ π. As a result, independently of the maturity structure,
the risk premium on long-term bonds is zero and the government never needs to carry out a fiscal
adjustment in period 1. This case shows that when both investor wealth and the government’s
expected revenues are high, term premia are low and the maturity structure is undetermined. This
result reflects the fact that when investors and the government are both risk neutral, it does not
matter which one holds the risk.


Case II: Risk averse investors, high expected revenues

Assume that investors are risk averse, while government resources still satisfy πY − D0 ≥ 0. This
condition guarantees that if the government issued no long-term bonds and financed D0 solely with
short-term bonds (DS = D0 ), it would never face a rollover crisis. Since investors would hold no
country risk, the risk premium on long-term bonds would be zero (pL = π 0 ).23 If the government
issued a positive amount of long-term bonds, it would still avoid a rollover crisis in period 1 but it
would face a higher borrowing cost. Its payoﬀ would be


                                    π0 Y − D0 − (π0 − pL )DL < π0 Y − D0 .


      As a result, any DL > 0 is suboptimal. This case shows that when investor wealth is low and
the government’s expected resources are high, term premia are low and the maturity structure is
 23
      In this case, pL is the price of long-term bonds in the limit when DL → 0.




                                                          12
short. This result reflects the fact that when investor risk aversion dominates, it is optimal for the
government to hold all the risk by issuing only short-term bonds.


Case III: Risk neutral investors, low expected revenues

Assume that investors are risk neutral, while government resources are such that πY − D0 < 0.
                                                                      D0 −πY
Investor risk neutrality implies that pL = π0 . Let D̂L =              π0 −π   . If the government issued an
amount of long-term bonds DL ≥ D̂L , then


        π(Y − DL ) − (D0 − pL DL ) = π(Y − DL ) − (D0 − π0 DL ) = πY − D0 + (π0 − π)DL ≥ 0.


In this case, the government would never face a rollover crisis.24 Any amount of long-term bonds
DL < D̂L would lead to a positive probability of rollover crisis and would thus be suboptimal. This
case shows that when investor wealth is high and the government’s expected resources are low,
term premia are low and the maturity structure is long. This result reflects the fact that when
government risk aversion dominates, it is optimal for the government to transfer all the risk to
investors by issuing only long-term bonds.


Case IV: Risk averse investors, low expected revenues

Finally, assume that investors are risk averse, while government resources are such that πY −D0 < 0.
In this case, the government has to trade-oﬀ the cost of a rollover crisis associated with short-term
borrowing against the high borrowing cost associated with long-term borrowing. This leads us to
the following proposition.

Proposition 1. When investors are risk averse and government resources satisfy πY − D0 < 0,
there is an optimal amount of long-term borrowing DL ∈ (0, D̂L ), the risk premium on long-term
bonds is positive (pL < π0 ), and the probability of a rollover crisis is positive.

Proof: See Appendix A.
       The proposition states that when investors are risk averse and expected government resources
are low, the optimal maturity structure is an interior solution. By setting DL = 0, the government
  24
   Note that D̂L ≥ 0 since the government’s expected revenue satisfies π 0 Y > D0 and π < π0 . In the case in which
π = 0, D̂L = D 0
             π 0 and the unique optimum is to issue no short-term debt (DS = 0).




                                                        13
would not have to pay the risk premium associated with long-term borrowing, but it would face
a high expected fiscal adjustment cost in period 1 (when a large stock of short-term debt is to
be rolled over). By setting DL = D̂L , the government would completely avoid a rollover crisis in
period 1, but it would face a high borrowing cost in period 0. It is easy to see why the solution is
interior. At low levels of DL , investors are not very exposed to the country risk, so it is not very
expensive to increase DL . At high levels of DL , the country is well insured, so the cost of lowering
DL in terms of a higher cost from a rollover crisis is low. In addition, since investors are risk averse
and DL > 0, the risk premium on long-term bonds must be positive.


Supply and demand side crises

These four cases are summarized in Figure 1, where they are represented in the (w, Y ) space. This
figure is useful to discuss the eﬀects of supply and demand side shocks on debt maturity and the
term premium.
   A shift to the left reflects a reduction in investor wealth (or an increase in investor risk aversion),
which represents a deterioration of the supply side. The increase in investor risk aversion causes
an increase in the term premium and a shift towards shorter maturities, as the government finds it
optimal to transfer some of the risk from investors to itself. In the case of a shift from region I to
region II, this shift does not result in a rollover crisis, since expected repayment capacity is high.
In the case of a shift from region III to region IV, this shift does involve an increase in the cost of a
rollover crisis, since expected repayment capacity is low. Still, it is optimal for the government to
hold this risk because of the savings in borrowing cost associated with short-term debt. Intuitively,
a negative supply shock leads to lower quantities (less long-term borrowing) and higher cost of
borrowing (higher term premium).
   A shift down reflects a reduction in the country’s expected repayment capacity, which represents
a deterioration of the demand side. The decrease in expected repayment capacity increases the cost
of a rollover crisis. As a result, the government finds it optimal to transfer some of the increased risk
to investors by shifting towards longer debt maturities, which results in a higher term premium. In
the case of a shift from region I to region III, investors have low risk aversion and thus are willing
to hold the additional risk without demanding a higher premium. In the case of a shift from region
II to region IV, the shift towards longer maturities does increase the term premium since investors


                                                   14
are risk averse. Intuitively, a positive demand shock leads to higher quantities (more long-term
borrowing) and higher cost of borrowing (higher term premium).


2.5        Implications of the model

In the rest of the paper, we empirically study the behavior of the term premium and bond issuance
by emerging market sovereigns at diﬀerent maturities. In particular, we focus on whether there
exists a positive term premium, whether the term premium increases during crises, and whether
the maturity of bond issuance shifts during crises.
         The model predicts that the term premium should be positive on average. It also predicts
that, during crises, the term premium should increase. This occurs either because of an increase in
investor exposure to country risk in the case of a demand side shock, or because investors require a
higher premium to hold the same amount of risk in the case of a supply side shock. The predictions
on the optimal maturity structure depend on the type of shock. While a demand side shock causes
the country to issue long-term bonds to shift risk towards investors, a supply side shock causes the
country to issue short-term bonds to shift risk away from investors and save on borrowing costs.
As a result, the correlation between the term premium and the maturity of bond issuance allows
us to establish whether the predominant shocks are on the supply side (shifting the supply curve)
or on the demand side (shifting the demand curve).25


3         Bond data

We now turn to the empirical evidence and analyze bond price and quantity data. The price data
are used to estimate risk premia on short- and long-term bonds, and to characterize the behavior
of the implied term premium. The quantity data are used to analyze the comovement between the
maturity structure of bond issuance and the observed term premium.
         We conduct the empirical analysis by collecting data on sovereign bonds from the early 1990s
    25
    In a more general setting, we would expect a demand side shock to aﬀect the wealth of investors through its eﬀect
on the price of bonds investors already hold. In this case, a demand shock would have the direct eﬀect highlighted
in the model, but also an indirect eﬀect on the supply side. As we show in the empirical section, crises are typically
associated with higher term premia and a shift towards shorter maturities. This comovement suggests that either the
predominant shocks are on the supply side or that, if they are on the demand side, their direct eﬀects are dominated
by their indirect eﬀect on the supply side. In either case, the results support the conclusion that supply side factors
play an important role in emerging market crises.



                                                          15
up to 2003 for eight emerging economies. These countries are Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico,
Russia, Turkey, Uruguay, and Venezuela. To calculate the term premium, we also collect data
on sovereign bonds for Germany and the U.S., which are assumed to be free of default risk. The
choice of emerging markets is constrained by data limitations. To estimate time series of the term
premium, we need enough foreign currency denominated bonds of diﬀerent maturities at each point
in time. Therefore, our sample corresponds to those emerging economies that borrowed heavily in
foreign currency, generating a rich enough pool of bonds. Furthermore, we restrict the sample to
sovereign bonds because they constitute the most liquid debt instrument in most emerging markets,
and because private debtors in emerging markets do not issue enough bonds to compute the term
premium.
      We collect weekly (end-of-week) time series of bond prices, using all available bonds for each
country.26 We also collect other information on these bonds, including currency denomination,
coupon structure, and maturity. In addition, we compile time series of bond issuance in foreign
currency. For each bond, we collect the amount issued, currency denomination, and maturity date.
With this information, we construct weekly time series of amount issued valued in U.S. dollars. We
exclude from the sample the bonds with collateral and special guarantees, such as collateralized
Brady bonds and those issued by Argentina during the large pre-default swap. We also exclude
bonds issued during forced restructurings, like those issued by Argentina and Russia post default
and Uruguay post crisis.27 We collect data from three diﬀerent sources: Bloomberg, Datastream,
and J.P. Morgan.
      Regarding the currency choice, we restrict the sample to bonds denominated in foreign currency
so we can abstract from the currency risk that would aﬀect the term premium on domestic currency
bonds. This reduces the sample significantly, given that many countries, especially Asian and
Eastern European ones, mostly issue domestic currency bonds. With respect to the currency
selection, we use bonds denominated in U.S. dollars, Deutsche marks, and euros for the estimation
of bond spreads. This choice is not very restrictive as most foreign currency bonds are issued
in these currencies. As benchmarks of risk-less bonds, we use those issued by Germany in both
Deutsche marks and euros and by the U.S. in dollars. We use bonds in all foreign currencies for
our estimations of bond issuance.
 26
      We eliminate the observations where bond prices do not change over time, as this typically reflects no trading.
 27
      See Duﬃe, Pedersen, and Singleton (2003) for more details on the Russian default.


                                                          16
    Table 1 lists the countries in the sample, along with the time periods used for the price and
quantity data. The price data start in April 1993 (with a diﬀerent starting date for each country),
ending in May 2003 for all countries. The quantity data cover a longer time span, starting in
January 1990 and ending in December 2002. Table 1 also displays the number of bonds available to
calculate bond prices and the number of bonds issued during the sample period. For the price data,
the table shows the average minimum maturity, maximum maturity, and 75th percentile. Though
most bonds have a maturity of less than 15 years, the countries in the sample have been able to
issue longer-term bonds with maturity of 20 and 30 years. The bottom panel of Table 1 displays
the average amount issued by maturity, showing that issuance is distributed across maturities.
Appendix Table 1 lists all the bonds used in the paper, specifying for each bond its characteristics
and whether it is used for the price and/or quantity analysis. The number of emerging market
bonds used in the paper is 466, while the total number of bonds (including German and U.S.
bonds) is 746.


4    Bond returns: The cost of borrowing

In this section, we show that, consistent with the model predictions, observed term premia on
emerging market bonds are positive and increase during crisis times. In the model, the risk premium
on short-term debt is set to zero for simplicity, so the risk premium on long-term bonds and the
term premium are identical. In reality, the risk premium on short-term bonds is also positive.
Thus, to obtain information on the term premium, we first need to estimate the risk premia on
bonds of diﬀerent maturities.
    The risk premium for each maturity is estimated by using ex-post excess returns on emerging
market bonds over comparable default-free (German and U.S.) bonds. To calculate the risk pre-
mium, we need to obtain first bond yields, spreads, and prices. We begin by estimating time series
of German and U.S. yields curves and emerging market spread curves. The maturity-τ spread, st,τ ,
is defined as the diﬀerence between the yield, yt,τ , on an emerging market zero-coupon bond of
                           ∗ , on a default-free zero-coupon bond of maturity τ , s
maturity τ and the yield, yt,τ                                                                   ∗
                                                                                   t,τ = yt,τ − yt,τ .

We use this information to obtain bond returns at diﬀerent maturities and over time for every
country. This enables us to make cross-country, cross-maturity, and over-time comparisons. Note



                                                 17
that it would be impossible to carry out the analysis using the raw data because each country has a
diﬀerent set of bonds at each point in time, with varying maturity and coupon structure. Appendix
B describes the methodology used to estimate yields and spread curves.
       Figure 2 displays the estimated spreads over time for each country. The figure shows spreads
at two maturities to illustrate how short-term (3-year) and long-term (12-year) spreads move over
time. The figure shows some interesting facts. First, spread curves are, on average, upward sloping.
Second, spreads increase during periods of financial crises. For example, during the crises in Ar-
gentina, Russia, and Uruguay, spreads jump to more than 25 percent or 2,500 basis points. Third,
short-term spreads are more volatile than long-term spreads. In fact, during periods of very high
spreads there is an inversion of the spread curve, with short-term spreads becoming higher than
long-term ones.
       Using the estimated spread curves and U.S. yield curves, we compute the price Pt,τ of a rep-
resentative emerging market bond of given maturity τ and coupon c. In Figure 3, we plot the
price of short- and long-term bonds, with a semi-annual coupon of 7.5 percent.28 To simplify the
comparisons, the value at the beginning of the sample is normalized to 100 for each country. The
figure shows that the prices of long-term emerging market bonds are more volatile than those of
short-term bonds. In particular, at the onset of a crisis the prices of long-term bonds fall much more
than those of short-term bonds, while during the recovery (if there is one), the prices of long-term
bonds increase much more than those of short-term bonds. Next, we show how these price changes
are reflected in the risk premium and the term premium.
       After having obtained prices, we estimate the risk premium using excess returns or, more
precisely, average ex-post excess returns over T periods.29 The return of holding an emerging
                                                                    Pt+1,τ −1 −Pt,τ
market bond, rt+1,τ , for one period (one week) is equal to              Pt,τ       ,   in the case of no coupon
                                                                                       ∗
payment at date t + 1. We compare this return to the return on a German or U.S. bond, rt+1,τ .
Excess returns, erτ , are then expressed as the returns of holding emerging market bonds of maturity
  28
     For prices and returns, we choose to use coupon-paying bonds because emerging markets almost never issue
zero-coupon bonds. So the pricing errors for coupon-paying bonds are smaller than for zero-coupon bonds.
  29
     To calculate the means, we use holding periods of one week. We also experimented with holding periods of one
month, obtaining similar results.




                                                       18
τ and coupon c over the returns of “comparable” risk-less bonds,

                                       T −1                        T −1
                                  1                         1                          ∗
                          erτ =               ert+1,τ   =                    rt+1,τ − rt+1,τ .
                                T −1   t=1
                                                          T −1      t=1


Positive excess returns mean that emerging market bonds pay positive returns on top of what
German or U.S. bonds do. Note that the computation of excess returns does not simply use risk-
less bonds of the same maturity and coupon. In fact, we obtain excess returns by taking into account
the payment profile of the emerging market bond, and comparing it to a portfolio of risk-less bonds
that replicates its payment structure. (See Appendix B for more details.)
       The term premium, tpτ 2 ,τ 1 , is given by the diﬀerence between the risk premium (average excess
returns) on long-term bonds (of maturity τ 2 ) and that on short-term bonds (of maturity τ 1 ),


                                              tpτ 2 ,τ 1 = erτ 2 − erτ 1 .


       Before going to the empirical estimates, two points are worth noting about the term premium.
First, a positive slope in the spread curve does not imply that the term premium is positive, since
the term premium also depends on the evolution of spreads over time and on how defaults aﬀect
bonds of diﬀerent maturities. Second, the diﬀerence in risk premium between long- and short-term
emerging market bonds would typically reflect both the price risk associated with the probability
of default and the term premium inherent in default-free bonds. Here we concentrate on the first
component, because we define the term premium on emerging market bonds in excess of the term
premium on default-free bonds.30


4.1      Unconditional risk and term premia

Table 2 shows average annualized excess returns across all observations in the sample. The table
displays values for bonds with maturities of 3, 6, 9, and 12 years and annual coupon payments
of 5, 7.5, and 10 percent (paid semi-annually). These “theoretical” bonds are representative of
emerging market sovereign bonds both in terms of maturity and coupons. Table 2 shows that,
when considering all the countries in the sample, excess returns are positive for all coupon sizes
  30
   Since the term premium for U.S. and German bonds is positive, the total term premium would be larger if we
added the two components.



                                                          19
and maturities. More relevant for our analysis, excess returns increase with maturity in all cases,
so the term premium is also positive.31 Not surprisingly, there is heterogeneity in the results at the
country level, reflecting the diﬀerent performance of each emerging market. However, the results
are not driven by any particular emerging market, since they survive when we exclude from the
sample individual countries.
    What do the results in Table 2 tell about how much emerging market bonds pay relative to
comparable default-free bonds? To answer this question, consider the results for bonds with annual
coupons of 7.5 percent (the one closest to actual coupons). The results in Table 2 say that, on
average, investors receive an annualized return three percent higher when investing in a 3-year
emerging market bond than when investing in a German or U.S. 3-year bond, and an annualized
return seven percent higher when investing in a 12-year emerging market bond than when investing
in a German or U.S. 12-year bond. In other words, emerging market bonds pay a positive risk
premium and a positive term premium.


4.2    Conditional risk and term premia: Crises vs. tranquil times

We now study whether the term premium is diﬀerent during crisis and tranquil times. To do so,
we first need to define crises. The literature has used diﬀerent definitions, with no definition being
perfect as certain ad-hoc criteria need to be adopted. To partly overcome this problem, we use
four diﬀerent definitions of crises to gauge the robustness of our results. Since we are interested
in studying conditional returns, we adopt definitions that use only ex-ante information. In other
words, to determine whether there was a crisis at time t, we only use information that was available
at time t. Crisis definition 1 is our benchmark definition; it sets the beginning of a crisis when
9-year spreads are greater than a threshold, which is defined as the average spread over the previous
six months plus 300 basis points.32 The end of the crisis is at the end of the first four-week period
in which spreads have remained below the threshold used to determine the beginning of the crisis.
Crisis definition 2 is similar to crisis definition 1, but uses 400 basis points to define the threshold.
Crisis definitions 3 and 4 are similar, but use a one-week period instead of a four-week period to
  31
     Also note that excess returns decrease with coupon size. This is expected given that the term premia are positive
and duration is a decreasing function of coupon size.
  32
     To classify the first observations of the sample for each country, we repeat the first price observed during the
previous six months.




                                                         20
end the crisis.
   Table 3 lists the crisis periods obtained with crisis definition 1. All major crises are captured
by the crisis definition. For example, the Mexican 94-95 crisis aﬀected Argentina and Brazil. (Note
that our sample does not contain spreads for Mexico during that period.) The Russian crisis aﬀected
all countries in the sample except Uruguay, which had its own crisis after Argentina defaulted on
its debt in early 2002. The Argentine crisis started when the government was forced to change its
economic plan and the default became very likely. Brazil and Colombia were also hit by crises in
2002.
   Then, we calculate excess returns at diﬀerent maturities, splitting the sample between tranquil
times and crises. The results are reported in Table 4 for all crisis definitions. We report results using
bonds with coupons of size 7.5 percent, although the results are similar for bonds with coupons of
five and ten percent. The results indicate that both excess returns and the term premium are very
large during crises, and close to zero during tranquil times. For example, according to definition
1, the diﬀerence between the average 12- and 3-year annualized excess returns (our measure of the
term premium) is around 28 percent. Table 5 displays excess returns by country according to crisis
definition 1. The table shows that for most countries the risk premium and the term premium
are large during crises and low during non-crisis periods. There are two exceptions, excess returns
are negative during crises in Uruguay and, for short maturities, in Argentina. This is due to the
fact that both countries have experienced actual defaults, namely, crises in which the situation
continued to deteriorate rather than improve. In the case of Argentina, this is partly compensated
by the Mexican crisis, when excess returns were very high.
   In Table 6, we analyze more formally whether excess returns across maturities are predictable,
namely whether they change during crisis times. The table presents least squares regressions with
the long-short excess return as the dependent variable, defined as the diﬀerence for each observation
between a long-term (9-year or 12-year) excess return and a short-term (3-year) or medium-term
(6-year) excess return. The independent variable is a dummy that takes the value one during crises
and zero otherwise. To make sure that the results are robust to our crisis definition, we also try log
spreads, defined as log(1+st,τ ), at diﬀerent maturities as the independent variable. The estimations
pool all observations available across countries and over time. Results with and without country




                                                   21
and time eﬀects are reported.33
       The results in Table 6 show that the crisis variable is positive and statistically significant at
the one percent level for all regressions. The estimates also show that the eﬀect of a crisis is very
large. For example, the regression for the 12-3 term premium with no country or time dummies
shows that the term premium increases by 0.449 percent per week during crisis times, which on
an annualized basis corresponds to more than 26 percent. The coeﬃcient of 0.045 on the 6-year
spread in the regression of the 12-3 term premium states that when 6-year spreads increase by one
percent, the annualized long-short excess return increases by 2.4 percent. Confirming the evidence
presented in the previous tables, these regressions imply that the term premium is time-varying,
increasing during periods of crises and high spreads.
       We have already shown that the term premium increases during crises. To estimate to what
degree this increase can be related to an increase in the volatility of returns during crises, we plot
in Figure 4 the excess returns against the standard deviation of excess returns for crisis, non-crisis,
and all periods. The figure shows that during non-crisis periods excess returns are close to zero,
with the standard deviation increasing with maturity. During crisis periods, both excess returns
and their standard deviations increase for all maturities. It is important to note that the increase
in excess returns cannot be accounted for by the increase in volatility. The reason is that the
Sharpe ratio (i.e. the ratio of excess returns over their standard deviation) increases substantially
during crisis times. The average Sharpe ratio across maturities is 0.006 during non-crisis periods
and larger than 0.06 during crisis periods.
       In sum, the results above are consistent with the model presented in Section 2, which shows
that crises can be due to shocks to the country’s repayment capacity or to shocks to investor wealth
(or other determinants of risk appetite). In both cases, the model predicts that the term premium
should increase. In the case of debtor side shocks, or demand shocks, the country demands more
long-term funds, driving up the cost of long-term borrowing. In the case of investor side shocks, or
supply shocks, bondholders become more sensitive to the price risk of long-term bonds and demand
  33
     The regressions use robust estimates of the standard errors. To do so, we define clusters by the country and
crisis indicators, thus, observations are assumed to be independent across clusters, but not necessarily independent
within clusters. This allows for a general form of heteroskedasticity across observations and non-zero correlation
within clusters. As further robustness tests, we also estimated regressions with crisis dummies constructed with crisis
definitions 2, 3, and 4. Moreover, we redefined clusters using either country or crisis indicators. In all cases, we
obtained similar results.




                                                          22
a higher term premium. To complement the price evidence presented so far, the next section studies
bond issuance at diﬀerent maturities, during crisis and tranquil times. This will allow us to shed
more light on the relative role of debtor and investor side shocks during crises. But before doing
so, we discuss three points related to the results presented in this section.


4.3      Interpreting the evidence

We end this section with a discussion of three issues that might help clarify the results related
to the risk premium and the term premium. First, can our results be due to a peso problem?
Second, does the fact that the term premium is close to zero during tranquil times imply that our
explanation of why emerging economies borrow short term only applies to crisis times? Third,
what is the relation between our results and the literature on the term structure of interest rates
in developed countries?


4.3.1      Peso problem

As usual in studies that estimate ex-ante expected returns by computing average ex-post returns, it
is natural to ask whether our results could be due to a peso-type problem. In particular, is it possible
that ex-post returns be positive in our sample simply because defaults are underrepresented? This
potential small sample problem could be important given that defaults are rare events.
      We think that it is very unlikely that our results on either risk or term premia be due to a peso
problem. To begin, our sample does include a number of default episodes and it is diﬃcult to claim
that the period 1993-2003 was particularly good for emerging markets. In addition, the behavior
of short- and long-term bond prices during defaults also suggests that the results are not due to a
peso problem. As explained next, this argument is based on two points.
      First, the result that the term premium is positive would probably survive even if there were
more defaults in our sample. Usually, long-term bonds trade at higher discounts (i.e. lower percent-
age of face value) than short-term bonds. This is especially true during crises when spreads and
the probability of default are high. In addition, post-default workouts generally involve payments
approximately proportional to face value. This implies that episodes of default are associated with
larger losses on short-term bonds than on long-term bonds.34 As a result, even if in reality defaults
 34
      This in fact was the case during the Argentine default. We studied the excess returns of buying Argentine bonds



                                                          23
were more frequent than in our sample the term premium would still be positive.
    Second, if the term premium is positive, then risk premia are likely to be positive as well. The
reason is that it is very diﬃcult to think of an environment where long-term bonds have higher
returns than short-term bonds, while at the same time either long- or short-term bonds have a
negative risk premium. The returns on short- and long-term bonds are highly correlated and, thus,
probably have similar correlations with the investors’ stochastic discount factor or marginal utility.
A negative risk premium at any maturity would imply a positive correlation between bond returns
and the investors’ stochastic discount factor and, as a result, a negative price of risk. Since the
returns on long-term bonds are much more volatile than those on short-term bonds, a negative
price of risk would imply a negative term premium, contradicting our findings. Therefore, the fact
that the term premium is positive suggests that the price of emerging market risk and, thus, risk
premia are also positive.35


4.3.2    When is it cheaper to borrow short term?

Since the term premium is close to zero during tranquil times, one could think that borrowing short
term is cheaper than borrowing long term only during crises. In fact, this is not the case. The
reason is that there is a positive transition hazard rate from tranquil to crisis times. As a result,
when a country issues long-term bonds during tranquil times, it has to compensate bondholders
for the drop in bond prices that would take place if a crisis were to materialize. In other words,
the spreads on long-term bonds issued during tranquil times reflect not only the expected losses
from default, but also the expected risk premia that would need to be paid during the lifetime of
the bond. This is true irrespective of whether a crisis actually materializes.
    A caveat to this reasoning applies. This argument is valid only if there is some cost associated
with repurchasing outstanding long-term bonds at the beginning of crises by issuing short-term
of diﬀerent maturities before the default (which was declared on December 23, 2001) and holding them until after the
default. For purchase dates between early November 2001 and one week before the default and selling dates between
one week and one year after the default, the losses on short-term bonds were virtually always greater than those on
long-term bonds, by around ten percent.
   35
      The idea that the observed term premia carry information on the underlying risk premium seems to be very
useful since estimates of the risk premium are typically very sensitive to the sample under study. For example,
Eichengreen and Portes (1988) find that the ex-post excess returns on sovereign bonds issued by foreign countries in
the United States and Britain during the interwar years were close to zero. Klingen, Weder, and Zettelmeyer (2004)
find that the ex-post excess returns on emerging market sovereign lending were negative during the 1970s and 1980s,
but positive during the 1990s. In this paper, although excess returns are positive in the full sample, we find negative
excess returns for Argentina and Uruguay.


                                                          24
bonds. The behavior of bond issuance during crises suggests that this may be the case. As shown
in the next section, during crises emerging economies do not repurchase existing long-term bonds,
while they very seldom issue new ones. It is diﬃcult to explain this knife-edge result of no change
in long-term indebtedness in the absence of some cost (signalling or otherwise) associated with
retiring existing long-term bonds.36


4.3.3    Related literature on the term structure of interest rates

There is a vast literature on the term structure of interest rates in developed countries related to
our paper. A large part of this literature has focused on testing and rejecting the pure expectations
hypothesis (according to which term and risk premia are zero) and the expectations hypothesis
(according to which term and risk premia are constant over time). The more recent literature has
tried to characterize and explain the dynamics of risk premia by allowing for a time-varying price
of risk.37
    Our findings that risk and term premia are positive and increase during crises can be interpreted
as a rejection of the pure expectations hypothesis and the expectations hypothesis, but for emerging
economies and stated in terms of spreads instead of yields. These findings contradict the still widely
held view in the literature on emerging market borrowing that spreads mostly reflect the market
assessment of the probability of default.38


5     Bond issuance: Supply vs. demand shocks

The model in Section 2 shows that the comovement between the term premium and the maturity
structure of debt can shed light on the type of shocks characterizing the cyclical behavior of emerging
market debt. On the one hand, demand side shocks such as an increase in current financing needs or
a reduction in future expected government revenues are likely to lead to an increase in the maturity
   36
      The IMF (1999) reports that in fact there have been some attempts to buyback debt perceived to be “mispriced,”
i.e. paying a high risk premium. An example is the buyback of Polish Brady bonds. However, these operations are
rare, involve relatively small amounts, and tend to take place in tranquil times.
   37
      For a definition of the pure expectations and expectations hypotheses and for some references on these topics,
see Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985), Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), Cochrane (1999), Bekaert and Hodrick
(2001), and Dai and Singleton (2002).
   38
      Our model provides a simple equilibrium framework that is consistent with these observations. However, to
provide a quantitative assessment of these facts more work remains to be done, both in the direction of no-arbitrage
models and in the direction of equilibrium models. For no-arbitrage models see Duﬃe and Singleton (1999) and
Duﬃe, Pedersen, and Singleton (2003).


                                                        25
structure of debt and a resulting increase in the term premium, generating a positive comovement.
On the other hand, supply side shocks, such as a decrease in investor wealth, are likely to lead to an
increase in the term premium and a resulting decrease in the maturity structure of debt, generating
a negative comovement.
   In this section, we study whether the behavior of the quantity data are consistent with supply
or demand type of shocks. We concentrate on two sets of variables, the amount issued at diﬀerent
maturities and the average maturity of bond issuance. We study the behavior of these variables
over time. In particular, we analyze how they are aﬀected by crises, spreads, and the term premium.
   To study the amount issued at diﬀerent maturities, we run a separate regression of issuance
at each maturity as a function of each conditioning variable. We use a Tobit model, estimated by
maximum likelihood, pooling all observations. These estimations take into account the fact that
observations are left censored at zero. The dependent variable is the amount issued at each maturity
in any given week, normalized by the average weekly issues for each country. This normalization
takes into consideration that the average amount issued varies across countries. We use four diﬀerent
bond maturities: up to 3-year maturity (short term), more than 3-year maturity and up to 6-year
maturity (medium-short term), more than 6-year maturity and up to 9-year maturity (medium-long
term), and more than 9-year maturity (long term). As explanatory variables we use, alternatively,
the crisis dummy defined above, the 3-year spread, the 9-year spread, the emerging market bond
index (EMBI) spread for each country, and the predicted term premium for each country. For
spreads, we use log-spreads, defined as log(1+ st,τ ). The EMBI spreads, calculated by J.P. Morgan,
are well-known measures of long-term spreads in emerging markets. They not only provide an
alternative estimate of long-term spreads, but also extend the sample for Mexico to cover the
Mexican crisis (though they exclude Uruguay). We use the predicted term premium because it
most directly captures the cost of issuing long-term debt relative to short-term debt. This variable
is computed by regressing ex-post excess returns on 3-year and 9-year spreads and then obtaining
the predicted value. As before, we compute robust standard errors using the country and crisis
indicators as clusters.
   The Tobit estimations are reported in Table 7. The estimations show that short-term issues are
hardly aﬀected by any of the conditioning variables; only the 3-year spread is statistically significant
at the ten percent level. However, medium- and long-term issues do show clear cyclical patterns.


                                                  26
The conditioning variables become more statistically significant and the point estimates negative
and large in magnitude. In the regressions for long-term issues, all the regressors are significant,
at least at the five percent level. The coeﬃcients reported, which are the marginal eﬀects or the
eﬀects on the observed (not the latent) variable, also seem large. For example, an increase of 100
basis points in 9-year spreads leads to a decline in the weekly issues of 0.223, where the average
value of the normalized weekly issue is 1. In sum, the estimations in Table 7 suggest that during
crises and, more generally, in periods of high spreads, countries tend to issue less debt. In addition,
the longer the maturity of debt, the larger the eﬀect of crises and spreads on the amount issued.
Interestingly, the estimated term premium has a big negative eﬀect on long-term issues, but no
statistically significant eﬀect on shorter-term issues. The result that short-term issues are barely
aﬀected by the diﬀerent variables reflects the fact that although countries tend to issue less when
spreads are high, they mostly issue short-term bonds (if they issue at all). These two eﬀects cancel
out, leading to non-significant coeﬃcients.
       To study the average maturity of issues, we estimate a model that takes into account the
incidental truncation of the data, since the average maturity is only available when countries issue
bonds and, otherwise, there are missing observations. As noted initially by Heckman (1979),
ignoring the missing values might lead to a sample selection bias. In our case, one would tend
to miss observations when spreads are high and countries do not issue any bonds. To account
for this selection, we estimate two equations simultaneously by maximum likelihood. One equation
describes the probability of observing the average maturity of issues each week. The second equation
estimates how the average maturity is correlated with the conditioning variables. In this type of
estimations, it is usually diﬃcult to select the variables that enter in each equation. We choose
diﬀerent specifications to see whether the results are robust to this choice.39 The regressors included
in the selection equation are similar to those used for the Tobit models. These variables help to
predict whether countries issue at all. The regressors included are, alternatively, the crisis dummy,
the short- and long-term spreads, and the country EMBI spread. For the main equation, we use
the long-term spread and, alternatively, the estimated term premium, which captures the relative
cost of issuing long term. As the variables are not scaled, we include country dummies. Again, we
compute robust standard errors using the country and crisis indicators as clusters.
  39
    As another robustness check, we also estimated the main equation without taking into account the selection bias
and obtained similar results.


                                                        27
    The results of the selection equations, displayed in Table 8, show that countries are less likely to
issue bonds during crisis times and, more generally, when spreads are high. In addition, the results
of the main equations show that the average maturity of issues shortens when long-term spreads
or the predicted term premium increases. These results are consistent with the pattern displayed
in Figure 5, which shows the average maturity and spreads over time for each country. The figure
also shows that issuance is negatively correlated with crises and, more generally, with the level
of spreads. Finally, another way to summarize the evidence is that countries try to extend the
maturity structure of their debt whenever market conditions permit it, i.e. when markets require a
low term premium.
    Taken together, the results presented in the last two sections provide compelling evidence that
supply side factors play an important role in emerging market borrowing, especially during crises.
First, the fact that term premia are on average positive implies that borrowing long term is on
average more expensive than borrowing short term. Second, the fact that during crises the term
premium increases while borrowing shifts toward shorter maturities implies that crises are charac-
terized by negative shifts in the supply of funds to the aﬀected countries.


6    Final remarks

This paper proposes a new explanation to why emerging economies borrow short term, even though
this type of debt increases their exposure to rollover crises. We argue that countries borrow short
term because investors require a high risk premium to hold long-term debt, making short-term
borrowing cheaper. We model the choice of debt maturity structure as the outcome of a risk
sharing problem between the debtor country and risk averse investors. The model highlights the
trade-oﬀ between cheaper short-term borrowing and safer long-term borrowing, and endogenously
derives the maturity structure and the cost of borrowing at diﬀerent maturities. We then show
that emerging economies face a term premium that is positive on average and increases significantly
during crises. We also show that there is a negative correlation between the term premium and the
maturity of debt issuance. These results suggest that the higher cost of borrowing long-term can
account for both why emerging economies tend to borrow short term and why they rely even more
heavily on short-term debt during periods of financial turbulence.



                                                  28
       The evidence presented in the paper shows that supply-side factors, in particular time-varying
investor risk aversion, are important determinants of the borrowing cost and debt maturity of
emerging economies. While the evidence does not rule out the importance of other factors, it does
suggest that the conventional view overestimates the importance of debtor moral hazard.40 This
has important policy implications. One example is the question of how the international financial
system should deal with financial crises in emerging economies. From a moral hazard perspective,
the cost of crises is what makes these episodes a strong disciplining device. Eﬀorts to limit the
cost of crises through loans from the international financial community, or other liquidity providing
mechanisms, would exacerbate the moral hazard problem, and could end up reducing welfare. If,
on the other hand, countries borrow short term because of the high cost of long-term borrowing,
those same crisis prevention mechanisms would improve welfare. The benefits would come not only
from fewer and less severe crises, but also from cheaper long-term borrowing as a result of the
reduction in the price risk of long-term debt.
       An additional contribution of this paper is to construct time series of spreads and risk premia
at diﬀerent maturities. This is useful since the literature so far has mostly used plain spreads to
measure the cost of borrowing. Simply looking at spreads can lead to the wrong conclusions. For
example, during crises, long-term spreads increase less than short-term spreads, as illustrated in
Figure 2. This does not mean that long-term debt becomes relatively less costly. Indeed, looking
at risk premia, we show that long-term borrowing becomes more costly during crises. This happens
not because long-term spreads increase disproportionately, but because short-term spreads tend to
revert quickly to normal levels. Thus, the country would benefit by issuing short-term debt and
renewing it at lower spreads after the crisis.
       The distinction between risk premia and plain spreads is crucial for quantitative macroeco-
nomic analysis. Although the literature stresses the relation between spreads (and interest rates)
and the macroeconomic performance of emerging economies, existing studies need to make strong
assumptions regarding the extent to which spreads reflect expected losses from default and risk
premia. At one extreme, there is a growing literature that tries to account for the behavior of
emerging economy spreads in an environment in which bondholders are risk neutral and spreads
  40
     The evidence does rule out models solely based on moral hazard since in such models risk and term premia are
zero. Although in such models short-term borrowing can reduce spreads, this reduction only reflects lower expected
losses from default. Furthermore, the evidence also rules out models with constant investor risk aversion because risk
and term premia are close to zero during tranquil times.


                                                         29
solely reflect expected losses from default.41 These papers have so far been unable to account for
the high volatility of spreads in emerging economies. This is not surprising given our evidence that
an important fraction of the increase in spreads during crises reflects an increase in risk premia.
In fact, our evidence implies that even if these models could account for the volatility of spreads
while assuming zero risk premia, they would do so by overestimating the volatility of default prob-
abilities. At the other extreme, a number of papers analyze the relation between interest rates and
output volatility assuming that there are no defaults.42 These papers overestimate the increase in
the cost of borrowing during crises, by attributing it entirely to changes in risk premia. Our paper
has useful implications for this literature as it provides estimates on the magnitude and volatility
of the cost of borrowing for emerging economies.
  41
     See, for example, Oviedo (2003), Arellano (2005), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005), and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006). A
notable exception is a recent paper by Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2006), which integrates risk averse international
investors into a quantitative model of the optimal maturity structure for emerging economies.
  42
     See, for example, Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006).




                                                        30
7   References

Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath, 2006, “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates, and the Current Account,”
    Journal of International Economics, 69:1, pp. 64-83.

Alfaro, L., and F. Kanczuk, 2005, “Debt maturity: Is Long-Term Debt Optimal?” HBS Working
    Paper 06-09.

Arellano, C., 2005, “Default Risk, the Real Exchange Rate, and Income Fluctuations in Emerging
    Economies,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.

Arellano, C., and A. Ramanarayanan, 2006, “Default and the Term Structure in Sovereign Bonds,”
    mimeo, University of Minnesota.

Bekaert, G., and R. Hodrick, 2001, “Expectations Hypothesis Test,” Journal of Finance, 56:4, pp.
    1357-1399.

Blanchard, O., and A. Missale, 1994, “The Debt Burden and Debt Maturity,” American Economic
    Review, 84:1, pp. 309-319.

Broner, F., G. Gelos, and C. Reinhart, 2006, “When in Peril, Retrench: Testing the Portfolio
    Channel of Contagion,” Journal of International Economics, 69:1, pp. 203-30.

Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International Liquidity Illusion: On the Risks of
    Sterilization,” NBER Working Paper No. 8141.

Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial Development and
    Underinsurance,” Journal of Finance, 58:2, pp. 867-893.

Calvo, G., 1988, “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American Economic
    Review, 78:4, pp. 647-661.

Calvo, G., and E. Mendoza, 2000, “Rational Contagion and Globalization of the Securities Mar-
    ket,” Journal of International Economics, 51:1, pp. 79-113.

Campbell, J., A. Lo, and C. MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial Markets, Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.


                                              31
Chang, R., and A. Velasco, 2000, “Banks, Debt Maturity and Financial Crises,” Journal of Inter-
    national Economics, 51:1, pp. 169-194.

Chang, R., and A. Velasco, 2001, “A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 116:2, pp. 489-517.

Cochrane, J., 1999, “New Facts in Finance,” Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of
    Chicago, 23:3, pp. 36-58.

Cole, H., and T. Kehoe, 2000, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 67:1, pp.
    91-116.

Corsetti, G., P. Pesenti, and N. Roubini, 1999, “What Caused the Asian Currency and Financial
    Crises?” Japan and the World Economy, 11:3, pp. 305-373.

Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll, Jr., and S. A. Ross, 1985, “A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest
    Rates,” Econometrica, 53:2, pp. 385-407.

Dai, Q., and K. Singleton, 2002, “Expectations Puzzles, Time-Varying Risk Premia, and Aﬃne
    Models of the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 63:3, pp. 415-441.

Dell’Ariccia, G., I. Schnabel, and J. Zettelmeyer, 2002, “Moral Hazard and International Crisis
    Lending: A Test,” IMF Working Paper, WP/02/181.

Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 91:3, pp. 401-419.

Diamond, D., and R. Rajan, 2001, “Banks, Short-Term Debt, and Financial Crises: Theory, Policy
    Implications, and Applications,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 54:1,
    pp. 37-71.

Diebold, F., and C. Li, 2006, “Forecasting the Term Structure of Government Bond Yields,”
    Journal of Econometrics, 127:2, pp. 337-364.

Duﬃe, D., L. H. Pedersen, and K. Singleton, 2003, “Modeling Sovereign Yield Spreads: A Case
    Study of Russian Debt,” Journal of Finance, 58:1, pp. 119-159.



                                               32
Duﬃe, D., and K. Singleton, 1999, “Modeling the Term Structures of Defaultable Bonds,” The
    Review of Financial Studies, 12:4, pp. 687-720.

Eichengreen, B., and R. Hausmann, 1999, “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in proceed-
    ings of the symposium New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
    City, pp. 329-368.

Eichengreen, B., and R. Portes, 1988, “Foreign Lending in the Interwar Years: The Bondholders’
    Perspective,” CEPR Discussion Paper 273..

Feldstein, M., 1999, “A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets,” Foreign Aﬀairs, 78:2, pp. 93-109.

Furman J., and J. Stiglitz, 1998, “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East Asia,”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 1-114.

Heckman, J., 1979, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47:1, pp.
    153-161.

Hellwig, M., 1994, “Liquidity Provision, Banking, and the Allocation of Interest Rate Risk,”
    European Economic Review, 38:7, pp. 1363-1389.

Holmström, B., and J. Tirole, 2001, “LAPM: A Liquidity-Based Asset Pricing Model,” Journal
    of Finance, 56:5, pp. 1837-1867.

International Monetary Fund, 1999, Capital Markets Report, Washington, DC.

Jeanne, O., 2004, “Debt Maturity and the International Financial Architecture,” IMF Working
    Paper No. 04/137.

Kaminsky, G., and C. Reinhart, 2000, “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,” Journal of Inter-
    national Economics, 51:1, pp. 145-168.

Kaminsky, G., R. Lyons, and S. Schmukler, 2004, “Managers, Investors, and Crises: Mutual Fund
    Strategies in Emerging Markets,” Journal of International Economics, 64:1, pp. 113-134.

Klingen, C., B. Weder, and J. Zettelmeyer, 2004, “How Private Creditors Fared in Emerging Debt
    Markets, 1970-2000,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4374.


                                              33
Nelson, C., and A. Siegel, 1987, “Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves,” Journal of Business,
    60:4, pp. 473-489.

Neumeyer, P., and F. Perri, 2005, “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role of Interest
    Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52:2, pp. 345-380.

Obstfeld, M., 1998, “The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace?” Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 12:4, pp. 9-30.

Oviedo, M., 2003, “Macroeconomic Risk and Banking Crises in Emerging Market Countries:
    Business Fluctuations with Financial Crashes,” mimeo, Iowa State Univerity.

Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon, 2005, “Wealth Transfers, Contagion, and Portfolio Constraints,”
    NBER Working Paper No. 11440.

Radelet, S., and J. Sachs, 1998, “The East Asian Financial Crises: Diagnosis, Remedies, Prospects,”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 28:1, pp. 1-90.

Rochet, J., and X. Vives, 2004, “Coordination Failures and the Lender of Last Resort: Was
    Bagehot Right After All?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2:6, pp. 1116-
    1147.

Rodrik, D., and A. Velasco, 1999, “Short-Term Capital Flows,” in Annual World Bank Conference
    on Development Economics, Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Sachs, J., A. Tornell, and A. Velasco, 1996, “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets: The Lessons
    from 1995,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 147-215.

Tirole, J., 2002, Financial Crises, Liquidity Provision, and the International Monetary System,
    Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Tirole, J., 2003, “Ineﬃcient Foreign Borrowing: A Dual- and Common-Agency Perspective,”
    American Economic Review, 93:5, pp. 1678-1702.

Uribe, M., and V. Yue, 2006, “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom?”
    Journal of International Economics, 69:1, pp. 6-36.



                                               34
Appendix A: Model details

This appendix provides some details on the model.

Proof of Lemma 1.
   The investors’ first order condition is


                                         E[u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )] = 0.


When DL = 0, u (w + (π − pL )DL ) is a positive constant, and it easily follows that pL = E[π] = π0 .
Next, we consider the case DL > 0.
   Let F (·) be the CDF of π. We can rewrite the first order condition as

            pL                                                         1
                 u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )dF (π) +                     u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )dF (π) = 0.
        0                                                          pL


In the first region, π − pL < 0 and u (w + (π − pL )DL ) > u (w). In the second region, π − pL > 0
and u (w + (π − pL )DL ) < u (w). We thus have

                       pL                            pL                                1
       u (w)                (π − pL )dF (π) =             u (w)(π − pL )dF (π) +           u (w)(π − pL )dF (π) > 0,
                   0                             0                                    pL


which implies pL < E[π] = π0 .
   We now show that p (DL ) < 0. Diﬀerentiating investors’ first order condition with respect to
DL and rearranging we obtain


            p (DL ) E u (w + (π − pL )DL ) + E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL ) DL                              =

                                                                = E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )2


Since u (·) > 0 and u (·) < 0, it easily follows that


                                                E u (w + (π − pL )DL ) > 0


and
                                        E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )2 < 0.


                                                                  35
As a result, to show that p (DL ) < 0 it suﬃces to show that


                              −E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL ) < 0.


We can write


        −E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL ) =
                     pL
                          u (w + (π − pL )DL )
              =         −                       u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )dF (π) +
                   0       u (w + (π − pL )DL )
                        1
                            u (w + (π − pL )DL )
                 +        −                      u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL )dF (π).
                      pL    u (w + (π − pL )DL )

Since u(·) displays decreasing absolute risk aversion, in the first region π − pL < 0 and

                                    u (w + (π − pL )DL )    u (w)
                                −                        >−       ,
                                    u (w + (π − pL )DL )    u (w)

while in the second region π − pL > 0 and

                                    u (w + (π − pL )DL )    u (w)
                                −                        <−       .
                                    u (w + (π − pL )DL )    u (w)

Thus,

                                                u (w)
        −E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL ) < −          E u (w + (π − pL )DL )(π − pL ) = 0,
                                                u (w)

where the last equality follows from the first order condition.

Proof of Proposition 1.
   Let F (·) be the CDF of π, and let


                           x(π, DL ) = max {D0 − πY + (π − pL )DL , 0}


be the fiscal adjustment in period 1. The government’s objective function can be written as


        W (DL ) = π0 Y − D0 − (π0 − pL )DL +                  [x(π, DL ) − C(x(π, DL ))] dF (π).
                                                 x(π,DL )≥0



                                                 36
   Diﬀerentiating W with respect to DL , we obtain

                   d                                                               d
    W (DL ) = −       (π0 − pL )DL +                          1 − C (x(π, DL ))       (π − pL )DL dF (π).
                  dDL                       x(π,DL )≥0                            dDL

   When DL = 0, the first term in W (DL ) is zero and we have

                                       π̂
                          W (0) =            1 − C (x(π, 0)) (π − π0 )dF (π),
                                     π


                                                          D0
where we used the fact that p(0) = π0 , and π̂ =          Y     is the minimum π such that x(π, 0) = 0. The
fact that C (x) > 1 for x > 0 implies that the first factor in the integrand is negative. The fact
that π0 Y − D0 > 0 and πY − D0 < 0 implies that π̂ ∈ (π, π0 ) and, thus, the second factor in the
integrand is also negative. This shows that


                                                 W (0) > 0.


   When DL = D̂L , the second term in W (DL ) is zero and we have


                               W (D̂L ) = −(π0 − pL ) + p (D̂L )D̂L .


The fact that investors are risk averse implies that pL < π0 and p (D̂L ) < 0. This shows that


                                                W (D̂L ) < 0.


   Since W (0) > 0 and W (D̂L ) < 0, the optimum DL must be in (0, D̂L ).




                                                         37
Appendix B: Estimating spread curves

To estimate spread curves, we follow a modified version of the procedure developed by Nelson and
Siegel (1987) to estimate yields. At date t we have a sample of J coupon bonds, with various
coupon and maturity characteristics. Let P̂t,j be the estimated price at time t of the emerging
market bond j with coupons {cj,t+k }τk=1 and maturity τ j . Price P̂t,j can be written as

                                                τj
                               P̂t,j (āt ) =         e−kyt,k (āt ) cj,t+k + e−τ j yt,τ j (āt ) ,       (1)
                                                k=1


where yt,k (āt ) is the yield on a zero-coupon bond of maturity k; āt ≡ (at,0 , ..., at,3 ) is a vector of
time-varying parameters.
   We decompose the yield yt,k (āt ) as

                                                        ∗
                                         yt,k (āt ) = yt,k (ā∗t ) + st,k (āt ),

       ∗ is the zero-coupon yield on a default-free German or U.S. bond (depending on the
where yt,k
currency denomination of the original bond) and st,k is the zero-coupon spread. We express the
spread st,k as

                                                1 − e−kat,3                     1 − e−kat,3
                  st,k (āt ) = at,0 + at,1                         + at,2                  − e−kat,3 .   (2)
                                                   kat,3                           kat,3

   We proceed with the estimation in two steps. First, we compute the yields on default-free
                        ∗ . To do that, we use German and U.S. bond prices and estimate the
German and U.S. bonds, yt,k
parameters ā∗t using an expression analogous to (2). In the second step, we use the yields yt,k
                                                                                             ∗


derived in the first step and expression (2) to estimate the parameters āt . In both steps, we use
non-linear least squares (NLLS) period by period. For example, in the second step, we take the J
bonds available for a given emerging country at each date t and find the āt that minimizes

                                                J
                                                                               2
                                                        Pt,j − P̂t,j (āt )        ,
                                                j=1


where Pt,j is the price of bond j at time t.



                                                               38
       The approximation is parsimonious and gives a good fit of the data. This type of approximation
has other advantages. It allows us to include bonds denominated in diﬀerent currencies, using most
of the available information to obtain a better fit of the curve.43 Finally, expression (2) has a
simple interpretation. Spreads can be viewed as having three components. The constant is a long-
term, level component. The second term is a short-term component as it starts at one and decays
monotonically and quickly to zero. The third term can be interpreted as a “hump” or medium-term
component, which starts at zero, increases, and then goes to zero. Small values of at,3 generate a
slow decay and can better fit the curve at long maturities. We adopt this specific parametrization
of the yield curve and fix at,3 = 0.005 following Diebold and Li (2006); this helps in the convergence
of the NLLS estimation described above.44
       Once we have computed yields and spreads, we calculate prices and excess returns. The price
of any coupon bond can simply be obtained using (1). But to compute excess returns, one needs
to compare the returns of an emerging market bond to those of a comparable risk-less bond.
Using bonds with the same maturity and coupon structure can be misleading because the yields on
emerging market bonds tend to be much higher than those on risk-less bonds, aﬀecting significantly
the payments profile and duration. In particular, the high yield on an emerging market bond means
that its short-run payments carry more weight in the bond valuation. Therefore, its duration will
be much shorter than that of a similar U.S. bond.
       In this paper, we deal with this problem using two diﬀerent approaches. The two approaches
lead to similar expressions for excess returns and to very similar results. The first approach consists
in calculating separately the returns on an emerging market bond and on a comparable German or
U.S. bond. Then, one subtracts the returns on the risk-less bonds from those on the risky bonds.
The diﬃculty lies in constructing the comparable risk-less bond. We proceed in the following way.
We take a given coupon bond for the emerging economy, and construct a portfolio of risk-less bonds
with the same time profile of payments. For a given emerging market bond with coupons {ct+k } and
                                                 −kyt,k
                                                e                                                  e−τ yt,τ
maturity τ , we derive the weights ωt,k =           Pt    ct+k for k = 1, ..., n−1, and ω t,n =      Pt       (ct+τ + 1).
                                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                               −kyt,k
                                                                                              e
Then we construct a portfolio of risk-less zero-coupon bonds {θt,k }, such that                   Pt∗   θt,k = ω t,k for
  43
     For the countries and periods in which a comparison is feasible, we found similar results when estimating spreads
by calculating first the yield curve for each country (using only bonds in one currency) and then subtracting the
corresponding yield curve for Germany or the U.S. In addition, we compared our results with EMBI spreads on
long-term bonds, which are compiled by J.P. Morgan, obtaining similar values.
  44
     We chose this value of at,3 after experimenting with diﬀerent alternatives, which generated similar results.


                                                           39
each k. The price of this portfolio will be

                                                           n
                                                                     ∗
                                                Pt∗ =          e−kyt,k θt,k .
                                                         k=1


In this way the emerging market bond and the U.S. portfolio have an identical time profile of
                                                               n
payments and an identical duration, equal to                   k=1 kω t,k .

    The realized excess returns in period t take the form45

                                  ∗
                      Pt+1,τ −1 Pt+1
          ert,τ   =            − ∗ =
                        Pt,τ     Pt
                       n
                  =         ω t,k e−[(k−1)(yt+1,k−1 +st+1,k−1 )−k(yt,k +st,k )] − e−[(k−1)yt+1,k−1 −kyt,k ] .   (3)
                      k=1


Notice that the expression in brackets represents the excess returns on a zero-coupon bond. There-
fore, the expression for excess returns is a weighted average of excess returns on zero-coupon bonds.
    The second approach is to use only spreads st,k . We compute the “spread-based” prices

                                               τ
                                      s
                                     Pt,τ =         e−kst,k (āt ) ct+k + e−τ st,τ (āt ) ,
                                              k=1


and obtain the excess returns
                                                            s
                                                           Pt+1,τ −1
                                               ert,τ =         s     − 1.
                                                             Pt,τ

The spread-based excess returns ert,τ can also be interpreted as a weighted average of returns on
zero-coupon bonds, but the weights ω t,k are slightly diﬀerent from those in (3). Both approaches
are valid, in the sense that both approaches give us excess returns that can be obtained with the
appropriate portfolio of emerging market and risk-free bonds. Their interpretation are slightly
diﬀerent: while the first approach is easier to interpret in terms of the financial strategy involved,
the second one is easier to interpret in terms of the behavior of spreads.
    Using prices derived from spreads to calculate excess returns has an important practical advan-
tage. Since we work with bonds denominated in diﬀerent currencies, we avoid the need to report
every result for both dollar and deutsche mark/euro bonds. The reason is that while Pt,τ depends
  45
     This expression holds for a bond that pays no coupon in period t + 1. If the bond pays a coupon in period t + 1
the expression is easily adjusted.



                                                               40
                            s can be computed only from spreads. All the results reported in
on the currency of choice, Pt,τ
the paper are based on spread-based prices. We have also computed excess returns using the first
method and obtained very similar results.46




  46
     If we restricted ourselves to zero-coupon bonds, the excess returns obtained using the two approaches would be
identical. However, almost all the emerging market bonds used in the estimation of the yield curve are coupon bonds,
so we prefer to derive returns for coupon bonds.


                                                        41
                                     Figure 1
                                 Comparative Statics


                                high repayment capacity
                                             Y

                         II                                   I

            zero term premium (pL = π0)          zero term premium (pL = π0)

              short-term debt (DL = 0)           maturity structure irrelevant
                                                        (any DL, DS)

                                                                                               higher term
low investors' w                                                         w high investors'      premium
   wealth                                                                        wealth
                                                                                             longer maturity
                                                                                                structure
                        IV                                   III

          positive term premium (pL < π0)        zero term premium (pL = π0)
          maturity structure intermediate          long-term debt (DS = 0)
                   (DL, DS > 0)


                                             Y
                                low repayment capacity


                                 higher term premium
                               shorter maturity structure
                                                                         Figure 2
                                                              Short- and Long-Term Spreads
                                         Argentina                                                                      Brazil
  25                                                                                25


  20                                                                                20


  15                                                                                15


  10                                                                                10


      5                                                                              5


      0                                                                              0
       1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998   1999   2000   2001   2002      1993   1994   1995   1996   1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002

                                        Colombia                                                                        Mexico
  25                                                                                25

  20                                                                                20

  15                                                                                15

  10                                                                                10

   5                                                                                 5

   0                                                                                 0
      1993    1994    1995    1996    1997     1998   1999   2000   2001   2002      1993   1994   1995   1996   1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002

                                             Russia                                                                 Turkey
 25                                                                                25

 20                                                                                20

 15                                                                                15

 10                                                                                10

  5                                                                                 5

  0                                                                                 0
   1993       1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002      1993   1994   1995   1996   1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002

                                         Uruguay                                                                  Venezuela
 25                                                                                 25

 20                                                                                 20

 15                                                                                 15

 10                                                                                 10

  5                                                                                  5

  0                                                                                  0
  1993        1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002      1993   1994   1995   1996   1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002

                                                                       3-year maturity (in percent)
                                                                       12-year maturity (in percent)
The figures show spreads of 3-year and 12-year maturities over time by country.
                                                                    Figure 3
                                                          Short- and Long-Term Prices
                                     Argentina                                                                      Brazil
  150                                                                          150

  125                                                                          125

  100                                                                          100

   75                                                                           75

   50                                                                           50

   25                                                                           25

    0                                                                            0
       1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002        1993      1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002
                                     Colombia                                                                       Mexico
  150                                                                          150

  125                                                                          125

  100                                                                          100

   75                                                                           75

   50                                                                           50

   25                                                                           25

    0                                                                            0
       1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002           1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002

                                      Russia                                                                        Turkey
 150                                                                           150

 125                                                                           125

 100                                                                           100

  75                                                                            75

  50                                                                            50

  25                                                                            25

   0                                                                             0
    1993      1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002       1993       1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002

                                      Uruguay                                                                     Venezuela
 150                                                                           150

 125                                                                           125

 100                                                                           100

  75                                                                            75

  50                                                                            50

  25                                                                            25

   0                                                                             0
    1993      1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002       1993       1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002

                                                                        3-year maturity
                                                                        12-year maturity
The figures show indices of prices of 3-year and 12-year maturities over time by country. Prices are estimated assuming a coupon rate of
7.5 percent and using U.S. yields as a benchmark. The indices are constructed by fixing the first observation in each country equal to 100.
                                                                      Figure 4
                                                  Sharpe Ratio During Crisis and Non-Crisis Periods


                                        0.8


                                        0.7
                                              1
                                        0.6 2
    Weekly Excess Return (in percent)




                                              3
                                        0.5 4
                                              5
                                        0.4 6
                                              7
                                        0.3 8
                                             9
                                        0.2
                                           10
                                           11
                                         0.1
                                           12
                                           13
                                         0.0
                                           14
                                           15
                                        -0.1
                                           15
                                              0   1            2           3         4          5           6        7   8
                                           15
                                                                   Weekly Standard Deviation (in percent)

                                                      Non-Crisis Periods          All periods           Crisis Periods


The figure shows the Sharpe ratio corresponding to maturities of 3, 6, 9, and 12 years during crisis periods, non-
crisis periods, and all periods. Excess returns are estimated using a holding period of one week and assuming a
coupon rate of 7.5 percent. Crisis and non-crisis periods are determined according to definition 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Years                                                      Years                                                    Years                                                   Years




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                            1991.1                                                 1991.1                                                       1991.1                                                  1991.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                            1992.1                                                 1992.1                                                       1992.1                                                  1992.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1993.1                                                 1993.1                                                       1993.1                                                  1993.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1994.1                                                 1994.1                                                       1994.1                                                  1994.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1995.1                                                 1995.1                                                       1995.1                                                  1995.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1996.1                                                 1996.1                                                       1996.1                                                  1996.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1997.1                                                 1997.1                                                       1997.1                                                  1997.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                            1998.1                                                 1998.1                                                       1998.1                                                  1998.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                            1999.1                                                 1999.1                                                       1999.1                                                  1999.1
                                                                                                                                                                            2000.1                                                 2000.1                                                       2000.1                                                  2000.1
                                                                                                                                                                            2001.1                                                 2001.1                                                       2001.1                                                  2001.1
                                                                                                                                                                            2002.1                                                 2002.1                                                       2002.1                                                  2002.1




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9




                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percent                                                    Percent                                                  Percent                                                 Percent

                                                                                                                                                                                                  Years                                                       Years                                                    Years                                                   Years




case of Mexico, the EMBI spread is used instead of the estimated spread.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 5




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                            1991.1                                                 1991.1                                                       1991.1                                                  1991.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1992.1                                                 1992.1                                                       1992.1                                                  1992.1




                                                                                                                                            9-year spread (right scale)
                                                                                                                                                                            1993.1                                                 1993.1                                                       1993.1                                                  1993.1




                                                                                                                                            Average maturity (left scale)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Average Maturity and Spreads




                                                                                                                                                                            1994.1                                                 1994.1                                                       1994.1                                                  1994.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1995.1                                                 1995.1                                                       1995.1                                                  1995.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1996.1                                                 1996.1                                                       1996.1                                                  1996.1

                                                                                                                                                                            1997.1                                                 1997.1                                                       1997.1                                                  1997.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Turkey




                                                                                                                                                                            1998.1                                                 1998.1                                                       1998.1                                                  1998.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Venezuela
                                                                                                                                                                            1999.1                                                 1999.1                                                       1999.1                                                  1999.1

                                                                                                                                                                            2000.1                                                 2000.1                                                       2000.1                                                  2000.1

                                                                                                                                                                            2001.1                                                 2001.1                                                       2001.1                                                  2001.1

                                                                                                                                                                            2002.1                                                 2002.1                                                       2002.1                                                  2002.1




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9




                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percent                                                    Percent                                                  Percent                                                 Percent




The figures show the average maturity of bonds issued in each semester and the estimated spread of maturity of 9 years by country. In the
                                                          Table 1
                                                      Data Description

                                                         Price Data
                                            Number of                                  Maturities
Country         Sample Period                Bonds              Minimum                Maximum               75th Percentile
Argentina       Apr 1994 - May 2003              63                  1.0                    23.6                       8.3
Brazil          Nov 1994 - May 2003              38                  1.5                    29.5                      13.4
Colombia        Apr 1996 - May 2003              21                  1.3                    25.7                       9.7
Mexico          Oct 1995 - May 2003              26                  1.5                    27.5                      12.7
Russia          Nov 1996 - May 2003              21                  2.2                    24.2                      10.7
Turkey          Apr 1996 - May 2003              49                  0.8                    17.9                       5.3
Uruguay         Nov 1998 - May 2003              10                  1.8                    26.4                       9.2
Venezuela       Apr 1993 - May 2003              22                  1.4                    26.2                      15.7

Germany         Apr 1993 - May 2003             229                  0.6                    20.0                       5.9
U.S.            Apr 1993 - May 2003              51                  1.5                    29.4                      23.2



                                                    Quantity Data
                                                          Average Amount Issued by Maturity (USD Thousands)
                                            Number of        Up to     From 3 to 6 From 6 to 9      Over
Country         Sample Period                Bonds          3 Years        Years        Years      9 Years
Argentina       Jul 1993 - Dec 2002            146               17,731            59,388           29,898         60,008
Brazil          Jul 1994 - Dec 2002             45                7,557            29,273            9,246         57,959
Colombia        Jan 1993 - Dec 2002             41                1,087             9,080            3,797         13,567
Mexico          Jan 1991 - Dec 2002             54                5,941            14,798            7,887         39,836
Russia          Jan 1993 - Dec 2002             27                3,513            10,010           12,839         49,757
Turkey          Jan 1990 - Dec 2002             77                4,944            22,436            8,294         17,415
Uruguay         Jan 1993 - Dec 2002             18                  195             1,811              970          3,899
Venezuela       Jul 1991 - Dec 2002             24                2,406             1,524            2,239          9,305


The tables describe the price and quantity data used in the paper. The top table shows the sample periods, number of bonds, and
maturities covered by the price data. Maturities are expressed in years. Minimum, maximum, and 75th percentile correspond to
the average minimum, maximum, and 75th percentile maturity over time within the sample period. The bottom table shows the
sample periods, number of bonds, and average amount issued by maturity covered by the quantity data. Maturity up to 3 years
includes bonds of 3-year maturity, maturity from 3 to 6 years includes bonds of 6-year maturity, and maturity from 6 to 9 years
includes bonds of 9-year maturity. USD stands for U.S. dollars.
                                                   Table 2
                                               Excess Returns
                       Annualized Means Over Comparable German and U.S. Bonds, In Percent

                            Coupon = 5%                              Coupon = 7.5%                            Coupon = 10%
                      er3     er6    er9       er12            er3      er6    er9 er12                 er3      er6    er9      er12

Average              2.90     3.49     6.74     8.26          3.08     3.45     5.93     6.95          3.23     3.44     5.46    6.27
Argentina           -7.08 -4.21 0.55 0.48                    -6.34 -4.02 -0.31 -0.98                  -5.71 -3.85 -0.81 -1.63
Brazil               6.02 6.34 9.28 12.69                     6.04 6.21 8.60 11.34                     6.06 6.12 8.16 10.52
Colombia             4.67 4.41 4.11 4.50                      4.61 4.34 4.03 4.28                      4.57 4.30 3.99 4.15
Mexico               3.56 5.25 6.72 7.89                      3.52 5.08 6.40 7.43                      3.49 4.95 6.17 7.11
Russia              14.84 18.73 39.72 45.96                  15.09 18.03 33.43 37.57                  15.31 17.54 30.01 33.53
Turkey               4.09 3.78 4.52 6.92                      4.09 3.77 4.32 6.11                      4.09 3.77 4.21 5.63
Uruguay             -2.72 -5.21 -5.33 -5.74                  -2.51 -4.93 -5.22 -5.69                  -2.32 -4.70 -5.11 -5.61
Venezuela            2.50 1.05 1.10 1.74                      2.63 1.21 1.18 1.59                      2.74 1.35 1.25 1.53


The table shows the annualized means of excess returns over comparable German and U.S. bonds, by country and across countries.
Excess returns are estimated using a holding period of one week and for coupon rates of 5, 7.5, and 10 percent. er3, er6, er9, and er12
stand for 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-year excess returns.
                                                       Table 3
                                                    Crisis Periods

                                                  Crisis Definition 1
                                                       Start date              End date

                            Argentina
                            Crisis 1                     12/30/94              01/12/96
                            Crisis 2                     09/04/98              11/06/98
                            Crisis 3                     07/13/01                  -

                            Brazil
                            Crisis 1                     01/20/95              10/06/95
                            Crisis 2                     08/21/98              04/23/99
                            Crisis 3                     06/14/02              04/06/03

                            Colombia
                            Crisis 1                     08/28/98              02/26/99
                            Crisis 2                     05/05/00              06/23/00
                            Crisis 3                     07/26/02              11/15/02

                            Mexico
                            Crisis 1                     08/28/98              11/06/98

                            Russia
                            Crisis 1                     07/10/98              06/29/01

                            Turkey
                            Crisis 1                     08/28/98              11/13/98

                            Uruguay
                            Crisis 1                     04/19/02                   -

                            Venezuela
                            Crisis 1                     08/14/98              03/03/00


We use four different crisis definitions. Crisis definition 1 sets the beginning of a crisis when 9-year spreads are greater
than a threshold, which is defined as the average spread over the previous six months plus 300 basis points. The end of
the crisis is at the end of the first four-week period in which spreads have remained below the threshold used to
determine the beginning of the crisis. Crisis definition 2 is similar to crisis definition 1, but uses 400 basis points to
define the threshold. Crisis definitions 3 and 4 are similar, but use a period of one week instead of a period of four
weeks to end the crisis.
                                        Table 4
                   Excess Returns During Crisis and Non-Crisis Periods
            Annualized Means Over Comparable German and U.S. Bonds, In Percent

                                                    er3            er6           er9          er12

              All Periods                          3.08           3.45          5.93          6.95

                                          Crisis Definition 1
                Threshold + 300 basis points, ending crisis after four weeks of low spreads

              Crisis Periods                      11.43         15.03          30.88         39.06
              Non-Crisis Periods                   1.02          0.65           0.26         -0.11

                                          Crisis Definition 2
                Threshold + 400 basis points, ending crisis after four weeks of low spreads

              Crisis Periods                      11.47         16.85          42.50         55.70
              Non-Crisis Periods                   1.85          1.54           1.20          0.94

                                          Crisis Definition 3
                 Threshold + 300 basis points, ending crisis after one week of low spreads

              Crisis Periods                      10.31         13.39          33.38         42.67
              Non-Crisis Periods                   1.86          1.80           1.73          1.66

                                          Crisis Definition 4
                 Threshold + 400 basis points, ending crisis after one week of low spreads

              Crisis Periods                      11.67         20.32          52.03         66.03
              Non-Crisis Periods                   2.05          1.52           1.24          1.20


The table shows the annualized means of excess returns over comparable German and U.S. bonds during crisis
and non-crisis periods across countries. Results are presented for the four crisis definitions. Excess returns are
estimated using a holding period of one week and assuming a coupon rate of 7.5 percent. er3, er6, er9, and
er12 stand for 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-year excess returns.
                                      Table 5
           Excess Returns During Crisis and Non-Crisis Periods by Country
          Annualized Means Over Comparable German and U.S. Bonds, In Percent

                                                     Crisis Definition 1
                                            er3           er6            er9            er12
            Average
            Crisis Periods                11.43          15.03          30.88          39.06
            Non-Crisis Periods             1.02           0.65           0.26          -0.11

            Argentina
            Crisis Periods               -10.03           -3.47         11.81          15.87
            Non-Crisis Periods            -4.36           -4.30         -6.10          -8.78
            Brazil
            Crisis Periods                18.36          25.98          41.73          58.11
            Non-Crisis Periods             1.95          -0.10          -1.30          -1.85
            Colombia
            Crisis Periods                22.96          33.98          39.79          42.73
            Non-Crisis Periods             1.85           0.10          -0.95          -1.02
            Mexico
            Crisis Periods                81.03          82.56          90.33         113.92
            Non-Crisis Periods             1.88           3.43           4.64           5.32
            Russia
            Crisis Periods                35.06          31.06          62.37          70.75
            Non-Crisis Periods             0.38           7.93          12.80          14.35
            Turkey
            Crisis Periods                21.66          61.44         109.15         162.47
            Non-Crisis Periods             3.55           2.24           1.90           2.91
            Uruguay
            Crisis Periods                 -6.03          -9.76          -6.61          -4.78
            Non-Crisis Periods             -1.35          -3.34          -4.78          -5.98
            Venezuela
            Crisis Periods                 5.61           6.89          13.61          23.21
            Non-Crisis Periods             2.09           0.20          -0.95          -1.95


The table shows the annualized means of excess returns over comparable German and U.S. bonds during crisis
and non-crisis periods by country. Crisis and non-crisis periods are determined according to definition 1.
Excess returns are estimated using a holding period of one week and assuming a coupon rate of 7.5 percent.
er3, er6, er9, and er12 stand for 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-year excess returns.
                                                                                         Table 6
                                                                           Explaining Long-Short Excess Returns

                                    Dependent Variable: er9-er3                                    Dependent Variable: er12-er3                                   Dependent Variable: er12-er6
Crisis Dummy            0.325 ***                                                 0.449 ***                                                               0.381 ***
                      [5.809]                                                   [7.151]                                                                 [6.868]
3-Year Spread                         0.015 ***                                                 0.016 ***
                                    [4.816]                                                   [5.539]
6-Year Spread                                        0.040 ***                                                0.045 ***                                               0.035 ***
                                                  [10.219]                                                  [9.576]                                                 [6.052]
9-Year Spread                                                       0.062 ***                                                0.069 ***                                              0.072 ***
                                                                  [8.229]                                                 [10.587]                                                [3.753]
12-Year Spread                                                                                                                              0.060 ***                                             0.075 ***
                                                                                                                                         [10.562]                                               [3.498]

Country Dummies           no             no            no             no            no            no            no             no             no            no           no           no            no
Time Dummies              no             no            no             no            no            no            no             no             no            no           no           no            no
Observations            3153           3153          3153           3153         3,153         3,153         3,153          3,153          3,153         3,153        3,153        3,153         3,153
R-squared              0.002          0.003         0.006          0.013         0.003         0.002         0.005           0.01          0.013         0.002        0.003        0.013         0.022
Number of Countries        8              8             8              8             8             8             8              8              8             8            8            8             8



                                    Dependent Variable: er9-er3                                    Dependent Variable: er12-er3                                   Dependent Variable: er12-er6
Crisis Dummy            0.290 ***                                                 0.407 ***                                                               0.295 ***
                      [4.441]                                                   [6.985]                                                                 [5.188]
3-Year Spread                         0.013 ***                                                 0.012 ***
                                    [6.096]                                                   [4.766]
6-Year Spread                                        0.040 ***                                                0.039 ***                                               0.029 ***
                                                   [6.317]                                                  [6.353]                                                 [7.855]
9-Year Spread                                                       0.072 ***                                                0.073 ***                                              0.083 ***
                                                                  [5.714]                                                  [6.436]                                                [3.243]
12-Year Spread                                                                                                                              0.062 ***                                             0.087 ***
                                                                                                                                          [8.442]                                               [3.569]

Country Dummies          yes            yes           yes            yes           yes           yes           yes            yes            yes           yes          yes          yes           yes
Time Dummies             yes            yes           yes            yes           yes           yes           yes            yes            yes           yes          yes          yes           yes
Observations           3,153          3,153         3,153          3,153         3,153         3,153         3,153          3,153          3,153         3,153        3,153        3,153         3,153
R-squared              0.265          0.265         0.267          0.273         0.286         0.285         0.287          0.291          0.293         0.225        0.226        0.234         0.243
Number of Countries        8              8             8              8             8             8             8              8              8             8            8            8             8


The tables report ordinary least squares regressions of weekly long-short excess returns on a crisis dummy and on spreads of different maturities. The long-short excess returns are the
differences between the 9-year excess return and the 3-year excess return (er9-er3), between the 12-year excess return and the 3-year excess return (er12-er3), and between the 12-year
excess return and the 6-year excess return (er12-er6). Excess returns are estimated using a holding period of one week and assuming a coupon rate of 7.5 percent. The crisis dummy
corresponds to crisis definition 1. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. Observations are assumed to be independent across clusters but not within
clusters. Clusters are defined by country and crisis periods. Regressions in the bottom table include country and time dummies. Robust t statistics are in brackets. *, **, and ***: significant
at 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.
                                                                                Table 7
                                                                              Amount Issued
                                         Dependent Variable: Issues of Maturity Up to 3 Years                Dependent Variable: Issues of Maturity Between 3 and 6 Years
Crisis Dummy                        -0.528                                                                   -2.947 ***
                                   [1.087]                                                                  [2.662]
3-Year Spread                                   -0.066 *                                                                 -0.189 **
                                               [1.729]                                                                  [2.311]
9-Year Spread                                                  -0.043                                                                 -0.133 **
                                                              [1.097]                                                                [2.321]
EMBI                                                                        -0.027                                                                 -0.121
                                                                           [1.007]                                                                [1.619]
Predicted Term Premium                                                                  0.087                                                                  -0.455
(er9-er3)                                                                             [0.183]                                                                 [0.816]

Observations                        2,996         2,996          2,996         2,647      2,996               2,996         2,996        2,996         2,647        2,996
Uncensored Observations                46            46             46            48         46                 109           109          109            86          109


                                    Dependent Variable: Issues of Maturity Between 6 and 9 Years                  Dependent Variable: Issues of Maturity Over 9 Years
Crisis Dummy                        -1.973 ***                                                               -2.180 ***
                                   [3.008]                                                                  [4.500]
3-Year Spread                                   -0.145 *                                                                 -0.257 **
                                               [1.940]                                                                  [2.227]
9-Year Spread                                                 -0.141 ***                                                              -0.223 ***
                                                             [2.729]                                                                [4.501]
EMBI                                                                        -0.148 *                                                               -0.223 **
                                                                           [1.933]                                                                [2.172]
Predicted Term Premium                                                                -0.692                                                                    -1.230 ***
(er9-er3)                                                                            [1.434]                                                                   [3.975]

Observations                        2,996         2,996          2,996         2,647      2,996               2,996         2,996        2,996         2,647        2,996
Uncensored Observations                56            56             56            48         56                 103           103          103            87          103


The tables report the marginal coefficients of Tobit regressions of the amount issued at different maturities on a crisis dummy, short-term and long-term spreads, the EMBI,
and the predicted term premium. Regressions are estimated by maximum likelihood. The dependent variables are normalized by the average weekly amount issued, short-
term or long-term respectively, for each country. Maturity up to 3 years includes bonds of 3-year maturity, maturity from 3 to 6 years includes bonds of 6-year maturity, and
maturity from 6 to 9 years includes bonds of 9-year maturity. The independent variables are in logs. The crisis dummy corresponds to crisis definition 1. The standard errors
are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. Observations are assumed to be independent across clusters but not within clusters. Clusters are defined by country
and crisis periods. Regressions using the EMBI do not include Uruguay due to data availability. Robust z statistics are in brackets. *, **, and ***: significant at 10, 5, and 1
percent, respectively.
                                         Table 8
                                     Average Maturity

                         Dependent Variable: Average Maturity of Issues
Main Equation
9-Year Spread                                -0.476 **    -0.590 *** -0.332 **        -0.399 **
                                            [2.287]      [4.730]     [2.116]         [2.000]

Selection Equation
Crisis Dummy                                 -0.149 **
                                            [2.033]
3-Year Spread                                             -0.032 ***
                                                         [2.985]
9-Year Spread                                                           -0.089 ***
                                                                       [4.550]
EMBI                                                                                  -0.066 ***
                                                                                     [3.704]
Country Dummies                                 yes           yes          yes           yes
Observations                                 2,996         2,996         2,996         2,338


                      Dependent Variable: Average Maturity of Issues
Main Equation
Predicted Term Premium                  -2.724 **   -2.696 *** -5.554 *** -2.103 ***
(er9-er3)                              [2.316]     [3.238]        [4.904] [3.029]

Selection Equation
Crisis Dummy                                 -0.191 **
                                            [2.212]
3-Year Spread                                             -0.031 ***
                                                         [3.005]
9-Year Spread                                                           -0.065 ***
                                                                       [3.352]
EMBI                                                                                  -0.066 ***
                                                                                     [3.764]
Country Dummies                                 yes           yes          yes           yes
Observations                                 2,996         2,996         2,996         2,338

The tables report selection bias regressions of the average maturity of issues on long-term spreads
and the predicted term premium. In the selection equation, the decision to issue is explained by a
crisis dummy, short- and long-term spreads, and the EMBI. Regressions are estimated by
maximum likelihood. The independent variables are in logs. The crisis dummy corresponds to
crisis definition 1. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.
Observations are assumed to be independent across clusters but not within clusters. Clusters are
defined by country and crisis periods. All regressions include country dummies. Regressions using
the EMBI do not include Uruguay due to data availability. Robust z statistics are in brackets. *,
**, and ***: significant at 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.
                                             Appendix Table 1
                        Description of Emerging Market Bonds Included in the Sample
        Issue     Maturity Amount Issued                                          Coupon     Data
Bond     Date      Date    (USD Thousands) Currency      Market       Coupon     Frequency   Available
                                                      Argentina
  1    10/15/92   10/15/97     250,000       USD         Eurobond         8.25      A        Price / Quantity
  2    08/02/93   08/02/96     150,000       USD         Eurobond       6.875       S        Price / Quantity
  3    08/02/93   08/02/00     100,000       USD         Eurobond         8.25      S        Price / Quantity
  4    10/05/93   10/05/98     608,580       DM          Eurobond            8      A        Price / Quantity
  5    11/05/93   03/29/05   8,466,548       USD         Brady Bond   Floating      S        Price
  6    12/20/93   12/20/03   2,050,000       USD         Global         8.375       S        Price / Quantity
  7    03/04/94   03/06/95     350,000       USD         Eurobond     Floating     N.A.      Quantity
  8    04/01/94   04/01/04     100,000       USD         Eurobond          7.9      A        Quantity
  9    07/11/94   07/11/97     312,538       DM          Eurobond            8      A        Quantity
 10    08/22/94   08/27/97     100,000       USD         Eurobond     Floating      Q        Price / Quantity
 11    08/26/94   08/26/97      67,688       ATS         Eurobond            8      A        Quantity
 12    10/14/94   10/14/97      73,562       CAD         Eurobond         10.5      A        Quantity
 13    10/21/94   10/21/97     288,453       ITL         Eurobond       13.45       A        Quantity
 14    11/01/94   11/01/99     500,000       USD         Global         10.95       S        Price / Quantity
 15    11/01/94   11/01/01      52,000       USD         Domestic     Floating      A        Quantity
 16    12/09/94   12/09/97      75,720       ESP         Eurobond         12.8      A        Quantity
 17    12/15/94   12/15/99     149,815       JPY         Eurobond          7.1      A        Quantity
 18    12/19/94   12/19/97     199,753       JPY         Eurobond            6      A        Quantity
 19    12/28/94   12/28/10      23,674       USD         Domestic     Floating      M        Quantity
 20    01/06/95   01/06/98     187,463       FRF         Eurobond       9.875       A        Quantity
 21    08/29/95   08/29/00     795,153       DM          Eurobond        9.25       A        Price / Quantity
 22    11/09/95   11/09/98     130,905       CHF         Eurobond       7.125       A        Quantity
 23    11/14/95   11/14/02     704,460       EUR         Eurobond         10.5      A        Quantity
 24    11/23/95   11/14/02     177,493       DM          Eurobond        10.5       A        Quantity
 25    11/29/95   03/25/99     441,534       JPY         Eurobond            5      A        Quantity
 26    12/06/95   12/28/98      49,297       ATS         Eurobond          8.5      A        Quantity
 27    12/27/95   06/27/97     137,504       JPY         Eurobond        3.25       S        Quantity
 28    02/06/96   02/06/03     676,200       EUR         Eurobond       10.25       A        Quantity
 29    02/20/96   02/23/01   1,100,000       USD         Global           9.25      S        Price / Quantity
 30    03/06/96   03/06/01     321,473       ITL         Eurobond       13.25       A        Quantity
 31    04/04/96   04/04/06      74,993       JPY         Eurobond          7.4      A        Quantity
 32    04/10/96   04/10/06     676,652       DM          Eurobond       11.25       A        Price / Quantity
 33    04/15/96   09/01/02      99,341       EUR         Eurobond      12.625       A        Quantity
 34    04/18/96   04/18/01      95,200       ATS         Eurobond            9      A        Quantity
 35    04/25/96   04/25/06      74,444       JPY         Eurobond          7.4      A        Quantity
 36    05/07/96   03/27/01     845,499       JPY         Eurobond          5.5      A        Quantity
 37    05/15/96   05/15/06      65,761       JPY         Eurobond          7.4      A        Quantity
 38    05/20/96   05/20/99     326,146       DM          Eurobond            7      A        Price / Quantity
 39    05/20/96   05/20/11     645,360       EUR         Eurobond       11.75       A        Quantity
 40    06/25/96   06/25/99     227,505       ITL         Eurobond           11      A        Quantity
 41    07/05/96   07/05/99     147,589       NLG         Eurobond       7.625       A        Quantity
 42    08/14/96   08/14/01     155,302       GBP         Eurobond        11.5       A        Quantity
 43    08/15/96   08/19/99     500,000       USD         Eurobond     Floating      Q        Price / Quantity
 44    09/19/96   09/19/03     248,363       DM          Eurobond            9      A        Price / Quantity
 45    09/19/96   09/19/16     248,363       DM          Eurobond           12      A        Quantity
 46    10/09/96   10/09/06   1,300,000       USD         Global             11      S        Price / Quantity
 47    11/05/96   11/05/03     329,903       ITL         Eurobond           11      A        Quantity
 48    11/12/96   03/24/05     445,407       JPY         Eurobond            6      A        Quantity
 49    11/13/96   11/13/26     329,078       DM          Eurobond       11.75       A        Quantity
 50    12/04/96   12/04/03     230,357       CHF         Eurobond            7      A        Quantity
        Issue     Maturity Amount Issued                                                 Coupon     Data
Bond     Date      Date    (USD Thousands) Currency   Market                Coupon      Frequency   Available
 51    12/05/96   12/20/02     444,286       JPY      Eurobond                      5      S        Quantity
 52    12/13/96   12/13/98     500,000       USD      Domestic                      8      S        Quantity
 53    12/20/96   12/20/02     439,504       JPY      Eurobond                      5     N.A.      Quantity
 54    12/23/96   02/23/05     643,561       DM       Eurobond                    8.5      A        Price / Quantity
 55    01/03/97   01/03/07     385,990       ITL      Eurobond                     10      A        Quantity
 56    01/30/97   01/30/17   3,287,500       USD      Global                  11.375       S        Price / Quantity
 57    03/18/97   03/18/04     898,382       DM       Eurobond                      7      A        Price / Quantity
 58    04/09/97   03/18/04      83,852       ATS      Eurobond                      7      A        Quantity
 59    05/08/97   05/27/04     449,785       JPY      Eurobond                    4.4      S        Quantity
 60    05/09/97   05/09/02   2,292,000       USD      Domestic                   8.75      S        Quantity
 61    05/23/97   05/23/02     138,569       ESP      Eurobond                    7.5      A        Quantity
 62    05/27/97   05/27/04     295,869       ITL      Eurobond               Floating      Q        Quantity
 63    05/27/97   05/27/04     420,198       JPY      Eurobond                    4.4      S        Quantity
 64    06/25/97   06/25/07     330,785       GBP      Eurobond                     10      A        Quantity
 65    08/11/97   08/11/07     416,948       ITL      Eurobond                 7.625       A        Quantity
 66    09/19/97   09/19/27   2,500,000       USD      Global                     9.75      S        Quantity
 67    10/17/97   10/16/98     500,000       USD      Domestic                      0      Z        Price
 68    10/21/97   03/18/04     435,325       ITL      Eurobond                      7      A        Quantity
 69    10/24/97   03/18/04     217,845       ITL      Eurobond                      7      A        Quantity
 70    10/30/97   10/30/09     570,169       DM       Eurobond                      8      A        Price / Quantity
 71    12/16/97   11/30/02     500,000       USD      Yankee                      9.5      S        Quantity
 72    12/22/97   12/22/00     158,580       ITL      Eurobond                      8      A        Quantity
 73    01/14/98   01/20/01   1,563,000       USD      Domestic               Floating     N.A.      Quantity
 74    02/04/98   02/04/03     663,790       EUR      Eurobond                   8.75      A        Quantity
 75    02/26/98   02/26/08     822,684       EUR      Eurobond            Step Down        A        Price / Quantity
 76    03/12/98   10/30/09     416,914       ITL      Eurobond                      8      A        Quantity
 77    04/03/98   02/26/08     244,577       EUR      Eurobond                      8      A        Price / Quantity
 78    04/03/98   02/26/08     249,335       EUR      Eurobond                      8      A        Quantity
 79    04/13/98   04/10/05   1,000,000       USD      Global                 Floating      S        Quantity
 80    04/21/98   04/21/08     820,829       EUR      Global                   8.125       A        Price / Quantity
 81    07/06/98   07/06/10     556,615       EUR      Eurobond                  8.25       A        Price / Quantity
 82    07/08/98   07/08/05     565,384       ITL      Eurobond               Floating      Q        Quantity
 83    07/21/98   07/21/03   1,000,000       USD      Domestic               Floating      Q        Quantity
 84    07/29/98   07/29/05     414,863       DM       Eurobond                 7.875       A        Price / Quantity
 85    07/30/98   07/30/10     554,485       EUR      Eurobond                    8.5      A        Price / Quantity
 86    10/16/98   09/19/27     293,450       USD      Domestic                9.9375       S        Quantity
 87    11/19/98   11/19/08     299,618       DM       Eurobond                      9      A        Price / Quantity
 88    11/19/98   12/04/05   1,000,000       USD      Global                       11      S        Quantity
 89    12/04/98   12/04/05   1,000,000       USD      Global                       11      S        Price / Quantity
 90    01/15/99   04/15/07      48,918       USD      Domestic               Floating      Q        Quantity
 91    02/04/99   02/04/03     214,198       EUR      Eurobond                  8.75       A        Quantity
 92    02/25/99   02/25/02     112,061       EUR      Domestic                      8      A        Quantity
 93    02/25/99   02/25/19   1,000,000       USD      Global                  12.125       S        Price / Quantity
 94    02/25/99   02/25/19   1,000,000       USD      Global                  12.125       S        Quantity
 95    02/26/99   02/26/08     393,623       EUR      Eurobond            Step Down        A        Price / Quantity
 96    03/01/99   03/01/29     125,000       USD      Yankee                   8.875       S        Quantity
 97    03/04/99   03/04/04     433,182       EUR      Eurobond                    9.5      A        Price / Quantity
 98    03/15/99   04/06/04     300,000       USD      Private Placement      Floating      Q        Quantity
 99    03/19/99   03/17/00   1,168,544       USD      Domestic                      0      Z        Price
100    04/06/99   04/10/04     300,000       USD      Eurobond               Floating      Q        Price / Quantity
101    04/06/99   02/26/08     270,304       EUR      Eurobond                      8      A        Price / Quantity
102    04/07/99   04/07/09   1,226,354       USD      Global                   11.75       S        Price / Quantity
103    04/26/99   04/26/06     483,316       EUR      Eurobond                      9      A        Price / Quantity
104    05/10/99   03/18/04     439,464       EUR      Eurobond                      7      A        Price / Quantity
105    05/24/99   05/24/01   1,270,080       USD      Domestic                    9.5      S        Quantity
        Issue     Maturity Amount Issued                                               Coupon     Data
Bond     Date      Date    (USD Thousands) Currency    Market              Coupon     Frequency   Available
106    05/24/99   05/24/04   2,640,292       USD       Domestic              11.25       S        Quantity
107    05/26/99   05/26/09     694,155       EUR       Eurobond                   9      A        Price / Quantity
108    06/10/99   06/10/02     208,677       EUR       Eurobond              7.125       A        Quantity
109    07/01/99   07/01/04     681,842       EUR       Eurobond                 8.5      A        Price / Quantity
110    07/22/99   07/22/03     103,489       EUR       Eurobond            Floating      S        Quantity
111    08/11/99   08/11/09     158,724       JPY       Eurobond                 3.5      A        Quantity
112    09/03/99   09/03/01     585,504       EUR       Eurobond                 8.5      A        Price / Quantity
113    10/14/99   05/14/01     321,199       EUR       Eurobond                 7.3      Z        Quantity
114    10/15/99   10/16/00     250,000       USD       Global                     0      Z        Quantity
115    10/15/99   04/15/01     250,000       USD       Global                     0      Z        Quantity
116    10/15/99   10/15/01     250,000       USD       Global                     0      Z        Quantity
117    10/15/99   10/15/02     250,000       USD       Global                     0      Z        Quantity
118    10/15/99   10/15/03     250,000       USD       Global                     0      Z        Quantity
119    10/15/99   10/15/04     250,000       USD       Global                     0      Z        Quantity
120    10/21/99   10/21/02     523,341       EUR       Eurobond               9.25       A        Quantity
121    11/12/99   11/10/00   1,141,458       USD       Domestic                   0      Z        Price
122    11/19/99   02/26/08   1,488,544       EUR       Eurobond                   8      A        Price / Quantity
123    11/26/99   11/26/03     260,308       EUR       Eurobond               9.75       A        Price / Quantity
124    12/07/99   12/07/04     412,672       EUR       Eurobond                  10      A        Price / Quantity
125    12/09/99   12/07/04     101,792       EUR       Eurobond                  10      A        Quantity
126    12/11/99   01/07/05     254,091       EUR       Eurobond                  10      A        Quantity
127    12/17/99   12/17/03     183,135       JPY       Eurobond                 5.4      S        Quantity
128    12/22/99   12/22/04     202,196       EUR       Eurobond            Floating      Q        Quantity
129    01/07/00   01/07/05     657,455       EUR       Eurobond                  10      A        Price / Quantity
130    01/07/00   01/07/05     253,362       EUR       Eurobond               N.A.      N.A.      Quantity
131    01/26/00   01/26/07     776,156       EUR       Eurobond              10.25       A        Price / Quantity
132    02/03/00   02/01/20   1,250,000       USD       Global                    12      S        Price / Quantity
133    02/21/00   05/21/03   1,684,938       USD       Domestic              11.75       S        Quantity
134    02/21/00   05/21/05   1,763,641       USD       Domestic             12.125       S        Quantity
135    03/15/00   03/15/10   1,000,000       USD       Global               11.375       S        Price / Quantity
136    03/17/00   03/16/01   1,109,683       USD       Domestic                   0      Z        Price
137    04/04/00   10/04/04     479,039       EUR       Eurobond              8.125       A        Price / Quantity
138    05/24/00   05/24/05     674,068       EUR       Eurobond                   9      A        Price / Quantity
139    06/14/00   06/14/04     561,979       JPY       Eurobond              5.125       S        Quantity
140    06/15/00   06/15/15   2,402,700       USD       Global                11.75       S        Price / Quantity
141    06/20/00   06/20/03     940,083       EUR       Eurobond                   9      A        Price / Quantity
142    07/14/00   07/13/01   1,251,560       USD       Domestic                   0      Z        Price
143    07/20/00   07/20/04     949,065       EUR       Eurobond               9.25       A        Price / Quantity
144    07/21/00   07/21/30   1,250,000       USD       Global                10.25       S        Price / Quantity
145    09/07/00   09/07/07     435,722       EUR       Eurobond                  10      A        Price / Quantity
146    09/26/00   09/26/05     575,595       JPY       Eurobond               4.85       S        Quantity
147    11/10/00   11/09/01   1,000,979       USD       Domestic                   0      Z        Price
148    02/21/01   02/21/12   1,593,951       USD       Global               12.375       S        Price / Quantity
149    02/22/01   02/22/07     300,000       USD       Eurobond                  11      S        Price / Quantity
150    06/19/01   06/19/31   8,935,311       USD       Global                    12      S        Price / Quantity
151    06/19/01   06/19/31     200,000       USD       Eurobond                 9.5      A        Quantity
152    06/19/01   06/19/18   7,691,791       USD       Global                12.25       S        Price / Quantity
153    06/19/01   06/19/18     463,729       EUR       Eurobond                  10      A        Quantity
                                                      Brazil
 1     10/15/88   10/15/99     670,000       USD       Restructured Debt   Floating      S        Price
 2     08/31/89   09/15/13   1,000,000       USD       Restructured Debt          6      S        Price
 3     11/26/92   01/01/01   7,104,960       USD       Brady Bond          Floating      S        Price
 4     04/15/94   04/15/06   4,799,521       USD       Brady Bond          Floating      S        Price
 5     04/15/94   04/15/09   1,737,355       USD       Brady Bond          Floating      S        Price
        Issue     Maturity Amount Issued                                            Coupon     Data
Bond     Date      Date    (USD Thousands) Currency     Market         Coupon      Frequency   Available
  6    04/15/94   04/15/09    2,174,663      USD        Brady Bond      Floating      S        Price
  7    04/15/94   04/15/14    7,387,519      USD        Brady Bond             8      S        Price
  8    04/15/94   04/15/24    3,593,064      USD        Brady Bond      Floating      S        Price
  9    04/15/94   04/15/24   10,631,926      USD        Brady Bond      Floating      S        Price
 10    10/15/94   04/15/12    8,489,909      USD        Brady Bond      Floating      S        Price
 11    06/19/95   06/19/97      946,415      JPY        Eurobond               6      A        Quantity
 12    06/21/95   07/20/98      719,756      DM         Eurobond               9      A        Price / Quantity
 13    10/19/95   01/06/01       70,715      DM         Eurobond              10      A        Price
 14    03/22/96   03/22/01      283,509      JPY        Eurobond             5.5      S        Quantity
 15    05/08/96   04/15/05      164,668      EUR        Eurobond              11      A        Price / Quantity
 16    06/11/96   06/11/99      154,223      GBP        Eurobond           9.75       A        Quantity
 17    10/09/96   09/15/07    1,281,699      USD        Eurobond        Floating      S        Quantity
 18    11/05/96   11/05/01      750,000      USD        Global            8.875       S        Price / Quantity
 19    02/05/97   02/26/07      601,900      EUR        Eurobond               8      A        Price / Quantity
 20    02/26/97   02/26/07      590,338      EUR        Eurobond               8     N.A.      Quantity
 21    04/25/97   05/21/02      174,124      EUR        Eurobond          6.625       A        Price / Quantity
 22    04/30/97   05/21/02      208,699      EUR        Eurobond          6.625       A        Price / Quantity
 23    05/07/97   05/21/02      166,905      EUR        Eurobond          6.625       A        Price / Quantity
 24    06/03/97   06/26/17      442,219      EUR        Eurobond              11      A        Price / Quantity
 25    06/09/97   05/15/27    3,500,000      USD        Global           10.125       S        Quantity
 26    07/30/97   07/30/07      253,245      GBP        Eurobond              10      A        Quantity
 27    03/03/98   03/03/03      538,100      EUR        Eurobond          8.625       A        Price / Quantity
 28    04/06/98   04/07/08    1,000,000      USD        Eurobond               0      Z        Quantity
 29    04/07/98   04/07/08    1,250,000      USD        Global            9.375       S        Quantity
 30    04/23/98   04/23/08      413,289      DM         Eurobond     Step Down        A        Quantity
 31    04/30/99   04/15/04    3,046,172      USD        Global           11.625       S        Price / Quantity
 32    07/29/99   07/29/02      750,778      EUR        Eurobond             9.5      A        Quantity
 33    09/10/99   09/30/04      523,596      EUR        Eurobond         11.125       A        Price / Quantity
 34    10/25/99   10/15/09    4,000,000      USD        Global             14.5       S        Price / Quantity
 35    10/29/99   11/17/06      735,812      EUR        Eurobond              12      A        Price / Quantity
 36    11/13/99   11/26/01      606,366      EUR        Eurobond           8.25       A        Price / Quantity
 37    01/15/00   02/04/10      741,988      EUR        Eurobond              11      A        Price / Quantity
 38    01/26/00   01/15/20    1,000,000      USD        Global            12.75       S        Price / Quantity
 39    03/06/00   03/06/30    1,000,000      USD        Global            12.25       S        Price / Quantity
 40    06/21/00   07/05/05      709,622      EUR        Eurobond               9      A        Quantity
 41    06/23/00   07/05/05    1,170,631      EUR        Eurobond               9      A        Price / Quantity
 42    07/26/00   07/26/07    1,500,000      USD        Global            11.25       S        Price / Quantity
 43    08/17/00   08/17/40    5,157,311      USD        Global                11      S        Price / Quantity
 44    09/20/00   10/05/07      423,765      EUR        Eurobond             9.5      A        Price / Quantity
 45    11/29/00   03/22/06      600,646      JPY        Eurobond           4.75       S        Quantity
 46    01/10/01   01/24/11      937,124      EUR        Eurobond             9.5      A        Price / Quantity
 47    01/11/01   01/11/06    1,500,000      USD        Global            10.25       S        Price / Quantity
 48    03/17/01   04/10/07      651,090      JPY        Eurobond           4.75       S        Quantity
 49    03/22/01   04/15/24    2,150,000      USD        Global            8.875       S        Price / Quantity
 50    05/09/01   07/05/05      424,012      EUR        Eurobond               9      A        Quantity
 51    05/17/01   07/15/05    1,000,000      USD        Global            9.625       S        Price / Quantity
 52    08/02/01   08/28/03      177,576      JPY        Eurobond           3.75       S        Quantity
 53    01/11/02   01/11/12    1,250,000      USD        Global                11      S        Price / Quantity
 54    03/12/02   03/12/08    1,250,000      USD        Global              11.5      S        Quantity
 55    04/02/02   04/02/09      445,859      EUR        Eurobond           11.5       A        Price / Quantity
 56    04/16/02   04/15/10    1,000,000      USD        Global                12      S        Quantity
                                                      Colombia
 1     05/11/93   05/11/98     125,000       USD        Eurobond          7.125       S        Price / Quantity
 2     01/14/94   01/14/99      89,678       JPY        Eurobond           3.55       S        Quantity
        Issue   Maturity Amount Issued                                                  Coupon     Data
Bond     Date    Date    (USD Thousands) Currency    Market                Coupon      Frequency   Available
  3    02/23/94 02/23/04     250,000       USD       Yankee                    7.25       S        Price / Quantity
  4    10/06/94 10/06/99     175,000       USD       Yankee                    8.75       S        Price / Quantity
  5    02/15/95 02/15/00     100,000       USD       Eurobond                  9.25       A        Quantity
  6    08/02/95 08/02/02     126,920       JPY       Eurobond                   4.1       S        Quantity
  7    11/28/95 12/21/00     104,113       DM        Eurobond                 7.25        A        Price / Quantity
  8    12/21/95 12/22/00     147,326       JPY       Eurobond                     3       S        Quantity
  9    02/15/96 02/15/03     200,000       USD       Global                    7.25       S        Price / Quantity
 10    02/15/96 02/15/16     200,000       USD       Global                     8.7       S        Price / Quantity
 11    06/13/96 06/14/01     400,000       USD       Eurobond                     8       A        Price / Quantity
 12    10/07/96 10/07/16     125,000       USD       Eurobond                  8.66       S        Quantity
 13    11/21/96 11/21/01     181,916       DM        Eurobond              Floating       Q        Quantity
 14    02/24/97 02/15/07     750,000       USD       Global                  7.625        S        Price / Quantity
 15    02/24/97 02/15/27     250,000       USD       Global                  8.375        S        Price / Quantity
 16    02/11/98 02/11/08     164,830       GBP       Eurobond                  9.75       A        Quantity
 17    03/06/98 03/06/02     222,433       ITL       Eurobond                     7       A        Quantity
 18    04/02/98 04/01/08     500,000       USD       Global                  8.625        S        Price / Quantity
 19    06/15/98 06/15/03     150,000       USD       Private Placement         7.27       S        Quantity
 20    06/25/98 06/15/03     150,000       USD       Eurobond                 7.27        S        Price / Quantity
 21    07/14/98 07/14/03     135,000       USD       Eurobond                   7.7       S        Price / Quantity
 22    08/13/98 08/13/05     500,000       USD       Yankee                Floating       Q        Quantity
 23    03/09/99 03/09/04     500,000       USD       Global                 10.875        S        Price / Quantity
 24    04/23/99 04/23/09     500,000       USD       Global                    9.75       S        Price / Quantity
 25    11/30/99 04/25/05     500,000       USD       Eurobond                  9.75      N.A.      Quantity
 26    11/30/99 04/23/09     500,000       USD       Global                    9.75       S        Quantity
 27    02/25/00 02/25/20   1,075,000       USD       Global                  11.75        S        Price / Quantity
 28    03/17/00 03/09/28      22,285       USD       Global                  11.85        S        Quantity
 29    06/09/00 06/30/03     427,948       EUR       Eurobond                    11       A        Price / Quantity
 30    07/28/00 06/30/03     139,210       EUR       Eurobond                    11       A        Quantity
 31    10/05/00 10/20/05     513,629       EUR       Eurobond                11.25        A        Price / Quantity
 32    10/13/00 10/17/05     300,000       USD       Eurobond              Floating       Q        Quantity
 33    10/20/00 10/20/05     252,786       EUR       Eurobond                11.25        A        Quantity
 34    01/25/01 01/31/08     648,145       EUR       Eurobond               11.375        A        Price / Quantity
 35    04/09/01 04/09/11     875,000       USD       Global                    9.75       S        Quantity
 36    04/12/01 04/27/05     243,041       JPY       Eurobond                   5.5       S        Quantity
 37    05/12/01 05/31/11     344,828       EUR       Eurobond                 11.5        A        Price / Quantity
 38    06/13/01 06/13/06     450,000       USD       Global                    10.5       S        Price / Quantity
 39    11/21/01 01/23/12     900,000       USD       Global                      10       S        Price / Quantity
 40    07/09/02 07/09/10     507,029       USD       Global                    10.5       S        Quantity
 41    12/09/02 01/15/13     625,000       USD       Global                  10.75        S        Quantity
                                                    Mexico
  1    03/28/90 12/31/19   1,516,473       EUR       Brady Bond                5.01       S        Price
  2    03/13/91 03/13/96     187,243       DM        Eurobond                  10.5       A        Quantity
  3    07/16/91 07/16/01     150,000       USD       Eurobond                    9.5      S        Quantity
  4    08/21/91 08/21/96      91,747       ESP       Eurobond                 14.25       A        Quantity
  5    09/29/91 09/01/08      96,500       GBP       Eurobond                  16.5       S        Quantity
  6    12/03/91 12/03/98     182,252       GBP       Eurobond                 12.25       A        Quantity
  7    09/24/92 09/15/02     250,000       USD       Yankee                      8.5      S        Price / Quantity
  8    03/16/93 03/16/98     200,000       USD       Eurobond                  7.25       A        Price / Quantity
  9    04/02/93 08/12/00      58,895       USD       Eurobond                  6.97       S        Price
 10    07/23/93 07/23/96      92,825       JPY       Eurobond                    4.9      S        Quantity
 11    01/25/95 01/29/03     846,891       EUR       Eurobond                10.375       A        Price / Quantity
 12    07/20/95 07/21/97   1,000,000       USD       Eurobond               Floating      S        Price
 13    07/21/95 07/21/97     418,403       USD       Eurobond            Step Down        A        Quantity
 14    08/17/95 08/17/98   1,057,666       JPY       Eurobond                      5      A        Quantity
        Issue     Maturity Amount Issued                                      Coupon     Data
Bond     Date      Date    (USD Thousands) Currency    Market     Coupon     Frequency   Available
 15    10/05/95 11/02/00       705,975       DM        Eurobond     9.375       A        Price / Quantity
 16    12/05/95 11/27/96     1,500,000       USD       Eurobond          0      Z        Quantity
 17    12/12/95 03/12/97       294,652       JPY       Eurobond       2.85      A        Quantity
 18    12/12/95 12/12/97       127,683       JPY       Eurobond          3      A        Quantity
 19    01/29/96 01/29/03       684,158       DM        Eurobond    10.375       A        Quantity
 20    02/06/96 02/06/01     1,000,000       USD       Global         9.75      S        Price / Quantity
 21    05/07/96 05/15/26     1,750,000       USD       Global         11.5      S        Price / Quantity
 22    06/06/96 06/06/06       918,628       JPY       Eurobond       6.75      S        Quantity
 23    09/10/96 09/10/04     1,002,904       DM        Eurobond   Step Up       A        Quantity
 24    09/24/96 09/15/16     1,200,000       USD       Global      11.375       S        Price / Quantity
 25    09/30/96 09/30/02       637,841       JPY       Eurobond          5     N.A.      Quantity
 26    11/21/96 11/21/01       330,447       ITL       Eurobond   Floating      Q        Quantity
 27    01/14/97 01/15/07     1,250,000       USD       Global       9.875       S        Price / Quantity
 28    01/14/97 01/15/07       500,000       USD       Eurobond     9.875       S        Quantity
 29    02/05/97 02/24/09       902,850       EUR       Eurobond      8.25       A        Price / Quantity
 30    02/20/97 02/20/07       302,076       EUR       Eurobond     9.125       A        Price / Quantity
 31    02/24/97 02/24/09       885,506       EUR       Eurobond       8.25      A        Quantity
 32    03/11/97 03/11/04       407,692       JPY       Eurobond          4     N.A.      Quantity
 33    04/24/97 04/24/02       796,761       JPY       Eurobond        3.1     N.A.      Quantity
 34    05/08/97 05/08/17       297,195       ITL       Eurobond         11      A        Quantity
 35    05/30/97 05/30/02       489,966       GBP       Eurobond       8.75      A        Quantity
 36    06/27/97 06/27/02     1,000,000       USD       Eurobond   Floating      Q        Quantity
 37    07/16/97 07/16/04       286,671       ITL       Eurobond     8.375       A        Quantity
 38    07/23/97 07/23/08       418,543       DM        Eurobond          8      A        Quantity
 39    09/10/97 10/01/04       446,235       EUR       Eurobond     7.625       A        Price / Quantity
 40    10/29/97 06/02/03       360,573       CAD       Global            7      S        Quantity
 41    03/12/98 03/12/08     1,250,000       USD       Global       8.625       S        Price / Quantity
 42    06/08/98 06/08/03       100,867       PTE       Eurobond   Floating      S        Quantity
 43    02/19/99 02/17/09     1,250,000       USD       Global      10.375       S        Price / Quantity
 44    04/06/99 04/06/05     1,000,000       USD       Global         9.75      S        Price / Quantity
 45    04/07/99 04/07/00       227,952       USD       Eurobond   Floating      S        Quantity
 46    04/07/99 04/07/04       500,000       USD       Eurobond   Floating      Q        Price
 47    04/07/99 04/07/04       394,926       EUR       Eurobond   Floating      Q        Quantity
 48    06/23/99 07/06/06       420,643       EUR       Global       7.375       A        Price / Quantity
 49    01/28/00 02/01/10     1,500,000       USD       Global       9.875       S        Price / Quantity
 50    03/02/00 03/08/10       966,277       EUR       Eurobond        7.5      A        Price / Quantity
 51    08/01/00 02/01/06     1,500,000       USD       Global          8.5      S        Price / Quantity
 52    09/20/00 09/29/04       467,158       JPY       Eurobond       2.25      S        Quantity
 53    01/16/01 01/14/11     1,500,000       USD       Global       8.375       S        Price / Quantity
 54    03/13/01 03/13/08       659,805       EUR       Eurobond     7.375       A        Quantity
 55    03/30/01 12/30/19     3,300,000       USD       Global       8.125       S        Price / Quantity
 56    08/13/01 08/15/31     3,250,000       USD       Global          8.3      S        Price / Quantity
 57    01/14/02 01/14/12     1,250,000       USD       Global          7.5      S        Price / Quantity
 58    09/24/02 09/24/22     1,750,000       USD       Global            8      S        Quantity
                                                      Russia
 1     05/14/93   05/14/94     266,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Quantity
 2     05/14/93   05/14/96   1,518,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Quantity
 3     05/14/93   05/14/99   1,307,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Quantity
 4     05/14/93   05/14/03   2,627,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Price / Quantity
 5     05/14/93   05/14/08   2,502,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Price / Quantity
 6     05/14/96   05/14/06   1,750,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Price / Quantity
 7     05/14/96   05/14/11   1,750,000       USD       Domestic         3       A        Price / Quantity
 8     11/27/96   11/27/01   1,000,000       USD       Eurobond      9.25       S        Price / Quantity
 9     03/13/97   03/25/04   1,177,126       EUR       Eurobond         9       A        Price / Quantity
        Issue   Maturity Amount Issued                                                  Coupon     Data
Bond     Date    Date    (USD Thousands) Currency    Market                Coupon      Frequency   Available
 10    03/19/97 03/19/15      58,932       DM        Eurobond               Floating      A        Quantity
 11    03/25/97 03/25/04   1,187,936       EUR       Eurobond                      9      A        Quantity
 12    06/26/97 06/26/07   2,400,000       USD       Private Placement            10      S        Price
 13    06/26/97 06/26/07   2,400,000       USD       Eurobond                     10      S        Price / Quantity
 14    12/06/97 12/06/99      50,000       USD       Eurobond               Floating     N.A.      Quantity
 15    03/12/98 03/12/18      54,744       DM        Eurobond            Step Down        A        Quantity
 16    03/31/98 03/31/05     680,108       EUR       Eurobond                 9.375       A        Price / Quantity
 17    03/31/98 03/31/05     687,815       EUR       Eurobond                 9.375       A        Quantity
 18    04/24/98 04/30/03     418,403       EUR       Eurobond                      9      A        Price / Quantity
 19    06/10/98 06/10/03   1,250,000       USD       Private Placement        11.75       S        Price / Quantity
 20    06/10/98 06/10/03   1,250,000       USD       Eurobond                 11.75       S        Price / Quantity
 21    06/24/98 06/24/08     150,000       USD       Eurobond                 12.75      N.A.      Quantity
 22    06/24/98 06/24/28   2,500,000       USD       Private Placement        12.75       S        Price / Quantity
 23    06/24/98 06/24/28   2,500,000       USD       Eurobond                 12.75       S        Price / Quantity
 24    07/24/98 07/24/05   2,968,968       USD       Private Placement          8.75      S        Price
 25    07/24/98 07/24/05   2,968,967       USD       Eurobond                  8.75       S        Price / Quantity
 26    07/24/98 07/24/18   3,466,671       USD       Private Placement            11      S        Price
 27    07/24/98 07/24/18   3,466,671       USD       Eurobond                     11      S        Price / Quantity
 28    02/01/00 11/14/07   1,322,000       USD       Domestic                      3      S        Price
 29    03/31/00 03/31/30   1,840,000       USD       Private Placement      Step Up       S        Quantity
 30    03/31/00 03/31/30   1,840,000       USD       Eurobond               Step Up       S        Quantity
 31    08/25/00 03/31/10   2,534,000       USD       Private Placement          8.25      S        Price
 32    08/25/00 03/31/10   2,534,000       USD       Eurobond                  8.25       S        Price / Quantity
                                                    Turkey
  1    01/01/50 02/06/03   1,000,000       EUR       Eurobond                  7.25       A        Price
  2    12/22/88 12/22/98     150,000       USD       Eurobond                11.125       A        Price / Quantity
  3    04/27/89 04/27/99     200,000       USD       Eurobond                  11.5       S        Price / Quantity
  4    06/07/89 06/07/99     280,000       USD       Eurobond                    5.5      A        Price / Quantity
  5    09/14/89 09/14/99     200,000       USD       Eurobond                 10.25       S        Quantity
  6    11/22/89 11/22/95     250,000       USD       Eurobond                  9.75      N.A.      Quantity
  7    02/21/90 03/15/97     200,000       USD       Eurobond                 10.75       A        Price / Quantity
  8    04/04/90 04/24/97     147,001       DM        Eurobond                     10      A        Price
  9    08/16/90 08/16/95     150,000       USD       Eurobond                10.375      N.A.      Quantity
 10    10/28/91 10/28/96     328,235       DM        Eurobond                 10.75       A        Price / Quantity
 11    03/03/92 03/20/97     250,000       USD       Eurobond                    8.5      S        Price / Quantity
 12    06/25/92 06/15/99     250,000       USD       Eurobond                      9      S        Price / Quantity
 13    07/06/92 07/27/99     268,294       DM        Eurobond                 10.25       A        Price / Quantity
 14    07/16/92 08/06/97     200,000       USD       Eurobond                 8.125       A        Price / Quantity
 15    09/24/92 09/24/99     407,432       JPY       Eurobond                    6.8     N.A.      Quantity
 16    01/19/93 02/18/00     243,665       DM        Eurobond                   9.5       A        Price / Quantity
 17    02/25/93 02/25/00     826,720       JPY       Eurobond                    6.3      S        Quantity
 18    06/10/93 06/10/03     326,067       JPY       Eurobond                      7     N.A.      Quantity
 19    06/28/93 07/09/03     585,783       EUR       Eurobond                  8.75       A        Price / Quantity
 20    10/19/93 10/29/98     610,493       DM        Eurobond                  7.25       A        Price / Quantity
 21    10/27/93 10/27/03     187,481       GBP       Eurobond                      9      A        Quantity
 22    11/30/93 11/30/98     278,287       JPY       Eurobond                      4      S        Quantity
 23    11/30/93 11/30/01     463,811       JPY       Eurobond                    5.1      S        Quantity
 24    03/01/94 03/01/02     428,006       JPY       Eurobond                  5.45      N.A.      Quantity
 25    03/01/94 03/01/04     286,766       JPY       Eurobond                  5.75       S        Quantity
 26    07/25/95 08/21/98     345,994       DM        Eurobond                      8      A        Price / Quantity
 27    07/27/95 07/27/98     573,254       JPY       Eurobond                    4.5      S        Quantity
 28    09/19/95 10/05/98     300,000       USD       Eurobond                  8.75       S        Price / Quantity
 29    11/06/95 05/06/05     263,350       USD       Eurobond                      3      S        Price / Quantity
 30    01/16/96 02/16/06      94,793       JPY       Eurobond                    7.2      A        Quantity
        Issue     Maturity Amount Issued                                                   Coupon     Data
Bond     Date      Date    (USD Thousands) Currency     Market                Coupon      Frequency   Available
 31    02/05/96 02/14/01       341,041       DM         Eurobond                    7.5      A        Price / Quantity
 32    04/23/96 04/23/01       697,913       JPY        Eurobond                    5.7      S        Quantity
 33    05/22/96 06/11/99       500,000       USD        Eurobond                  8.25       S        Price / Quantity
 34    05/30/96 05/30/02       281,833       JPY        Eurobond                      6      A        Quantity
 35    08/13/96 09/04/00       431,656       DM         Eurobond                      8      A        Price / Quantity
 36    12/05/96 12/05/01       483,406       DM         Eurobond                 7.625       A        Price / Quantity
 37    01/29/97 02/17/04       301,397       DM         Eurobond                  7.75       A        Price / Quantity
 38    02/24/97 03/18/02       177,144       EUR        Eurobond                      9      A        Price / Quantity
 39    03/14/97 06/26/03        57,626       DM         Eurobond                    8.5      A        Quantity
 40    05/20/97 05/23/02       400,000       USD        Eurobond                     10      S        Price / Quantity
 41    06/03/97 06/24/02       578,935       DM         Eurobond                  7.25       A        Price / Quantity
 42    08/18/97 08/18/00       100,000       USD        Eurobond               Floating      S        Quantity
 43    09/17/97 09/19/07       600,000       USD        Eurobond                     10      S        Price / Quantity
 44    09/19/97 09/19/07       600,000       USD        Private Placement            10      S        Quantity
 45    10/10/97 10/22/07     1,285,709       EUR        Eurobond                 8.125       A        Price / Quantity
 46    02/06/98 02/06/03       551,222       DM         Eurobond                  7.25       A        Quantity
 47    02/13/98 02/23/05       400,000       USD        Private Placement        9.875       S        Price / Quantity
 48    02/13/98 02/23/05       450,000       USD        Eurobond                 9.875       S        Price / Quantity
 49    04/20/98 04/20/06       552,154       DM         Eurobond            Step Down        A        Quantity
 50    05/12/98 05/12/03       300,000       USD        Eurobond                 8.875       S        Price / Quantity
 51    11/20/98 11/30/01       475,737       DM         Eurobond                    9.5      A        Price / Quantity
 52    12/11/98 12/15/08       600,000       USD        Eurobond                     12      S        Price / Quantity
 53    12/15/98 12/15/03       200,000       USD        Eurobond                     12     N.A.      Quantity
 54    02/06/99 02/17/03       449,102       DM         Eurobond                  9.25       A        Price / Quantity
 55    02/25/99 03/15/04     1,105,154       EUR        Eurobond                    9.5      A        Price / Quantity
 56    06/19/99 06/15/09     1,250,000       USD        Eurobond                12.375       S        Price / Quantity
 57    08/05/99 08/25/05       427,656       EUR        Eurobond                 9.625       A        Price / Quantity
 58    10/30/99 11/05/04       500,000       USD        Eurobond                11.875       S        Price / Quantity
 59    11/13/99 11/30/06       773,914       EUR        Eurobond                 9.625       A        Price / Quantity
 60    12/03/99 12/17/02       404,000       EUR        Eurobond                  7.75       A        Price / Quantity
 61    01/11/00 01/15/30     1,500,000       USD        Eurobond                11.875       S        Price / Quantity
 62    01/27/00 02/09/10       977,359       EUR        Eurobond                  9.25       A        Price / Quantity
 63    03/31/00 04/14/05       561,209       EUR        Eurobond                  7.75       A        Price / Quantity
 64    06/09/00 06/15/10     1,500,000       USD        Eurobond                 11.75       S        Price / Quantity
 65    06/13/00 06/13/03       474,809       EUR        Eurobond               Floating      Q        Quantity
 66    06/15/00 06/15/10       750,000       USD        Eurobond                 11.75      N.A.      Quantity
 67    06/17/00 07/14/04       516,674       JPY        Eurobond                  3.25       S        Quantity
 68    08/07/00 08/07/03       177,949       EUR        Eurobond               Floating      S        Quantity
 69    11/07/00 11/27/03       467,022       JPY        Eurobond                      3      S        Quantity
 70    01/31/01 02/16/04       697,492       EUR        Eurobond                  8.25       A        Price / Quantity
 71    10/24/01 02/07/05       713,349       EUR        Eurobond                     11      A        Price / Quantity
 72    11/21/01 11/27/06     1,000,000       USD        Eurobond                11.375       S        Price / Quantity
 73    01/17/02 01/23/12     1,000,000       USD        Eurobond                  11.5       S        Price / Quantity
 74    03/13/02 03/19/08       600,000       USD        Eurobond                 9.875       S        Price / Quantity
 75    04/19/02 05/08/07       614,058       EUR        Eurobond                  9.75       A        Price / Quantity
 76    05/14/02 05/14/07       200,000       USD        Eurobond                   11.5      S        Quantity
 77    11/13/02 01/13/08     1,100,000       USD        Eurobond                   10.5      S        Quantity
 78    01/14/03 01/14/13     1,500,000       USD        Eurobond                     11      S        Quantity
 79    01/24/03 01/24/08       535,720       EUR        Eurobond                 9.875       A        Quantity
                                                      Uruguay
 1     04/23/93   04/23/98    100,000        USD        Eurobond                   7.5       S        Quantity
 2     03/07/94   03/07/01    100,000        USD        Eurobond                  7.25       S        Quantity
 3     10/24/94   04/24/97    101,604        JPY        Eurobond                     5       S        Quantity
 4     08/08/95   09/08/00    136,774        DM         Eurobond                     8       A        Price / Quantity
         Issue    Maturity Amount Issued                                                              Coupon        Data
Bond      Date     Date    (USD Thousands) Currency             Market                   Coupon      Frequency      Available
  5    09/19/96 09/26/06          100,000            USD        Eurobond                   8.375         S         Price / Quantity
  6    09/20/96 09/26/06          100,000            USD        Private Placement          8.375         S         Quantity
  7    04/24/97 04/24/02           79,676            JPY        Eurobond                      2.5       N.A.       Quantity
  8    07/09/97 07/15/27          510,000            USD        Eurobond                   7.875         S         Price / Quantity
  9    04/06/98 04/07/08          250,000            USD        Eurobond                        7        S         Price / Quantity
 10    11/14/98 11/18/03          175,000            USD        Eurobond                   7.875         S         Price / Quantity
 11    04/30/99 05/04/09          250,000            USD        Eurobond                    7.25         S         Price / Quantity
 12    06/20/00 06/22/10          300,000            USD        Eurobond                    8.75         S         Price / Quantity
 13    09/13/00 09/26/05          196,824            EUR        Eurobond                        7        A         Price / Quantity
 14    11/23/00 05/29/07          156,149            CLP        Eurobond                 Floating        S         Quantity
 15    02/27/01 03/14/06          257,023            JPY        Eurobond                 Step Up         S         Quantity
 16    06/08/01 06/28/11          170,032            EUR        Eurobond                        7        A         Price / Quantity
 17    11/20/01 01/20/12          355,000            USD        Eurobond                   7.625         S         Price / Quantity
 18    03/25/02 03/25/09          250,000            USD        Eurobond                   7.875         S         Quantity
                                                             Venezuela

  1    11/14/88    11/14/93        60,606            DM         Eurobond                     8.25        A         Price
  2    12/22/88    12/22/98       167,000            USD        Eurobond                 Floating        S         Price
  3    12/22/88    12/30/03       167,000            USD        Eurobond                 Floating        S         Price
  4    12/18/90    03/30/20       329,059            EUR        Brady Bond                   6.66        S         Price
  5    12/18/90    03/31/20       719,600            USD        Brady Bond                   6.75        S         Price
  6    08/21/91    09/11/96       150,000            USD        Eurobond                    9.75         A         Price / Quantity
  7    09/18/91    12/18/07       100,000            USD        Restructured Debt               9        S         Quantity
  8    11/18/91    12/02/96       127,429            DM         Eurobond                    10.5         A         Price / Quantity
  9    12/18/92    12/18/07        30,000            USD        Private Placement            8.75        S         Quantity
 10    03/08/93    03/11/96       150,000            USD        Eurobond                   9.125         S         Price / Quantity
 11    05/05/93    05/05/98       155,661            DM         Eurobond                   10.25         A         Price / Quantity
 12    05/11/93    05/27/96       150,000            USD        Eurobond                        9        S         Price / Quantity
 13    09/13/93    09/20/95       250,000            USD        Eurobond                    6.75         S         Price / Quantity
 14    09/16/93    10/15/00       183,148            DM         Eurobond                    8.75         A         Price / Quantity
 15    09/20/93    09/20/95        50,000            USD        Eurobond                 Floating       N.A.       Quantity
 16    12/07/93    12/07/95        83,155            ATS        Eurobond                        8       N.A.       Quantity
 17    12/14/95    12/14/98       347,044            DM         Eurobond                       10        A         Price / Quantity
 18    09/12/96    10/04/03       427,590            EUR        Eurobond                   10.25         A         Price / Quantity
 19    06/10/97    06/18/07       315,000            USD        Global                     9.125         S         Price / Quantity
 20    06/10/97    06/18/07       315,000            USD        Private Placement          9.125         S         Price / Quantity
 21    09/11/97    09/15/27     4,000,000            USD        Global                      9.25         S         Price / Quantity
 22    07/31/98    08/15/18       500,000            USD        Eurobond                  13.625         S         Price / Quantity
 23    10/29/98    10/29/08       109,532            DM         Eurobond                 Step Up         A         Quantity
 24    12/23/99    12/23/02       190,762            EUR        Eurobond                   9.875         A         Quantity
 25    03/03/00    03/23/05       481,554            EUR        Eurobond                    10.5         A         Price / Quantity
 26    02/09/01    03/05/08       550,785            EUR        Eurobond                       11        A         Price / Quantity
 27    03/05/01    03/05/08       181,830            EUR        Eurobond                       11        A         Quantity
 28    06/28/01    07/25/11       213,613            EUR        Eurobond                  11.125         A         Price / Quantity
 29    12/07/01    06/30/03       222,892            EUR        Eurobond                    10.5         A         Price / Quantity


The table describes the emerging market bonds used in the paper by country. For the currency, ATS stands for Austrian schilling,
CAD for Canadian dollar, CHF for Swiss franc, CLP for Chilean peso, DM for Deutsche mark, ESP for Spanish peseta, EUR for
Euro, FRF for French franc, GBP for British pound, ITL for Italian lira, JPY for Japanese yen, NLG for Dutch guilder, PTE for
Portuguese escudo, and USD for U.S. dollar. For the coupon frequency, A stands for annual, M for monthly, Q for quarterly, S for
semi-annual, Z for zero-coupon bond, and N.A. for not available. The last column of the table reports whether the bond is used in the
price section, in the quantity section, or in both sections of the paper.
