                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FOREIGN KNOW-HOW, FIRM CONTROL, AND THE INCOME OF DEVELOPING
                             COUNTRIES

                                          Ariel Burstein
                                     Alexander Monge-Naranjo

                                        Working Paper 13073
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13073


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




We thank Manuel Amador, Pol Antràs, Andy Atkeson, Wilbur John Coleman, Pete Klenow, Éva Nagypál,
Giorgio Primiceri, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Martin Schneider, Aleh Tsyvinski,
and seminar participants in various places for useful comments and suggestions. Gilberto Arce provided
superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ariel Burstein and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Know-How, Firm Control, and the Income of Developing Countries
Ariel Burstein and Alexander Monge-Naranjo
NBER Working Paper No. 13073
May 2007
JEL No. F23,F43

                                            ABSTRACT

Managerial know-how shapes the productivity of firms by defining the set of available technologies,
production choices, and market opportunities. This know-how can be reallocated across countries
as managers acquire control of factors of production abroad. In this paper, we construct a quantitative
model of cross-country income differences to study the aggregate consequences of international mobility
of managerial know-how. We use the model and aggregate data to infer the relative scarcity of this
form of know-how for a sample of developing countries. We also conduct policy counterfactuals and
find that on average, developing countries gain up to 23% in output and 9% in consumption when
they eliminate all barriers to foreign control of domestic factors of production.

Ariel Burstein
UC, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu

Alexander Monge-Naranjo
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Andersen Hall 3232
Evanston, IL 60208
a-monge1@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

The diﬀusion of productive knowledge plays an important role in the literature on cross-
country income diﬀerences (e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1998 and Klenow and Rodriguez-
Clare 2005). Much of the attention has been focused on flows of knowledge embedded in
capital goods and in patents, and on the role of international trade and imitation in the
diﬀusion of ideas. Less attention has been given to the transfer of know-how that takes
place when management crosses borders to directly control inputs in a foreign country. Such
transfers, however, appear to be important in light of the large and fast growing multinational
activity observed in recent years.1 In this paper, we construct a quantitative model of cross-
country income diﬀerences to study the aggregate consequences of foreign management and
control of inputs in host countries.
       There is a long tradition of linking the productivity of firms to the quality of their
management.2 Managerial know-how shapes the productivity of firms by governing the
set of available technologies, production choices, and market opportunities. This know-how
is costly to reproduce but can be imported from abroad as foreign management acquires
control of local inputs. To evaluate the consequences of policies that restrict the international
mobility of managerial know-how, it is essential to separate this component of productivity
from other complementary factors that are fixed in each country.
       We refer to those factors which are immobile across countries and that impact the produc-
tivity of all firms operating in the country, as “country-embedded productivity”. It includes,
for example, the infrastructure, regulations, natural amenities, and the quality of the local
labor force and other inputs that are fixed in the country. We refer to the know-how of the
individuals in control of the firm as “firm-embedded productivity”. Because of its human
aspect this factor has two important characteristics. First, it is a “rival” factor that is in
limited supply. At any point in time, employing the skills of an individual in one task or lo-
cation precludes them from being used in another one. Second, firm-embedded productivity
can be reallocated across sectors, regions and, albeit imperfectly, across countries.
       Consider the case of wine production. Making wine is mostly a matter of the choices made
   1
     See chapter 1 of Barba Navaretti and Venables (2004) and references therein for an account of the
impressive growth of multinational firms during the last two decades of the 20th century.
   2
     See, for example, Kaldor (1934), Lucas (1978), Oi (1983), Prescott and Visscher (1980), and Rosen
(1982). Bloom and Van Reenen (2006) provide survey evidence that managerial practice is strongly associated
with firm-level performance.



                                                    2
during each phase of production, from choosing the grapes to bottling and marketing the
finished product. Country-embedded productivity includes the quality of the soil, rainfall,
sunlight, water, as well as appellations, seals of origin, and other amenities. Firm-embedded
productivity is given by the viticultural and enological know-how of winemakers, as well as
their connections and knowledge of the relevant markets. The international mobility of firm-
embedded productivity is illustrated by winemakers such as Gallo, Mondavi, and Rothschild,
who export their know-how to produce wine faraway from their traditional ‘terroirs’.3
       The mobility of firm-embedded productivity across countries conforms with the obser-
vation that multinational firms in developing countries rely largely on expatriates from the
source country for “senior management positions and key technical and engineering jobs to
execute sophisticated or specialized production tasks” (UNCTAD 1994, p. 238).4 Bloom,
Sadun and Van Reenen (2007) provide direct evidence that multinational firms transplant
their organization structure and managerial practices, and this shapes their productivity
abroad. Indeed, Bloom (2007) documents that foreign operations of firms from developed
countries (e.g., U.S. and Japan) are better managed than domestic firms in developing coun-
tries (e.g., China and India).
       At the aggregate level, country- and firm-embedded productivity cannot be directly sep-
arated. For given levels of capital and labor, a combination of high country- and low firm-
embedded productivity can lead to the same observed output level as a combination of low
country- and high firm-embedded productivity. Firm-embedded productivity, however, is
a rival factor that can be reallocated across countries. To equalize the marginal product
across countries, firm-embedded productivity must flow from countries where it is relatively
abundant to countries where it is scarce. Therefore, for the same measured level of output,
a high observed share of capital and labor controlled by foreign know-how indicates a high
ratio of country- to firm-embedded productivity.
       We formalize this logic in a standard model of cross-country income diﬀerences, extended
with internationally mobile managerial know-how. We use the model and aggregate data to
disentangle country- and firm-embedded productivities for a sample of developing countries,
   3
     For example, The Economist (“Vino Twin Peaks”, March 15, 2007) describes how the arrival of foreign
winemakers in Argentina led to a large increase of high quality wine exports over recent years. See Fisher
(1999) for a broader discussion on the globalization in wine production.
   4
     The UNCTAD report provides evidence that the reliance on expatriates is greater in developing countries
than in developed countries. It also highlights the important role of foreign personnel in organizing the early
phases of the enterprise as well as training the local workers.



                                                      3
and to conduct policy counterfactuals on changes in the barriers to foreign control of local
factors of production.
    In our model, production is organized in teams composed of a top-level manager leading
a set of inputs. Inputs include middle managers, workers, and capital services. As in Lucas
(1978), we refer to these teams as “firms.” Firms have decreasing returns to scale in the
inputs controlled by the top manager. The productivity of a firm is the product of two
Hicks-neutral factors: the location of the firm (country-embedded productivity) and the
know-how of its top-level manager (firm-embedded productivity). Firm leaders from one
country can reallocate their know-how to another country and form teams with local inputs
and capital. We refer to such teams as foreign firms.5
    Firms maximize profits by choosing locations with high country-embedded productivity
and low factor prices. The worldwide equilibrium allocates firm-embedded productivity by
equalizing its marginal product (the firms’ profits) across countries. Everything else equal,
a host country attracts more foreign firms, the higher its country-embedded productivity
and the lower its domestic firm-embedded productivity, both of which reduce the production
costs of foreign firms. This implication of our model echoes the result in Helpman (1984),
that inflows of vertical multinational firms are more prevalent in countries that are relatively
scarce in factors intensively used by headquarter services (e.g., management, marketing and
R&D) and relatively rich in factors intensively used in production activities (e.g., labor).
    We use the model and aggregate data to separately measure the domestic endowment
of firm-embedded productivity and the level of country-embedded productivity. Observing
a higher share of factors controlled by foreign firms indicates, everything else the same, a
higher ratio of country-to-firm-embedded productivity. Similarly, a higher tax rate on foreign
profits (for the same share of factors controlled by foreign firms) indicates a higher ratio of
country-to-firm-embedded productivity. In our model, we also allow for geographic barriers
that reduce the productivity of foreign firms, physical capital accumulation, and mobility
across occupations (workers, middle managers, and top managers) within countries.
    In our quantitative analysis, we measure the aggregate share of inputs controlled by
foreign firms in host countries as the ratio of the stock of inward foreign direct investment
(FDI) to the stock of physical capital in each country. The measurement of FDI in the data is
closely connected to the cross-country reallocation of managerial know-how and control in our
  5
    In this paper we assume a bounded aggregate supply of managerial know-how in each country. Monge-
Naranjo (2007) studies the dynamic accumulation of this factor in a model where it can move across countries.


                                                     4
model, since it represents foreign investment undertaken with the objective of establishing
a lasting interest in the country, a long-term relationship, and a significant influence on the
management of the firm. As a robustness check, we also construct an alternative measure of
inputs controlled by foreign firms based on the share of eﬃciency units of labor controlled
by multinational firms (combining data on the wage bill of U.S. multinational firms and
inward stocks of FDI). Despite some important limitations, which are discussed below, both
measures can be constructed for a large set of host countries.
       The average stocks of FDI for the period 1997-2000 (see Figure 1) show that most net
sources of FDI are developed countries, while most recipients of FDI are developing or
recently developed countries. In our quantitative analysis we construct a single net source
of firm-embedded know-how by aggregating the data for the largest net sources of FDI,
and use data for 38 individual net host countries.6 To account for the observed flows of
FDI, our inference implies that developing countries are relatively scarce in firm-embedded
productivity. Under the inferred levels of country- and firm-embedded productivities, our
model replicates the observed share of capital controlled by foreign firms in each host country.
We abstract from the gross flows of FDI within net exporters of FDI — which account for
the majority of gross-flows of FDI worldwide — because our model does not include trade
frictions that play a key role in North-North multinational activity.7
       We then perform accounting exercises using our model as an organizing framework. We
quantify the importance of fixed country productivity factors (country-embedded produc-
tivity), internationally mobile productivity factors (firm-embedded productivity of home
and foreign firms), and physical capital stocks in accounting for cross-country diﬀerences
in per capita output observed in the data. We find, in our baseline calculations, that dif-
ferences in country-embedded productivity, firm-embedded productivity of domestic firms,
and firm-embedded productivity of foreign firms account, and capital/output ratios, account
respectively, for 61%, 27%, −5% and 17% of the output diﬀerence between source and host
countries in the period 1997-2000. That is, the presence of foreign firms reduces the output
gap between developed and developing countries by roughly 5%. We obtain similar num-
   6
      Flows of FDI from developing to developed countries are small. For example, in 2001, 93% of all assets
controlled by foreign aﬃliates in the U.S. were owned by nationals of other developed countries. Flows from
developing to other developing countries also tend to be small. For example, during the 1990s, the fraction
of inflows of FDI originated from developed countries was 91% in Mexico, and roughly 80% in Argentina,
Costa Rica, and Peru (see Barba Navaretti and Venables 2004).
    7
      See Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004) for a model of horizontal FDI in which firms establish foreign
subsidiaries to serve the local market and avoid international trade costs.


                                                     5
bers when accounting for the output dispersion across host countries, and when using our
alternative measures of the share of inputs controlled by foreign firms.
      Next, we use our model to conduct policy counterfactuals. We quantify the aggregate
impact in host countries of removing taxes on the profits of foreign firms. We identify three
key margins that determine the magnitude of the gains in aggregate output and welfare: (i)
the response in the inflow of firms, which largely depends on the degree of decreasing returns
to scale at the firm level; (ii) the response of capital accumulation, which depends on the
output share of capital; and (iii) the reallocation of agents across occupations, which depends
on the shape of the cross-section distribution of managerial skills. Under our parameteriza-
tion, the gains for host countries of moving from autarky to openness to foreign firms can be
substantial. When margins (ii)—(iii) are shut-down, the average gains in output and welfare
are 5% and 1%, respectively. When margins (ii)-(iii) are incorporated, the average gains
increase to 23% and 9%, respectively.
      In related work, Ramondo (2006) constructs a quantitative model of multinational ac-
tivity in which firm-embedded productivity is a nonrival factor that can be simultaneously
used in many countries. Therefore, in contrast to our model, productivity inflows in host
countries do not involve productivity outflows in source countries. Antras, Garicano, and
Rossi-Hansberg (2006a and 2006b) model managerial knowledge as a rival factor, but their
focus is on the implications of North-South multinational activity on the assignment of indi-
viduals to tasks, and on the distribution of income. Our attention on the managerial know-
how of foreign-controlled firms also conforms with a large literature on multinational activity
that highlights the role of firm-specific intangible assets.8 Since prolonged and continuous
physical presence is not essential for eﬀective management and control, our framework is
also consistent with the model of Helpman (1984) in which headquarters provide managerial
services to foreign aﬃliates.
      In this paper we provide a contribution towards an aggregate quantitative framework of
multinational activity and cross-country income diﬀerences. In doing so, we have abstracted
from some interesting issues regarding the international mobility of firms. For example,
our model does not deal with the endogenous choice of organization, either on the cross-
country within-firm allocation of skills and tasks, or on the choice between outsourcing and
integration (e.g., Helpman 1984, Grossman and Helpman 2003, Antras and Helpman 2004,
  8
      See, for example, Barba-Navarretti and Venables (2004), Helleiner (1989), and Markusen (2004).



                                                     6
and Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2006). Our analysis also abstracts from the cross-country
mobility of workers (e.g., Rauch 1991, and Klein and Ventura 2006).
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 uses a simple version of
our model to illustrate the equilibrium allocation of firm-embedded productivity and how
country- and firm-embedded productivities can be inferred from observed aggregate data.
Section 3 extends the basic model in three dimensions: geographic frictions and taxes, capital
accumulation, and occupation choice. Section 4 analyzes the equilibrium and inference of
country- and firm-embedded productivities in the extended model. Section 5 describes the
multicountry quantitative model, its calibration, and the quantitative results on the inference
of country and firm-embedded productivities. Section 6 presents the policy counterfactuals,
and Section 7 concludes. The Appendix contains some details of the quantitative model
omitted in the body of the paper.

2. A Basic Two-Country Model

In this section we use a simple model to illustrate the gains of reallocating managerial know-
how, or “firm-embedded productivity”, across countries. We also show how to use aggregate
data to infer the relative scarcity of firm-embedded productivity.

2.1. The Model

Consider a world of two countries, indexed by i = 1, 2 and a single, freely traded consumption
good. The population Li in each country is divided into a fraction ω of managers and a
fraction 1 − ω of workers, each endowed with one unit of time.
       Production is organized in firms. A firm is a team of a manager and a set of workers
under his or her control. The productivity of a firm depends on two factors. The first factor
is determined by the country where the firm operates. The second is determined by the
know-how of the manager.9
       The first factor is what we call “country-embedded productivity”, z i . It is a Hicksian
shift in the productivity of all the firms producing in the country. It captures the infrastruc-
ture, regulation, natural amenities, unmeasured human capital of workers, and any other
   9
    In our model, there are no gains or losses of consolidating many teams into one. Hence, we can re-
interpret any collection of teams as a firm, or equivalently we can re-interpret each team as a subset of the
operations of a firm. For examples of models in which integrating teams is not neutral, see Rosen (1982),
and Antras, Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006b).



                                                     7
nontradeable factor of production of the country.
   The second factor, x, is what we call firm-embedded productivity. It is the know-how
embedded in the manager that leads the team. Managers use their know-how in making and
implementing the critical technological, production, and marketing decisions relevant to a
firm. This know-how can be reallocated across countries. The firm-embedded productivity
x is also a Hicksian shift in the firm’s productivity. We assume for now that all managers
from country i are endowed with the same value xi > 0.
   Specifically, output y of a firm with n workers and firm-embedded productivity x is

                                          y = z i x1−ν nν .                                  (2.1)

The parameter ν ∈ (0, 1) determines the degree of diminishing returns to scale to the man-
ager’s control of other inputs.
   In a competitive equilibrium, managers hire workers and earn the profits of the firm. For
our purposes, it is instructive to examine world competitive equilibria under two diﬀerent
scenarios. In the first, referred to as “autarky,” only local managers can lead firms in each
country. In the second scenario, referred to as “international firm mobility,” managers are
free to lead teams in any of the two countries. We always maintain the assumption that
workers are internationally immobile.

2.2. Autarky

Within countries, each identical manager controls n = (1 − ω) /ω units of labor. Summing
up over the output of individual units, aggregate output in each country i is
                                            h ¡ ¢ i
                                                    1−ν
                                     Y i = µ z i xi     Li ,                                 (2.2)

                                                              1−ν
where µ ≡ ω 1−ν (1 − ω)ν . Notice that the term z i (xi )           pins down per capita output in
each country. Note also that in autarky, z i and xi are indistinguishable.
   World total output is
                                  nh ¡ ¢ i         h ¡ ¢ i o
                                           1−ν             1−ν
                         Yw =µ      z 1 x1     L1 + z 2 x2     L2 .                          (2.3)

It is determined in part by the sorting of z i and xi across countries, since these two factors
are complementary. In general, there can be gains from reallocating managerial know-how
from countries where xi /z i is high, to countries where xi /z i is low.


                                                 8
2.3. International Firm Mobility

Assume now that managers can be reallocated across countries. For now assume that,
regardless of location, country i managers carry their firm-embedded productivity xi to
either country in which they operate.
   Suppose that a fraction m ∈ (0, 1) of country 1 managers operates in country 2. Assume
also that all managers from country 2 operate in country 2. Therefore, with (1 − m) ωL1
managers operating in country 1, each one controls n11 = (1 − ω) / [ω (1 − m)] workers. Ag-
gregate output in country 1 is
                                                ¡ ¢1−ν ¡ 1 ¢ν
                           Y 1 = (1 − m) ωL1 z 1 x1     n1                            (2.4)
                                     ¡ ¢1−ν
                               = µz 1 x1    (1 − m)1−ν L1 .

   Country 2 hosts both domestic and foreign managers. Each domestic manager hires n22
workers, and each foreign manager hires n21 workers. Equalization of marginal products of
labor across firms implies that employment in each firm is proportional to firm-embedded
productivity. Therefore:
                                               ¡      ¢
                                          n22 = x2 /x1 n21 .                          (2.5)

The total labor used by domestic and foreign firms must equate the aggregate endowment
in country 2:
                                 ωmL1 n21 + ωL2 n22 = (1 − ω) L2 .                    (2.6)

Adding up output from domestic and foreign firms, and using (2.5) and (2.6), aggregate
output in country 2 is
                           h     ¡ ¢1−ν ¡ 1 ¢ν          ¡ ¢1−ν ¡ 2 ¢ν i
                  Y 2 = z 2 ωmL1 x1        n2 + ωL2 x2          n2                    (2.7)
                             £              ¤1−ν ¡ 2 ¢ν
                      = µz 2 mL1 x1 + L2 x2       L .

   We solve for the international allocation of managerial know-how that maximizes world
output and show that it is also the outcome of a competitive equilibrium. The eﬃcient
allocation m∗ maximizes world output by equating the marginal product of managers across
locations, ∂Y 1 /∂m + ∂Y 2 /∂m = 0. The solution is
                                                 ³ 2 ´ ³ 1 ´1/ν
                                                     x       z
                                            1−       x1      z2
                                      ∗
                                    m =          ³        ´ ¡ ¢1/ν .                  (2.8)
                                                     L1      z1
                                            1+       L2      z2


                                                  9
   Notice that a suﬃcient and necessary condition for country 2 to receive foreign managers
(m∗ > 0) is
                                                µ        ¶µ        ¶1/ν
                                                    x2        z1
                                          R≡                              < 1.                       (2.9)
                                                    x1        z2
   The ratio R provides the precise basis for comparing the relative scarcity of firm-embedded
productivity across countries. If the ratio is less than one, firm-embedded productivity is
scarce in country 2, and a social planner would transfer some of the managerial know-how
from country 1 to country 2. Observe that the host country attracts foreign firms either
because it is a relatively productive location (high z 2 /z 1 ), or because it has a relatively low
endowment of firm-embedded productivity (low x2 /x1 ). Relative population sizes also shape
the magnitude of inflows of foreign firms. If country 1 is relatively large, a smaller fraction of
its firm-embedded productivity needs to be reallocated to country 2 to equate the marginal
productivity of managers.
   The world as a whole has an endowment of firm-embedded productivity equal to ω (L1 x1 + L2 x2 ),
and managers of both countries are perfect substitutes (at a rate x2 /x1 ). In this setup, the
optimal allocation only pins down the net reallocation of managerial know-how. Many alter-
native patterns of gross flows have the same output and welfare implications as long as they
imply the same aggregates of firm-embedded productivity allocated to each country. Our
assumption that m > 0 and that all country 2 managers operate in country 2 is without loss
of generality as long as country 2 is a net recipient.
   Using expressions (2.4), (2.7), and (2.8), aggregate output under the eﬃcient allocation
of firms is                  Ã                                 !1−ν
                                      x1 L1 + x2 L2                       h ¡ ¢ i
                                                                                  1/ν
                 Yi =µ                                                     Li z i     , i = 1, 2.   (2.10)
                                 (z 1 )1/ν L1 + (z 2 )1/ν L2
The first term is common to both countries. With firm mobility, relative output levels depend
only on immobile country factors (which are z i and Li ).
   For the world as a whole, output is

                         w
                               ¡ 1 1     ¢ h 1 ¡ 1 ¢1/ν
                                      2 2 1−ν             2
                                                            ¡ 2 ¢1/ν iν
                     Y       =µ x L +x L      L z       +L z            .                           (2.11)

Note that world output depends on the world endowment of firm-embedded productivity,
and not on how it is initially distributed across countries. Moreover, world output is still
aﬀected by the sorting of populations Li and country-embedded productivities z i , which are
fixed in each country.


                                                          10
   For our exercises, it is useful to compute the share of inputs that foreign firms control in
host countries. Given any m, the share of labor that country 1 firms control of the aggregate
labor in country 2 is denoted by s and given by
                                               ωmL1 n21
                                       s =                                              (2.12)
                                           ωmL1 n21 + ωL2 n22
                                             mL1 x1
                                         =                .
                                           mL1 x1 + L2 x2
We can use (2.12) to re-express output of country 2 in (2.7) as
                                                µ     ¶1−ν
                               2     2
                                       ¡ 2 ¢1−ν    1
                             Y = µz x                      L2 .                         (2.13)
                                                  1−s
The higher the share s, the higher the output in country 2, as it is hosting a larger amount
of firm-embedded productivity. Likewise, an increase in s lowers output in country 1. Note
that a larger output share of firm-embedded productivity, 1 − ν, raises the impact of an
increase in s on aggregate output.
   Consumption in each country equals the sum of labor income and the profits of its firms:

                     C 1 = Y 1 + (1 − ν) sY 2 , and C 2 = [1 − (1 − ν) s] Y 2 .         (2.14)

An increase in s leads to a larger increase in consumption than output in country 1 (output
actually falls), and a smaller increase in consumption than output in country 2.
   To get a first sense of magnitudes, let ν = 0.85 (which we justify below). Consider raising
s from zero (autarky) to 25% (roughly the share of factors that foreign firms controlled in
Dominican Republic on average during 1997-2000, based on the measures discussed below).
The resulting increment in output and consumption is 4.4% and 0.5%, respectively. These
gains are significantly higher (up to 10 times for consumption) in the extended model that
includes capital accumulation, and endogenous occupation choice.
   Eﬃcient allocations coincide with those in a competitive equilibria. To see this, let wi
be the wage in country i and πji be the profits of firms from country i operating in country
j, given by
                                         n ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ν              o
                                                i 1−ν
                           π ji = max     z j
                                              x       nj
                                                       i  − nj j
                                                             i w                        (2.15)
                                  {nji }
                                   ¡ ¢ 1         ¡ ¢ ν
                                = κ z j 1−ν xi / wj 1−ν ,
                ν
where κ = ν 1−ν [1 − ν] > 0. Managers from both countries strictly prefer to operate in
                                   1/ν
country 2 if (w2 /w1 ) < (z 2 /z 1 )     . In an interior equilibrium, managers are indiﬀerent

                                                 11
between operating in the two locations, and therefore relative wages are pinned down by
relative country-embedded productivities.
   Given m, we can solve for the equilibrium wages by combining the optimal labor choices
and market clearing in both labor markets:
                                          νµ 1 ¡ 1 ¢1−ν
                                  w1 =       z x        (1 − m)1−ν                         (2.16)
                                         1−ν
and
                                          νµ 2 £ 2 2        ¤1−ν
                                  w2 =       z x L + mx1 L1      .                         (2.17)
                                         1−ν
                                                                                         1/ν
   It is straightforward to see that the value of m that implies (w2 /w1 ) = (z 2 /z 1 )       , or
π 11 = π 21 , coincides with the eﬃcient m∗ .

2.4. Using Observed {Y i , Li , s} to Infer xi and z i

The endowments of country- and firm-embedded productivities, xi and z i , are not observed.
Inferring their values is essential to determine the output and consumption gains of inter-
national firm mobility. Note that, from expression (2.13), a given level of aggregate output
can result from many combinations of xi and z i , for a given share s. We now show how the
equilibrium determination of s allows us to separately infer xi and z i from aggregate data.
   First, we can use the expression for equilibrium output, (2.10), to obtain an expression
for relative country-embedded productivities in terms of relative per capita output levels:
                                  µ 2 ¶ µ 2 2 ¶ν
                                   z          Y /L
                                     1
                                         =             .                              (2.18)
                                   z          Y 1 /L1
This expression shows that, since mobile factors are being allocated to equalize their marginal
return across countries, output levels are entirely pinned down by factors that are immobile
across countries (z i and Li ).
   Second, we can infer relative firm-embedded productivities from the equalization of mar-
ginal products of managerial know-how across countries. Namely, combining the expression
for the equilibrium determination of m, (2.8), the definition of s, (2.12), and (2.18) we obtain
                               µ 2¶
                                x                  (1 − s)
                                      =  ¡   1 ¢   ¡ Y2
                                                        ¢     ¡ L2 ¢.                     (2.19)
                                x1         Y
                                           L 1   /   L2   + s   L1


This expression indicates that the higher the fraction of inputs controlled by foreign firms,
the lower must be the national endowment of managerial know-how. Also, a higher output
per capita in the host country indicates a higher value of z 2 /z 1 , making the host country

                                                 12
more attractive to foreign firms. Therefore, for the same level of s, domestic firms must be
more productive to compete with foreign firms. Finally, notice that country size also matters
because for a given share of inputs s, a larger host country requires a larger inflow of firms
from the source country. Everything else constant, this can only take place if firm-embedded
productivity is relatively lower in the host country.
   We now show that this basic idea of using observed aggregate data {Y i , Li , s} to infer xi
and z i carries out much more generally than in this basic model.

3. Model Extensions

We extend the basic model along three dimensions that are important to quantify the gains of
internationally reallocating firm-embedded productivity. First, we consider geographic and
policy barriers. Second, we introduce physical capital accumulation. Finally, we endogenize
the number of firms and introduce two layers of management.
   We consider each extension in isolation and show how they aﬀect the world equilibrium.
We then combine all the extensions and show how to infer the country- and firm-embedded
productivities using aggregate data and the equilibrium conditions of the model.

3.1. Geographic and Policy Barriers

In the basic model we assumed that managers have the same know-how when they operate
in their home country or in a foreign country. In reality, we can expect that firm-embedded
productivity may erode when firms operate abroad due to geographic and cultural barri-
ers in the host country, or lost connections and local knowledge from their home country.
These geographic barriers, or “gravity” considerations, are not part of the country-embedded
productivity because they do not aﬀect domestic firms.
   We incorporate these considerations into the model by assuming that output of a firm
                                                       1−ν
from country 1 operating in country 2 is z 2 (θx1 )          nν . Here, if θ < 1 there is a home bias
in the location of firms since moving a firm from country 1 to country 2 entails an eﬃciency
loss. For a given m, aggregate output in country 2 is
                                         ¡                ¢1−ν ¡ 2 ¢ν
                              Y 2 = z 2 µ mL1 θx1 + x2 L2       L .                              (3.1)

   We also assume that countries diﬀer in their tax on firms’ profits. The government of
country i imposes a tax rate τ iF ∈ [0, 1] on the profits of foreign firms and a tax rate τ iD ∈ [0, 1]


                                                  13
on the profits of home firms. We assume that taxes collected by each government are rebated
in a lump-sum fashion to national households. We view τ iF as proxying for a variety of barriers
faced by firms operating in a foreign country. As taxes are applied to profits, they aﬀect
only the location of firms and not their hiring of inputs. The counterfactual quantitative
exercises reported below are based on variations in these tax rates.
   In an interior equilibrium, the number of foreign managers in country 2 is determined by
                                    ¡        ¢     ¡        ¢
                                     1 − τ 2F π21 = 1 − τ 1D π11 .                                (3.2)

If in addition, taxes are such that (1 − τ 2F ) / (1 − τ 1D ) ≤ (1 − τ 2D ) / (1 − τ 1F ), then managers
from country 2 will prefer (strictly if the inequality is strong) to remain in country 2, elimi-
nating the possibility of two-way flows.
   In equilibrium, the fraction of country 1 managers operating in country 2 is
                                     ³ 2 ´ ³ 1 ´1/ν ³ 1 ´1/ν
                                             1−τ D
                                 1 − xx1 θ   1−τ 2F
                                                           z
                                                      z 2 θ1−ν
                             ∗
                          m =         ³ ´ ³ 1 ´1/ν ¡
                                       L1    1−τ D        z1
                                                               ¢1/ν .                             (3.3)
                                  1 + L2     1−τ 2    z 2 θ1−ν
                                                       F


Here, the terms z 1 /z 2 θ1−ν and x2 /x1 θ take the place of z 1 /z 2 and x2 /x1 in expression (2.8)
of the basic model. A low θ negatively impacts output and has exactly the same eﬀect on m∗
as a reduction in z 2 and x1 . Only the terms z 1 /z 2 θ1−ν and x2 /x1 θ are relevant in assessing
the output and welfare gains of firm mobility.
   Notice that if τ 2F > τ 1D , then fewer firms flow from country 1 to country 2 compared to the
undistorted case. Similarly, m∗ is higher if country 2 promotes the presence of foreign firms
by charging a tax rate τ 2F < τ 1D . Note also that a decrease in ν, by increasing the weight
of firm-embedded productivity in production, increases the response of m∗ to a change in
taxes.

3.2. Physical Capital

When firm-embedded productivity can be reallocated across countries, the return of other
factors of production will be aﬀected as well. Consequently, an inflow of foreign firms will
boost capital accumulation in the host country importing foreign firms. This complemen-
tarity magnifies the output and welfare gains of allowing international mobility of firms.
   Assume now that output y of a firm is given by
                                                   ¡        ¢ν
                                       y = z i x1−ν k α n1−α ,                                    (3.4)

                                                  14
where k are units of capital services and αν is the output share of capital.
   Households own the aggregate stock of capital in each country. Capital follows the law
of motion
                                      Kti = (1 − δ)Kt−1
                                                    i
                                                        + Iti ,                            (3.5)

where Iti denotes investment in country i, Kt−1
                                            i
                                                denotes the previous period capital stock,
and δ ∈ [0, 1] is the depreciation rate of capital.
   All firms face the same factor prices and country- and firm-embedded productivities are
Hicks-neutral. Therefore, the share of capital controlled by foreign firms is also equal to
their share on labor. With this, for any given m, aggregate outputs (abstracting from time
t subscripts) are                                        ¶αν    µ
                           1    1           1−ν      ¡ 1 ¢1−ν
                                                      K1
                       Y = µz (1 − m)                 x1
                                                             L1 , and                      (3.6)
                                                      L
                                                      µ 2 ¶αν
                                 ¡                ¢1−ν K      ¡ 2 ¢ν
                       Y 2 = µz 2 mL1 θx1 + x2 L2               L .                        (3.7)
                                                        L2
Notice that a higher capital stock is similar to a higher z i in that it raises the returns to
both foreign and domestic firms. For given capital stocks in each country, the allocation of
firms that maximizes world output is
                                           ³ 2 ´ ³ 1 ´1/ν ³                 ´α
                                            x          z            K1 K2
                                      1−    x1         z2
                                                                      /
                                                                    L1 L2
                               m∗ =         ³        ´ ¡ ¢1/ν ¡             ¢α .           (3.8)
                                                L1      z1      K1      2
                                       1+       L2      z2
                                                                      /K
                                                                    L1 L2

A higher capital-labor ratio in the host country increases m∗ by attracting more firms from
the source country.
   Over time, capital stocks will endogenously respond to the international reallocation of
firms. From equations (3.6) and (3.7), a higher m raises the marginal product of capital in
the host country and reduces it in the source country. In a steady state with no country-
specific distortions on capital accumulation, the marginal products of capital (ανY i /K i ) are
equal in both countries. The steady-state optimal reallocation of firms m∗ss is
                                          ³ 2 ´ ³ 1 ´1/(1−α)ν
                                      1 − xx1    z
                                                 z2
                                 ∗
                               mss =      ³ ´ ¡ ¢1/(1−α)ν .                                (3.9)
                                                   1
                                      1 + LL12 zz2

If we start in a steady state with no firm mobility and it is optimal to reallocate firms
to country 2, then the output gains will be magnified by the enhanced rate of return and
accumulation of capital.

                                                      15
3.3. Heterogeneity, Occupation Choice, and Local Management

We now endogenize the number of firms in each country so that firms are in bounded but
elastic supply. We assume that individuals are heterogeneous in their managerial skills,
and each decides between managing firms or working for other firms. We also consider
firms with two layers of management. The first layer is composed of “top managers” and
determines the level of firm-embedded productivity. The second layer consists of “middle-
level managers,” which we assume are internationally immobile. In this way, we capture
the fact that multinational operations are typically directed by managers from the source
country and lower ranks of management are conducted by nationals of the host country.
Indeed, the availability of highly qualified mid-level managers is often cited by multinational
firms as one of the main factors in picking a particular host country.10
    Assume that the firm’s production function is extended to include “mid-level adminis-
tration” services, denoted by a,
                                                     ¡       ¢ν
                                         y = z i x1−ν aγ n1−γ ,                                       (3.10)

where x is the know-how of the top manager that leads the firm.
    The average skill of top managers (or the average firm-embedded productivity) in country
i is xi , and the average skill of middle-level managers is xia . Within each country, individuals
draw an idiosyncratic skill level e with c.d.f. F , support [0, ∞), and mean one. Individuals
choose between becoming a top manager, a middle manager, or a worker. As a top manager,
an individual with idiosyncratic skill e controls a firm with firm-embedded productivity xi e
and earns its profits. As a middle manager, the individual supplies xia e units of intermediate
managerial services, which, multiplied by the market wage for mid-management services,
determines his income. As a worker, he supplies one unit of labor services and receives a
wage independent of e.
    Given that earnings of managers (both top and middle level) are increasing in e while
earnings of workers are not, there is a unique threshold ēi0 such that individuals with e ≤ ēi0
are employed as workers, as in Lucas (1978). Since the earnings of middle and top managers
are both proportional to e, there is an indeterminacy in the allocation of individuals between
top and middle management occupations.11 However, the equilibrium uniquely pins down
 10
    See, for example, Larrain, Lopez-Calva and Rodriguez-Clare (2001). Antras, Garicano, and Rossi-
Hansberg (2006b) also study the role of locally provided middle-level management in multinational activity.
 11
    This indeterminacy is also discussed in Jovanovic (1994). It results from the fact that returns to middle


                                                     16
the mass of middle and top management skills, denoted by ξ i0 and ξ i1 , as well as the other
aggregates of the model (such as Y i and s). One particular way of attaining these aggregate
masses ξ i0 and ξ i1 is allocating individuals with e > ēi1 to top managerial positions and
                                                                                  R ēi
individuals with ēi0 < e < ēi1 to middle manager positions, implying that ξ i0 = ēi1 edF (e)
      i
           R∞                                                                        0

and ξ 1 = ēi edF (e). Throughout our analysis, we only need to determine the equilibrium
               1

values of   ξ i0   and ξ i1 regardless of how they are formed, with ēi0 , ξ i0 , and ξ i1 satisfying the
resource constraints                Z     ēi0
                                                 edF (e) + ξ i0 + ξ i1 = 1 , i = 1, 2.                   (3.11)
                                      0
    With heterogeneous firms we reinterpret m as the fraction of aggregate firm-embedded
productivity (or top managerial skills) that country 1 exports to country 2.12 For any m,
aggregate outputs are
                         h¡      ¢ ¡ 1 ¢(1−γ) iν £                   ¤1−ν ¡ 1 ¢ν
                            1 1 γ
                      1
                    Y =z    1
                           xa ξ 0 F ē0           (1 − m) L1 x1 ξ 11       L     , and                   (3.12)
                                h¡        ¢γ ¡ ¢(1−γ) iν £ 2 2 2                ¤1−ν ¡ 2 ¢ν
                     Y 2 = z2     x2a ξ 20 F ē20         L x ξ 1 + mL1 x1 ξ 11       L .                (3.13)

    The values of ēi0 , ξ i0 , and ξ i1 that maximize global output, Y 1 + Y 2 , subject to (3.11), are
the unique fixed points of
                                                   (1 − γ) ξ i0
                                            ēi0 =                , i = 1, 2 ,                           (3.14)
                                                      γ F (ēi0 )
                                                        νγ
                                               ξ 10 =        (1 − m) ξ 11 ,                              (3.15)
                                                      1−ν
                                                         ∙                  ¸
                                             2       νγ     2      x1 L1 1
                                            ξ0 =           ξ + m 2 2 ξ1 ,                                (3.16)
                                                    1−ν 1          xL
                                                                                         h¡        ¢γ              iν
                                                                                                             (1−γ)
and (3.11). Here m is given by expression (2.8) of the basic model, where z i              xia ξ i0 F (ēi0 )
and xi ξ i1 are the eﬀective productivities that take the role of z i and xi , respectively.13
    The quality of local mid-level managers, xia ξ i0 , and the abundance of workers, F (ēi0 ),
operate as a country-embedded factor. Note that if xia = xi , a higher xi augments both the
and top managers are perfectly correlated. If we assumed that the exponent on x in the production function
was 1 instead of 1 − ν, then the model would imply a unique allocation of individuals across occupations.
Our quantitative results are invariant to this alternative assumption.
   12
      For similar reasons as in the basic model (profits are proportional to firm-embedded productivity), we
can only determine the net fraction of aggregate firm-embedded productivity flowing between countries. The
cross-section distribution of reallocated skills is indeterminate.
   13
      In the fully extended model, we will assume that all occupations face the same tax τ iD , and therefore,
occupation choices are not distorted. See Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) for an analysis of taxation and the
distortions on occupational choice. We also abstract from other within-country distortions across domestic
firms (see, for example, Restuccia and Rogerson 2003, Caselli and Gennaioli 2005, and Guner, Ventura, and
Yi 2006).

                                                               17
eﬀective country-embedded productivity (attracting foreign firms) and the firm-embedded
productivity of domestic firms (repelling foreign firms). The second force always dominates
(see expression 2.8), so that a higher x2 /x1 implies a lowers m∗ , as in the benchmark model.
   The reallocation of top managers across countries interacts with the allocation of indi-
viduals across occupations within each country. From the expressions above, we can see that
∂ē10 /∂m < 0, ∂ξ 10 /∂m < 0, ∂ξ 11 /∂m > 0, ∂ē20 /∂m > 0, ∂ξ 20 /∂m > 0, and ∂ξ 21 /∂m < 0. A
higher m reduces the fraction of top managerial units remaining in country 1, increasing the
marginal product of top managers and lowering the marginal product of middle managers
and workers. Some workers will switch to managerial positions, and the mass of managerial
skills will be reallocated from middle to top positions. In country 2, the reallocation of oc-
cupations and skills is in the opposite direction. The inflow of foreign top managerial skills
lowers the marginal product of home top managers and increases the marginal product of
middle managers and workers. Therefore, some managers switch to worker occupations, and
part of the mass of managerial skills is reallocated from top- to middle-level positions.
   The reallocation of occupations within each country reinforces the reallocation of firms
between countries. To see this, suppose we fix ēi0 , ξ i0 , and ξ i1 at their autarky level. Let mA
be the resulting fraction of country 1 firms that move to country 2 under these occupation
choices. When we let ēi0 , ξ i0 , and ξ i1 optimally adjust according to (3.14), (3.15), and (3.16)
the resulting m∗ is larger than mA . Therefore, fixing ēi0 , ξ i0 , and ξ i1 at their autarky levels
is a lower bound on the gains of allowing firms to reallocate across countries. This margin
plays an important role when evaluating the gains of firm international mobility.
   Finally, it is straightforward to verify that the resulting allocations ēi0 , ξ i0 , and ξ i1 also arise
in a competitive equilibrium in which individuals take as given the international returns of
top-managerial skills, and the national wages of mid-level managerial skills and labor services.

4. Inferring Country- and Firm-Embedded Productivities in the
   Extended Model

We now briefly discuss the equilibrium allocations and our inference of z i and xi using
aggregate data in the fully extended model.




                                                    18
4.1. Equilibrium

For given capital stocks and fraction of foreign firms m > 0, aggregate output in each country
is
                                £              ¤1−ν ¡ 1 ¢(1−α)ν ¡ 1 ¢αν
                       Y 1 = ze1 (1 − m) L1 x
                                            e1       L           K      , and                                   (4.1)
                                 £                 ¤1−ν ¡ 2 ¢(1−α)ν ¡ 2 ¢αν
                        Y 2 = ze2 L2 x
                                     e2 + mθL1 xe1       L           K      ,                                   (4.2)

where zei and x
              ei are the eﬀective country- and firm-embedded productivities in country i
defined as
                                      h¡     ¢ ¡ i ¢(1−γ−α) iν
                              i          i i γi
                             ze    ≡ z xa ξ 0 F ē0            , and                                            (4.3)
                            ei ≡ xi ξ i1 .
                            x

     Following similar steps as in the basic model, the fraction m∗ that equates the net-of-taxes
returns to managers in both countries is
                                     ³             ´1/ν ³          ´³                ´1/ν ³            ´α
                                         1−τ 1D              xh2               zh1            K1 K2
                              1−         1−τ 2F               x1
                                                             θh            zh θ1−ν
                                                                             2                  /
                                                                                              L1 L2
                      m∗ =               ³        ´³            ´1/ν ¡              ¢1/ν   ¡ K1             .   (4.4)
                                             L1        1−τ 1D                  zh1                2 ¢α
                                  1+         L2        1−τ 2F              zh2 θ1−ν
                                                                                               /K
                                                                                             L1 L2


The terms ξ i0 , ξ i1 , F (ēi0 ) are pinned down using expressions (3.15) and (3.16) and

                                           (1 − γ − α) ξ i0
                                  ēi0   =                      , i = 1, 2.                                     (4.5)
                                                γ     F (ēi0 )

This condition is the analog of (3.14) extended to take into account the presence of capital.
     Up until here, the capital stocks are exogenously given. If instead we consider a steady
state with no country-specific barriers to capital accumulation, then capital stocks will adjust
until marginal products are equalized in both countries, and the steady-state fraction of
country 1 firms operating in country 2 is
                                              ³            ´1/ν ³          ´³              ´1/(1−α)ν
                                                  1−τ 1D            xh2              zh1
                                    1−            1−τ 2F             x1
                                                                    θh          zh2 θ1−ν
                          m∗ss =              ³            ´1/ν ³          ´¡             ¢1/(1−α)ν    .        (4.6)
                                                  1−τ 1D              L1            zh1
                                     1+           1−τ 2F              L2          2
                                                                                zh θ  1−ν



Notice that with endogenous capital accumulation, the eﬀective country-embedded produc-
tivity has a bigger impact on the fraction of foreign firms in country 2 (its exponent is
1/ (1 − α) ν instead of 1/ν).



                                                                 19
4.2. Using Observed {Y i , Li , K i , s, τ iF , τ iD } to Infer xi and z i

We now describe, as we did in the basic model, how the equilibrium conditions of the fully
extended model allow us to infer the relative values of xi and z i .
   Using expressions (4.1), (4.2), and (4.4), we obtain the ratio of eﬀective country-embedded
productivities:

                               µ 2 2 ¶ν(1−α) µ 2 2 ¶αν µ          ¶1−ν
                    ze2 θ1−ν    Y /L          Y /K       1 − τ 1D
                             =                                                              (4.7)
                        ze1     Y 1 /L1       Y 1 /K 1   1 − τ 2F
and the ratio of eﬀective firm-embedded productivities:
                                 xe2            (1 − s)
                                    1
                                      = ³ 1 1 ´ ³ 1−τ 1 ´   ¡ 2 ¢.                          (4.8)
                                 θe
                                  x      Y /L         D
                                                      2   +s L
                                          Y   2 /L2    1−τ F     L1

Each extension generates additional considerations for our inference of country- and firm-
embedded productivities.
   First, under geographic barriers (θ < 1), the host country is not a level playing field for
foreign firms. We can only infer the ratio of domestic to foreign firm-embedded productivities
                                            x1 . Similarly, we can only infer ze2 θ1−ν because
                                       e2 /θe
that eﬀectively operates in country 2, x
changes in ze2 and θ have symmetric eﬀects on observable aggregate variables Y 2 and s.
                                       z 2 θ1−ν and x
Therefore, the inferred levels of ze1 /e            e2 /θe
                                                         x1 are independent of θ, so the presence
of geographic considerations do not change our calculations on the output and welfare gains
from firm mobility. To save on notation, we assume from now on that θ = 1.
   Second, the presence of taxes modifies our inference of ze1 /e
                                                                z 2 and x
                                                                        e2 /e
                                                                            x1 . The higher the
tax rate τ 2F , the higher must be the country-embedded productivity of the host country and
the lower must be the firm-embedded productivity of its local firms for the equilibrium to
imply the same fraction s of inputs controlled by foreign firms. Therefore, with measures of
τ 2F and τ 1D , we can proceed with our inference.
                                                                   e2 /e
   Third, the presence of capital does not modify the inference of x   x1 since it aﬀects
symmetrically both domestic and foreign firms. Moreover, given that the capital stock
aﬀects productivity of all firms, we need to include measures of Y i /K i to infer ze1 /e
                                                                                        z 2 . Note
that with ze1 /e
               z 2 and x
                       e2 /e
                           x1 , we can also compute the gains of firm mobility across steady
states using expression (3.9).
   Fourth, if we include top- and middle- level management but abstract from occupation
reallocation after a shift in policy, then zei and x
                                                   ei are also fixed and we do not require assump-
tions on F (·) and γ to compute the equilibrium m and s. When individuals can reallocate

                                                      20
among occupations, we need additional assumptions on γ and F , which parametrize how
substitutable individuals are across occupations. Using the occupation choice conditions
(3.15), (3.16), and (4.5), we can solve for the values of ξ i0 , ξ i1 , and F (ēi0 ), and with those at
                                 γν
hand we can pin down z i (xia )       and xi .

5. Quantitative Analysis

We now proceed to the quantitative analysis, first extending the model to a multicountry
setting, then describing the data and parameter values, and then reporting the country- and
firm-embedded productivity obtained from the model.

5.1. The Multicountry Model

Consider now a world economy composed of I countries. Country i = 1 is the only source
country of foreign firms, and countries i = 2, 3, ...I are the host countries. In our quantitative
exercises, country 1 is an aggregate of 16 net source countries which happen to be mostly
developed countries, and countries 2, 3, ...I are net recipient, mostly developing countries.
   We assume perfect capital markets within each country. Therefore, the consumption
of all individuals in country i at time t is equal to aggregate consumption divided by the
population, Cti /Lit . Preferences of the representative household are:
                                         X
                                         ∞                  i   i 1−σ
                                                   t    i (Ct /Lt )
                                               β       Lt               ,                         (5.1)
                                         t=0
                                                            1−σ

where 0 < β < 1.
   The representative agent in each country can borrow and lend at the world risk-free rate
r∗ , and we assume the standard no-Ponzi-game condition. The discount factor is equal to the
inverse of the world interest rate. Countries start with a zero position of net foreign assets.
This assumption only aﬀects the allocation of consumption and not the determination of
output and the inference of z i and xi . For simplicity, we abstract from the world equilibrium
determination of the interest rate r∗ .
   The model boils down to a multicountry neoclassical growth model together with the
endogenous determination of the share sit of inputs controlled by country 1 firms in country
i in period t. The representative household in each country i chooses consumption, capital
accumulation, and the purchase of foreign assets, which are financed by aggregate returns
to labor, physical capital, financial assets, and the profits of the firms. Tax rates in each

                                                          21
country are rebated lump-sum to national households. All those details are standard, and
we explain them in Appendix A.

5.2. Equilibrium

We consider equilibria in which country 1 is the single source country. The equilibrium
                                  ©                  ª
determines the vector of fractions m1 , m2 , ...., mI of country 1 firms, where mi denotes the
fraction of country 1 firms operating in country i.
    Solving for the equilibrium in a multicountry setting is conceptually identical as in the
two-country case. The fraction m1 determines the profits π 11 of firms remaining in country
1, and after-tax profits (1 − τ 1D ) π 11 are the benchmark for all potential host countries. For
any two host countries j, l 6= 1 that host foreign firms, we have
                              ¡        ¢      ¡        ¢      ¡        ¢
                               1 − τ jF π j1 = 1 − τ lF π l1 = 1 − τ 1D π 11 ,                   (5.2)

where πi1 denotes profits of country 1 firms in country 1. All the general equilibrium inter-
actions between host countries is via π11 . For example, a change in τ jF , impacts country l
through changes in the returns of foreign managers in the source country.
    Appendix B describes a simple algorithm to solve for mi and si in each country.

5.3. Inferring z i and xi

As before, we can infer the unique values of zei /e       ei /e
                                                  z 1 and x   x1 consistent with observed data on
{Y i , Li , K i , si , τ iF , τ iD }. In Appendix C we describe the steps, which are virtually the same
as in the two-country model, that lead to the following expressions for zei /e
                                                                             z 1 and x̃i /x̃1 :
                              µ             ¶(1−α)ν µ              ¶αν µ
                                                                ¶1−ν
                      i   1       Y i /Li               Y i /K i
                                                       1 − τ 1D
                    ze /e
                        z =                                          , and                       (5.3)
                                  Y 1 /L1              1 − τ iF
                                                        Y 1 /K 1
                                                     µ         ¶
                              i   1   1
                                        ¡    ¢ i i 1 − τ iF
                                            i Y /L
                            x̃ /x̃ = m 1 − s                     .                               (5.4)
                                              Y 1 /L1 1 − τ 1D
As in the previous section, the optimality conditions for occupation choice pin down the
                                                                             γν
values of ξ i0 , ξ i1 , and F (ēi0 ), and with those the values of z i (xia )    and xi .
    We now derive a simple condition, in terms of observable data, under which country i is
an attractive location for country 1 firms. A host country is attractive if a social planner
that maximizes world output reallocates some country 1 foreign firms to country i when all
other host countries remain in autarky.


                                                         22
   Taking K i and K 1 as given, a social planner would move a firm from country 1 to country
i iﬀ                                      µ          ¶ ν1 µ         ¶µ              ¶α
                             i                z̃ 1            x̃i        K 1 /L1
                            Rstatic   ≡                                                   < 1.     (5.5)
                                              z̃ i            x̃1        K i /Li
This is the condition under which the marginal product of a firm is higher in country i than
in country 1.
   In Appendix C we show that, using expressions (5.3) and (5.4), a suﬃcient condition for
 i
Rstatic < 1 in terms of observable data is

                                                       µ               ¶1/ν
                                      ¡       ¢             1 − τ iF
                                       1 − si                                  < 1.                (5.6)
                                                            1 − τ 1D
Thus, if we observe a high si despite observing also a high τ iF , it must that the host country
                                                       i
is attractive to foreign firms. Note that we can have Rstatic > 1 (so that the host country is
not attractive) even if we observe si > 0, when τ iF is low relative to τ 1D (i.e., when the host
country is providing tax incentives to foreign firms).
   Consider now facing the social planner with the same decision but allowing him to also
adjust capital without country-specific barriers. The social planner would reallocate firms
from country 1 to country i iﬀ
                                                µ           ¶ ν(1−α)
                                                                 1   µ         ¶
                                   i                 z̃ 1                x̃i
                                  RSS      =                                       < 1.            (5.7)
                                                     z̃ i                x̃1

In Appendix C we show that, using expressions (5.3) and (5.4), a suﬃcient condition for
 i
RSS < 1 in terms of observable data is
                                      µ                ¶ ν(1−α)
                                                          1−αν µ                    ¶ 1−α
                                                                                       α
                          ¡       ¢       1 − τ iF                     K i /Y i
                           1 − si                                                           < 1.   (5.8)
                                          1 − τ 1D                     K 1 /Y 1

If despite the scarcity of capital in country i (low K i /Y i ), we observe that it attracts foreign
firms, then with undistorted accumulation of capital (that would lead to a higher K i /Y i )
the country would become even more attractive.
   In the data, a country might have a low capital-output ratio K i /Y i because it is far from
the steady-state level of capital, or due to distortions (e.g., taxes) and other considerations
(e.g., diﬀerences in relative prices) that aﬀect the steady-state accumulation of capital. The
cross-country variation in K i /Y i , which we use to infer RSS
                                                             i
                                                                , is outside the scope of our
model, and we take it as exogenously given.


                                                              23
5.4. Data

We first discuss how we measure the share of inputs controlled by foreign firms in each
country. In our model, top managers determine the productivity of factors of production
under their control. Since firm-embedded productivity is a Hicks neutral term, the fraction
of physical capital and the fraction of eﬃciency units of labor controlled by foreign firms are
equal within each host country. Our benchmark measure is based on the share of capital
controlled by foreign firms. As a robustness check, we also construct an alternative measure
based on employment.
   We use the stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) to proxy for the capital of those firms
in which foreign managerial know-how has a direct influence on their activities. The notion
of FDI in the data is closely connected to the cross-country reallocation of managerial know-
how and control in our model since it represents investments undertaken with the objective
of establishing a lasting interest in the country, a long-term relationship, and significant
influence on the management of the firm. However, the stock of FDI is only an imperfect
proxy for foreign controlled capital since some of the FDI may not carry any eﬀective control
by investors, and also some capital controlled by foreigners may not be registered as FDI.
Moreover, FDI partly includes the purchase of assets such as intangibles or natural resources
that are not usually counted as physical capital.
   We use the stocks of FDI constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) on the basis of
cumulative FDI flows and reinvested profits. A country is a net recipient of FDI when the
ratio of direct investment assets (outward FDI) to direct investment liabilities (inward FDI)
is less than one. Figure 1 displays, for a large set of countries, the geometric average for the
period 1997-2000 of the ratio of assets to liabilities. The figure shows that there is a sharp
divide between developed countries (typically net sources of FDI) and developing countries
(typically net hosts of FDI). While a handful of developed countries have very high ratios,
most developing countries have ratios that are close to zero. Notice, however, that some
developed countries, such as the United States, have both large assets and large liabilities.
   We construct a single source country, indexed by i = 1, consolidating the data of the
major 16 net source countries into our country 1. We consider 38 net hosts that are mainly
developing countries or countries that have recently developed, such as Ireland and Spain. We
abstract from flows from developing to developed countries or to other developing countries,
since for the most part, they are minor sources of total FDI. The set of countries included


                                              24
in our analysis is listed in Appendix D.
   For each host country, we construct the share of foreign-controlled capital as

                                  stock of inward FDI in country i
                           si =                                     .
                                   total capital stock in country i
Total capital stocks are constructed using the standard permanent inventory scheme on the
investment reported in the Penn World Tables, Version 6.1 (PWT), assuming an annual
depreciation rate of 6%.
   Table 1 displays the shares si , as well as other aggregate variables including GDP, capital-
output ratios, and the labor force (all three from PWT) for each host country relative to the
net source aggregate. All the data corresponds to averages between 1997 and 2000. Columns
1—3 show that most net host countries are relatively poorer, smaller, and have lower capital-
output ratios than the net source aggregate. Indeed, relative to source countries: (i) only
Ireland has a higher per capita output; (ii) only China and India are close or larger in size;
and (iii) only Thailand, Spain, and Greece have higher capital-output ratios. As can be seen
in column 4, a significant share of the capital stock in these net host countries is controlled
by foreign firms. The average share is 16%, and is as high as 49% in Ireland and as low as
2% in Iceland.
   Our alternative measure of si is the ratio of total wages paid by multinationals to total
wage payments in the host country. This measure indicates the share of eﬃciency units of
labor controlled by multinationals. An important limitation in constructing this measure is
that, for most host countries, we only have data on wage payments by U.S. multinational
firms. To proxy for total wage payments by multinationals we assume that, consistent with
the model, the ratio of US to total multinational wage payments is equal to the ratio of US
to total inward stocks of FDI in each host country. Note that the possible biases of FDI as a
measure of eﬀective control will be mitigated if they do not systematically diﬀer for inflows
from the U.S. relative to the other source countries. Our alternative measure of si is then
given by
            Wages paid by U.S. MNC in country i   stock of inward FDI in country i
     si =                                       ×                                  .
                  Total wages in country i         stock of U.S. FDI in country i
   To construct this measure, we obtain the data on total wages and salaries payments by
U.S. multinational firms and on the stock of outward US FDI in each host country from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The total stock of inward FDI is from Lane and


                                               25
Milesi-Ferretti (2006), and the total labor income in the host country from the World Bank
Development Indicators.14 Appendix D lists the reduced set of countries for which this
alternative measure of si is available.
       To measure the tax faced by domestic firms in the source countries, we set τ 1D = 0.3, which
is consistent with the average corporate tax rate in our set of developed countries reported
in Ernst and Young’s Worldwide Corporate Tax Guide for the year 2002. To measure the
taxes on foreign profits we follow Desai, Foley, and Hines (2004), and calculate the eﬀective
income tax rates paid by foreign aﬃliates of U.S. Multinationals in each host country. We
use the surveys of U.S. Direct Investment between 1982 and 2001 from the BEA, and define
τ iF as
                                             foreign income taxes
                         τ iF =                                             .
                                  net foreign income + foreign income taxes
Desai, Foley, and Hines (2004) and Gordon and Hines (2002) argue that this is an imperfect
yet informative measure of the barriers on international firms. We take those taxes as also
proxying for other policy barriers to foreign firms.15 Column 5 in Table 1 shows that the
average tax for the period 1997-2000 is 32%, only slightly higher than τ 1D . However, there is
significant variation across host countries, with τ F = 56% in India and 52% in Turkey, and
τ F = 9% in Ireland.
       We also conduct our inference and policy counterfactuals using two alternative measures
of taxes. Under the first alternative we assume that, due to worldwide taxation clauses,
country 1 firms face a minimum tax rate τ 1D on repatriated profits. In this case, the eﬀective
tax rate τ M,i
           F   is
                                                    ©           ª
                                         τ M,i
                                           F   ≡ max τ 1D , τ iF .

Under the second alternative we assume that foreign firms may be able to deliver foreign
profits without paying taxes to the government in the source country. In this case, the
eﬀective tax rate τ m,i
                    F on foreign profits is

                                                  © 1 iª
                                         τ m,i
                                           F ≡ min τ D , τ F .

  14
     Consistent with our model and evidence in Gollin (2002), we assume a constant labor share of income
across host countries.
  15
     For example, starting in 1989, Mexico eliminated some restrictions on foreign ownership of firms. For a
detailed discussion of this policy change, see Perez-Gonzales (2005).




                                                    26
5.5. Parameter Values

The key parameters of the model are those of the production function (ν, α, γ), and the
distribution of skills F (·). They determine the gains of reallocating top managers across
countries, individuals across occupations, and the gains from accumulating capital. These
are the key margins in shaping the output and welfare consequences of changes in the barriers
to foreign firms. To quantify the importance of each margin, we sequentially add one at a
time.
       The parameter ν is central in shaping the response in the inflow of foreign firms to a
change in barriers. We do not use information about the change in the share s over time
                                                                ¡                ¢
to infer ν because we lack independent information on changes in θi , τ iF , τ 1D . Neither do
we use information on the relative size of domestic versus foreign firms in host countries,
as the model determines only the aggregate ξ i1 . We choose the value of ν based on existing
estimates on the degree of decreasing returns to scale in span-of-control models applied to
U.S. data. We set ν = 0.85, and report the sensitivity of our results to assuming ν = 0.8
and ν = 0.9, which is roughly the range for ν in this literature.16
       The parameter α is important in shaping the response of capital to the inflow of foreign
firms. In our benchmark calibration, we set α = 0.35 so that the output share of capital is
roughly equal to the standard value of 0.3. We also report results assuming a lower value of
α.
       The shape of F (·) and the value of γ determine the quantitative importance of occupa-
tion reallocation in response to the inflow of foreign firms. We assume that F is a Pareto
distribution with mean one and slope parameter b = 1.25. Under this parametrization, and
assuming that high idiosyncratic ability individuals sort into top managerial positions,17 the
right-tail firm size distribution of the model is in line with the U.S. firm size distribution for
middle- and large- sized firms.18
       We set γ so that, in the equilibrium with the observed shares of foreign firms in host
  16
      Atkeson, Kahn, and Ohanian (1996), Atkeson and Kehoe (2006), and Amaral and Quintin (2005) use
ν = 0.85. On the high side, Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) use v = 0.9. On the low side, Guner, Ventura, and
Xu (2006) use ν ' 0.8.
   17
      This is the unique optimal sorting of the population in the presence of an infinitesimal fixed cost of
setting up a production team.
   18
      Luttmer (2006) discusses in detail how the right tail of the U.S. firm size distribution resembles a
Pareto distribution. We choose the slope parameter b to target the employment-based right tail coeﬃcient
of size 2500 − 10000, equal to −0.25 on average between 1999 and 2003. This slope coeﬃcient is defined as
[log (N 10000) − log (N 2500)]/[log (10000) − log (2500)]. Here, N x corresponds to the total employment of
firms of size larger than x.


                                                    27
countries, 10% of the labor force in the source country is in managerial positions (this is
broadly motivated from U.S. data), which implies γ = 0.1.19 These parameter values also
imply that γ/ (1 − v + γ), the share of middle managers in total managerial compensation,
is roughly 40%. We also report our results assuming a lower value of γ.
       Other parameters are set as follows. Taking each time period as a year, we set the
interest rate at 5% and the depreciation rate δ at 6%. The curvature parameter σ of the
utility function does not have any impact on our calculations given that r∗ is assumed to be
constant.

5.6. Inferred Country- and Firm-Embedded Productivities

Table 2 reports the inferred values of z̃ i /z̃ 1 , x̃i /x̃1 , z i /z 1 , xi /x1 , Rstatic
                                                                                    i             i
                                                                                           , and RSS using our
procedure described above and aggregate data for the period 1997-2000.
       Columns 1—2 show that the inferred values of z̃ i /z̃ 1 and x̃i /x̃1 are uniformly lower than
one (except for z̃ Ireland /z̃ 1 = 1.2 ). This suggests that both country- and firm-embedded
productivities contribute to lower incomes in net host countries relative to net source coun-
tries. Notice also that for most countries, the values of z i /z 1 and xi /x1 observed in columns
3—4 are higher than z̃ i /z̃ 1 and x̃i /x̃1 in columns 1—2. This suggests that host countries use
managerial skills more intensively in mid-management or worker positions, both of which
complement the skills imported from abroad.
       In order to quantify the relative variation in country- and firm-embedded productivity,
it is useful to express output per person of a host country relative to source countries as
               µ             ¶       µ          ¶ 1−αν
                                                    1  µ        ¶ 1−αν
                                                                   1−ν µ                  ¶ 1−αν
                                                                                             1−ν µ              ¶ 1−αν
                                                                                                                   αν
                   Y i /Li                zei              ei
                                                           x                    1                    K i /Y i
                                 =                                                                                       (5.9)
                   Y 1 /L1               ze1               e1
                                                           x               (1 − si ) m1              K 1 /Y 1

Variation in output per capita can be accounted for by diﬀerences in four factors: (i) eﬀective
country-embedded productivity ze; (ii) eﬀective firm-embedded productivity of domestic firms
e; (iii) eﬀective firm-embedded productivity of foreign firms as proxied by the share of
x
  19
    The number of managerial occupations as a fraction of all non-self-employed workers in 2005 in the U.S.
is 5%, as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), and Chari, Golosov, and
Tsyvinski (2004) report a fraction of self-employed workers of roughly 11%. From these figures, the fraction
of managers would be close to 15%. However, many of the self-employed are not likely to correspond to
our concept of managers. To be conservative, we assume that 50% of self-employed individuals are actual
managers of their own businesses. This results in a share of managers in the labor force of 10%. The lower
this fraction, the lower the implied value for γ, which reduces the gains from reallocating managers across
top and middle positions in the presence of international firm mobility.




                                                                     28
factors controlled by foreign firms si (a higher si and a lower m1 contribute to a higher
(Y i /Li ) / (Y 1 /L1 )); and (iv) capital-output ratio K/Y .
   Table 3 reports the relative importance of each of the four factors in (5.9) in accounting
for diﬀerences in output per capita between host and source countries (upper panel), and
variation within host countries (lower panel), under our benchmark parametrization of the
model. The gap in per capita output in the period 1997-2000 for source relative to host
countries can be decomposed as follows: 61% of the gap is accounted for by higher country-
embedded productivities, 27% from higher firm-embedded productivities of domestic firms
and 17% from higher capital-output ratios. Moreover, by importing foreign firms from source
countries, the host countries close the gap by 5%. The lower panel in Table 3 reports the
variance decomposition (a la Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare 1997) of the logarithm of output
per capita across the group of host countries. We find that the share of each term in (5.9) in
accounting for the variance of output per capita in the period 1997 − 2000 is roughly 67%,
23%, 0.3% and 10%, respectively. These results remain roughly unchanged under our two
alternative measures of si , for the reduced sample of host countries for which both measures
are available. We also report the results under alternative values of ν (0.8 and 0.9). The
relative importance of firm-embedded productivity (both domestic and foreign) in accounting
for output per capita diﬀerence grows as we lower ν.
   Before performing our counterfactuals, we can observe in columns 5—6, Table 2, the
                 i           i
inferred ratios Rstatic and RSS that summarize the attractiveness of host countries to foreign
                   i
firms. The ratios Rstatic are lower than one in most countries (30 out of 38), making these
                                                                          i         i
host countries attractive in the absence of other distortions. Moreover, Rstatic > RSS for
most host countries, which results from low observed capital-output ratios. If diﬀerences in
capital-output ratios stem from variation in distortions to capital accumulation, our analysis
serves to quantify the role of these distortions in making host countries more or less attractive
to foreign firms.
   We can use expressions (5.5) and (5.7) to quantify the contribution of each variable
                                            i           i                              i
that shapes the cross-country variation in Rstatic and RSS . Figure 2, panel A, plots Rstatic
separately against the two factors in the right-hand side of (5.5). Note that variation in taxes
                                        i
accounts for much of the variations in Rstatic , but variation in s is also significant. Figure 2,
                i
panel B, plots RSS against the three terms in the right-hand side of expression (5.7). The
figure shows that while variation in all factors is significant, diﬀerences in capital-output



                                                 29
                                                              i
ratios are the leading factor in accounting for variation in RSS .

6. Quantifying the Gains from International Firm Mobility

In this section, we quantitatively assess the output and welfare consequences for the host
countries of eliminating barriers to foreign control of local factors of production.
   We focus on the following counterfactual experiment. We assume that initially all coun-
tries are in autarky, and then consider the consequences of opening-up, such that foreign
firms are equally taxed at home and abroad. That is, τ iF changes from 100% to τ 1D = 30%.
We consider two alternative experiments. In the first, each country opens-up unilaterally
and the rest remains in autarky. In the second experiment, all host countries open-up simul-
taneously. With these two experiments we quantify the gains for each country in isolation
and in a global liberalization.
   In all cases we use the values of xi and z i inferred from the equilibrium of the parametrized
model, as described above, using the 1997-2000 data on output, labor, capital stocks, shares
of capital controlled by foreign firms, and measure of eﬀective taxes τ iF .
   To isolate the role of various margins of response, we consider three alternative cases: (i)
fixed capital stocks at their measured 1997-2000 levels (obs. K) and fixed occupation choice
(fixed OC); (ii) capital stocks at their steady-state levels (SS K) and fixed OC; and (iii) SS
K and reallocation of occupations (flex. OC). In cases (ii) and (iii), our reported gains in
consumption take into account the investment required to increase the capital stock, and the
transition dynamics.

6.1. Unilateral Openness to Foreign Firms

Columns 1—2 in Table 4 report the results for case (i). The average gains across countries
are 5% for output and 1% for consumption. There is large variation in the gains, with some
countries gaining as much as 5% in consumption (Tunisia) and other countries not gaining
at all (e.g., Brazil, Venezuela, and Iceland). Figure 3, panel A, displays a strong negative
                                                                           i
relationship between output and consumption gains and the inferred ratios Rstatic , which
summarize the relevant information on shares and taxes to assess the attractiveness of a
given country as a host of foreign firms.
   Capital accumulation greatly enhances the gains in both output and consumption. This
is because the inflow of foreign firms raises the return to capital accumulation. Columns


                                               30
3—4 display the gains under case (ii), where capital adjusts to the steady-state level. The
average gains are 14% and 6% for output and consumption, respectively. Figure 3, panel B,
                                                                             i
illustrates the negative relationship between the gains to each country and RSS . Countries
              i
with a lower RSS stand to gain much more by allowing foreign firms to operate within their
territory.
   Reallocating individuals across occupations also magnifies the gains of firm mobility.
Shifting skills from top positions in domestic firms to middle management in foreign firms
complements the returns to importing foreign managerial know-how. Columns 5—6 display
the gains under case (iii). The average gains rise to 23% for output and 9% for consumption.
   To help put these welfare gains in perspective, we compare them with those from alterna-
tive policy experiments that have received much attention in the literature on the gains from
globalization. One the one hand, we obtain larger gains than those from reallocating phys-
ical capital over time. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) report an average consumption gain
of 1% for non-OECD countries switching from financial autarky to perfect financial integra-
tion. On the other hand, we obtain smaller gains than those in models where productivity
is non-rival, such as Alvarez and Lucas (2004) and Eaton and Kortum (2002) (reductions
in trade barriers) and Ramondo (2006) (reductions in barriers to multinational activity).
In those models, in contrast to ours, productivity inflows in host countries do not involve
productivity outflows in source countries.

6.2. Global Openness to Foreign Firms

We now compute the gains when all host countries start in autarky and simultaneously move
to international mobility of firms, where now firms are taxed at equal rates across countries.
   Table 5 reports the results under the same three cases as for the unilateral policy changes.
As expected, the gains are smaller than under unilateral policy changes because host coun-
tries, by competing with each other to attract the limited supply of country 1 firms, increase
the value of π 1 . The average output and consumption gains for the host countries are, re-
spectively, 4% and 0.7% under case (i), 9% and 3% under case (ii), and 16% and 6% under
case (iii). Notice that, in spite of the competition among host countries, the average gains
from firm mobility are still quite significant.




                                                  31
6.3. Sensitivity Analysis

In this subsection, based on the uncertainty regarding the value of some parameters and
measures of foreign control, we perform a sensitivity analysis. We report the gains from
the policy counterfactuals under our two alternative measures of input shares controlled by
foreign firms, as well as under our two alternative tax measures discussed in Section 5.4. We
also explore the sensitivity of the results to variations in parameters ν, α and γ. In all these
cases, we infer z i and xi using our inference procedure under each alternative parametrization,
and calculate the average output and consumption gains for each host country of unilateral
openness under case (iii) (i.e., allowing adjustment of capital and reallocations of individuals
across occupations). The results are reported in Table 6.
   The gains are higher when we use τ M,i
                                      F   = max {τ 1D , τ iF } — columns 3—4, as our measure
of taxes on foreign firms in the identification scheme. Now the barriers on foreign firms
are larger than under our benchmark parametrization, so our identification scheme infers
                                                                i
that host countries are more attractive (i.e., lower levels of RSS ). The average output gain
increases from 23% to 26%, and the average consumption gain increases from 9% to 10%.
On the contrary, if we use τ M,i
                             F   = max {τ 1D , τ iF } — columns 5—6, output and consumption
gains are reduced to 17% and 6%, respectively.
   As discussed above, there is some uncertainty regarding the output share of firm-embedded
productivity, 1−ν. We report the sensitivity of our quantitative findings to assuming ν = 0.8
and ν = 0.9, which is roughly the range for ν in the literature that calibrates similar span-of-
control models using US data. Assuming ν = 0.8 — columns 7—8, the gains rise to an average
of 30% in output and 12% in consumption. Assuming ν = 0.9 — columns 9—10, the gains fall
to 16% and 7%, respectively.
   We now consider a lower value of the output share of capital and mid-level managers. If
we assume a value of α such that the capital share in output is 20% (as in Atkeson and Kehoe
2005) — columns 11—12, the output and consumption gains fall to 15% and 5%, respectively.
A lower share of capital in output reduces the gains of firm mobility by reducing the ability
of the host economy to complement the inflow of foreign firms with capital accumulation.
   Assuming γ = 0.05 — columns 13—14, the output and consumption gains fall to 19% and
8%, respectively. A lower γ reduces the ability of the host economy to reallocate the skills
from top managers of local firms to mid-level managerial positions in foreign firms and labor,
both of which are complementary to foreign firm-embedded productivity.


                                              32
   Finally, we compare the gains under our two alternative measures of si , for the reduced
set of countries for which both measures are available — columns 15—18. Under the FDI
stocks-based shares, the average gains are 18% for output and 7% for consumption. Under
the employment-based shares, the gains are 17% for output and 6% for consumption.
   Overall, the alternative parameterizations and measures of foreign controlled inputs and
taxes still imply large gains in output and consumption that are on the same range as those
under our baseline parameterization.

7. Concluding Remarks

In this paper we construct a multicountry model of cross-country income diﬀerence to study
the international flows of managerial know-how and control from developed to developing
countries. Using the model and aggregate data, we decompose cross-country productivity
diﬀerences into components that can be moved across countries and components that cannot
be moved across countries. Based on this decomposition, we conduct policy counterfactuals
that suggest significant output and welfare gains of eliminating barriers to foreign control of
local factors of production.
   Using our framework, we back-out the relative endowments of firm-embedded produc-
tivity that can account for observed measures of foreign control of inputs in developing
countries. Our paper is silent about the accumulation of this component of productivity. An
important area for further research is to characterize the gains of reallocating firm-embedded
productivity across countries in models in which it can be accumulated.
   Our aggregate quantitative framework does not encompass many interesting issues related
with multinational activity, such as diﬀerences in the organization of production, financial
structure, and export behavior across countries, sectors, and firms. In future research, we
plan to extend our framework to address some of these features and, in combination with
more detailed information at the level of sectors and firms, provide a better understanding
of the measured diﬀerences in country- and firm embedded productivities, and the impact
of institutional frictions on the aggregate productivity of host countries.




                                              33
   Appendices
A. Characterizing Equilibria in the Multi-Country Model

Preferences are defined by (5.1), resource constraints are
                               £   ¡          ¢           ¤
            Ait+1 + Cti + Iti = 1 − 1 − τ iF,t (1 − ν) sit Yti + (1 + r∗ ) Ait , i = 2, ..., I                               (A.1)

                                                                                             X
                                                                                             I
                                                                                               ¡          ¢
                     A1t+1   +   Ct1   +   It1   =   Yt1   + (1 + r    ∗
                                                                           ) A1t   + (1 − ν)    1 − τ iF t sit Yti ,         (A.2)
                                                                                                   i=2

the law of motion of capital is given by (3.5), and the law of motion of xit is given by (??).
The initial capital stocks K0i and foreign assets Ai0 are given.
    Assuming β (1 + r∗ ) = 1 and perfect foresight, the level of foreign assets can be solved
                                         −σ  ¡ i ¢−σ
for using the optimality condition (Cti ) = Ct+1      . The optimal capital choice satisfies
1 = β [1 − δ + ανYti /Kti ].
   The occupation choice thresholds in country 1, ē10 , ξ 10 , and ξ 11 , are determined from

                                                                     (1 − γ) ξ 10
                                                            ē10 =                  ,                                        (A.3)
                                                                        γ F (ē10 )
                                                                        νγ
                                                              ξ 10 =       m1 ξ 11 ,                                         (A.4)
                                                                       1−ν
and those in country i > 1 are determined from

                                                                     (1 − γ) ξ i0
                                                            ēi0 =                  ,                                        (A.5)
                                                                        γ F (ēi0 )

                                              νγ      ξ i1
                                                             ξ i0 =
                                                             ,                                                               (A.6)
                                           1 − ν 1 − si
                                                       R ēi
plus the additional adding-up constraint ξ i0 + ξ i1 + 0 0 edF (e) = 1.
   Aggregate output levels in each country are
                             ¡         ¢1−ν h¡ 1 1 ¢γ ¡ 1 ¢(1−γ−α) iν ¡ 1 ¢1−ν ¡ 1 1 ¢αν 1
                    Yt1 = z 1 x1 ξ 11t        xa ξ 0t F ē0t           mt       Kt /L   L                                    (A.7)
                                                                             ∙             ¸1−ν
                  ¡ i i ¢1−ν h¡ i i ¢γ ¡ i ¢(1−γ−α) iν                             1              ¡ i i ¢αν i
  Yti   =   zti    x ξ 1t      xa ξ 0t F ē0t                                                      Kt /L   L , i = 2, ..., I. (A.8)
                                                                                 1 − sit
   Profits in country 1 of a domestic manager with idiosyncratic skill e = 1 are
                               ¡         ¢−ν h¡ 1 1 ¢γ ¡ 1 ¢(1−γ−α) iν ¡ 1 ¢−ν ¡ 1 1 ¢αν
            π 11t = (1 − ν) z 1 x1 ξ 11t       xa ξ 0t F ē0t           mt      Kt /L    .                                   (A.9)


                                                                           34
The share of factors controlled by country 1 managers in country i is
                                         ½                                             ¾
                                              ξ i1t xi (1 − τ 1D ) (1 − τ 1D ) π 11t
                              sit   = max 1 −                                        ,0 .                                   (A.10)
                                               θx1 (1 − τ iF ) (1 − ν) Yti /Li
The fraction of country 1 managers in country i can be backed out using
                                                                            i
                                                                sit xit ξ 1,t Lit
                                                      mit   =                         ,                                     (A.11)
                                                              1 − sit θx1t ξ 11,t L1t
                                                                                                             PI
and the fraction of country 1 managers remaining in country 1 is m1t = 1 −                                    i=2   mit .

B. Separating z 1 /z i from xi /x1 in the Multicountry Model

Suppose we make assumptions on α, γ, ν, F (.) and we observe data on {Y i , Li , K i , si ,τ iD , τ iF }
at a point in time. We now describe the algorithm to uncouple z 1 /z i from xi /x1 . We normalize
x1 = 1, and we always assume interior solutions.

   1. Guess m1 .

   2. Solve thresholds in country 1:

                                                 (1 − γ) ξ 10                 νγ
                                        ē10 =                1
                                                                , and ξ 10 =     m1 ξ 11 .                                   (B.1)
                                                    γ F (ē0 )               1−ν

   3. Solve for z 1 using
                        ¡        ¢1−ν h¡ 1 1 ¢γ ¡ 1 ¢(1−γ−α) iν ¡ 1 ¢1−ν ¡ 1 1 ¢αν 1
               Y 1 = z 1 x1 ξ 11        x ξ F ē0                m        K /L    L.                                         (B.2)


   4. Solve for thresholds and aggregate managerial skills in country i:

                                                   (1 − γ) ξ i0    i  νγ    ξ i1
                                          ēi0   =               ,ξ =            ,                                           (B.3)
                                                      γ F (ēi0 ) 0 1 − ν 1 − si
                           R ēi0
      and ξ i0 + ξ i1 +      0
                                    edF (e) = 1.

   5. Solve for xi /x1 , i > 1:
                                                                                          µ              ¶
                                                      ¡      ¢ Y i /Li                        1 − τ iF
                                         x̃ /x̃ θ = m 1 − si
                                           i      1            1
                                                                                                                             (B.4)
                                                               Y 1 /L1                        1 − τ 1D

          ei = xi ξ i1 .
      and x


                                                                     35
   6. Solve z i , i > 1, from
                                              ∙ 1 1 ¸1−α ∙ 1 1 ¸α ∙          ¸ 1−ν
                        ¡ 1 i 1−ν ¢1/ν          Y /L      Y /K      1 − τ iF ν
                          ze /e zθ         =                                                  (B.5)
                                                 Y i /Li  Y i /K i  1 − τ 1D
                     h¡      ¢γ                iν
                                       (1−γ−α)
        and zei = z i xi ξ i0 F (ēi0 )           .

   7. Solve mi for i > 1:
                                                           si x̃i Li
                                                  mi =                                        (B.6)
                                                         1 − si θx̃1 L1
                         PI
   8. Adjust m1 until          i=1   mi = 1.

              i           i
C. Inferring Rstatic and RSS

The condition that equalizes the net-of-tax marginal product of country 1 firms in countries
1 and i, using (A.7) and (A.8), is
                 µ        ¶             µ               ¶ν µ 1 1 ¶αν
                 1 − τ 1D     1   i 1−ν    i   1   L1 i     K /L      ¡ ¢ν
                        i
                            z̃ /z̃ θ     x̃ /x̃ θ + i m      i  i
                                                                     = m1 .         (C.1)
                 1 − τF                            L        K /L
    For simplicity but without loss of generality, we will assume that occupation margins
are fixed. Suppose that country i is in autarky in the sense that there are no foreign firms
operating therein (mi = 0, and m1 = m1A ). Suppose that τ 1D = τ iF , and the capital stocks
are fixed. Then, using (C.1), foreign firms will want to move to country i (that is, mi > 0)
if and only if                                              µ         ¶−α
                      i          1 ¡ 1 i 1−ν ¢1/ν ¡ i i ¢ K i /Li
                     Rstatic   = 1 z̃ /z̃ θ        x̃ /x̃ θ               < 1.                (C.2)
                                mA                            K 1 /L1
Recall that we inferred z̃ 1 /z̃ i and x̃i /x̃1 in the data using expressions (B.4) and (B.5), which
imply
                                           µ         ¶−α         µ          ¶
                1 ¡ 1 i 1−ν ¢1/ν ¡ i 1 ¢ K i /Li          ¡   i
                                                                ¢ 1 − τ iF 1/ν
                   z̃ /z̃ θ       x̃ /x̃ θ               = 1−s                 ,              (C.3)
               m1M                           K 1 /L1               1 − τ 1D
where m1M corresponds to the level of m1 in the algorithm described in Appendix B. Note
that m1A > m1M , if the remaining countries maintain the same policies and capital stocks
that we use to infer z̃ 1 /z̃ i and x̃i /x̃1 . Then, we have
                                                              µ              ¶1/ν
                                       i
                                                 ¡       ¢        1 − τ iF
                                      Rstatic   < 1 − si                            .         (C.4)
                                                                  1 − τ 1D
In the body of the paper, we can use this condition to quantify the sources of variation in
 i
Rstatic .

                                                         36
    Now suppose that, in the model, the capital stock adjusts every period so that the
marginal product of capital is equal in every country, Y i /K i = Y 1 /K 1 . Then, condition
(C.1) is
               µ              ¶                      µ               ¶ ν(1−α)
                   1 − τ 1D       ¡ 1 i 1−ν ¢ 1−αν
                                                1
                                                        i   1   L1 i 1−αν      £ ¤ ν(1−α)
                                   z̃ /z̃ θ           x̃ /x̃ θ + i m          = m1 1−αν .           (C.5)
                   1 − τ iF                                     L
Suppose that country i is in autarky in the sense that no foreign firms are operating therein
(mi = 0, and m1 = m1A ). Suppose that τ 1D = τ iF , and the capital stocks adjust every period
to equalize world-wide marginal products of capital. Then, using (C.5), foreign firms will
want to move to country i (that is, mi > 0) if and only if

                                   i       1 ¡ 1 i 1−ν ¢ ν(1−α)
                                                            1   ¡ i 1 ¢
                                  RSS =       z̃ /z̃ θ           x̃ /x̃ θ < 1.                      (C.6)
                                          m1A

Expressions (B.4) and (B.5) for z̃ 1 /z̃ i and x̃i /x̃1 imply
                                                  µ 1 1 ¶ 1−α
                                                            α µ          ¶ ν(1−α)
                                                                            1−αν
        1 ¡ 1 i 1−ν ¢ ν(1−α)
                         1   ¡ i 1 ¢ ¡          ¢  Y   /K       1 − τ  i
                                                                       F
           z̃ /z̃ θ           x̃ /x̃ θ = 1 − si                                   .                 (C.7)
       m1M                                         Y i /K i     1 − τ 1D
Using the same argument as before, we have
                                            µ          ¶ α µ          ¶ 1−αν
                               i
                                     ¡   i
                                           ¢ Y 1 /K 1 1−α 1 − τ iF ν(1−α)
                              RSS   < 1−s                                    .                      (C.8)
                                              Y i /K i       1 − τ 1D

D. Sample of Countries

Country 1: It is constructed as the aggregate of 16 developed countries: Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Switzerland, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan,
South Korea, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the United States.
    Host countries i = 2, ..., 38: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru,
Paraguay, El Salvador, Uruguay, Venezuela, China, Egypt, Indonesia, India, Israel, Jor-
dan, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Syria, Thailand, Botswana, Morocco, Tunisia, Spain,
Greece, Ireland, Iceland, Portugal, Turkey.20
    Reduced set of host countries (when using measure of si based on employment
shares): Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras,
  20
     Countries such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain are clearly more developed than the other
countries in the group. These countries, however, are net recipients of foreign direct investment. We
excluded New Zealand and Australia from the sample even if they are also large recipients of foreign firms,
because their FDI is mostly horizontally motivated.


                                                         37
Jamaica, Mexico, Venezuela, China, Indonesia, India, Israel, Malaysia, Philippines, Thai-
land, Spain, Greece, Ireland, Iceland, Portugal, Turkey.
   The BEA does not report aﬃliate information (used to construct our measure of eﬀective
taxes τ iF ) for multiple years for the following countries in our sample: Bolivia, El Salvador,
Uruguay, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Pakistan, Syria, Botswana, Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia,
and Iceland. For those countries, we use the average τ iF of the countries in the geographic
regions for which the BEA does report this information.

References

 [1] Alvarez, F., and Lucas, R. (2004) “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
    Model of International Trade,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

 [2] Amaral, P., and Quintin, E. (2005) “Financial Intermediation and Economic Develop-
    ment: A Quantitative Assessment,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

 [3] Antras, P., Garicano, L., and Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2006a) “Oﬀshoring in a Knowledge
    Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121 (1), pp. 31—77.

 [4] Antras, P. Garicano, L., and Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2006b) “Organizing Oﬀshoring: Mid-
    dle Managers and Communication Costs,” mimeo, Harvard University.

 [5] Antras, P., and Helpman, E. (2004) “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy,
    Vol. 112 (3), pp. 552—80.

 [6] Atkeson, A., and Kehoe, P. (2005) “Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital,”
    Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 113 (5), pp. 1026—53.

 [7] Atkeson, A., Khan, A., and Ohanian, L. (1996) “Are Data on Industry Evolution and
    Gross Job Turnover Relevant for Macro-economics?” Carnegie Rochester Conference
    Series on Public Policy, Vol. 44, pp. 215—50.

 [8] Barba Navaretti, G., and Venables, A. (2004), “Multinational Firms in the World Econ-
    omy,” Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

 [9] Barro, R., and Sala-i-Martin, X. (1998), “Economic Growth,” Cambridge, MA: MIT
    Press.


                                              38
[10] Bloom, N. (2007), “Are Chinese and Indian Firms Really that Badly Managed? Evi-
    dence from a New Survey of 4000 Firms,” mimeo, Stanford University.

[11] Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2007), “Measuring and Explaining Management Prac-
    tices Across Firms and Countries,” forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[12] Bloom, N., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. (2007), “Nobody Doest I.T. Better: U.S.
    Firms and their Multinational Productivity Miracle,” mimeo, Stanford University.

[13] Cagetti, M., and De Nardi, M. (2006) “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth,” Jour-
    nal of Political Economy, Vol. 114, 835—870

[14] Caselli, F., and Gennaioli, N. (2005) “Dynastic Management,” mimeo, London School
    of Economics.

[15] Chari, V., Golosov, M., and Tsyvinski, A. (2004) “Business Start-ups, the Lock-in
    Eﬀect, and Capital Gains Taxation,” mimeo, MIT.

[16] Desai, M., Foley, C., and Hines, J. (2004) “Foreign Direct Investment in a World of
    Multiple Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol 88 (12), pp. 2727-44.

[17] Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. (2002) “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
    Vol. 70 (5), pp. 1741—79.

[18] Ernst and Young (various years), Worldwide Corporate Tax Guide.

[19] Fisher, L. (1999) “How Mondavi is Growing Around the World,” strategy + business,
    Second Quarter, http://www.strategy-business.com/press/16635507/16529

[20] Gollin, D. (2002) “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
    110 (2), pp. 458-74.

[21] Gordon, R. and Hines J. (2002) “International Taxation,” Working Paper 8854, National
    Bureau of Economic Research.

[22] Gourinchas, P., and Jeanne, O. (2006) “The Elusive Gains from International Financial
    Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 73 (3), pp. 715—41.

[23] Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (2005) “Outsourcing in a Global Economy,” Review of
    Economic Studies, Vol. 72 (1), pp. 135—59.

                                           39
[24] Grossman, G. and Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2006) “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
    Oﬀshoring,” mimeo, Princeton University.

[25] Guner, N., Ventura, G., and Xu, Y. (2006) “Macroeconomic Implications of Size-
    Dependent Policies,” mimeo, Penn State University.

[26] Helpman, E. (1984) “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Cor-
    porations,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 92 (3), pp. 451—71.

[27] Helpman, E. Melitz, M., and Yeaple, S. (2004) “ Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous
    Firms,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94 (1), pp. 300—16.

[28] Hopenhayn, Hugo (1992) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium”
    Econometrica Vol. 60, pp 1127—50.

[29] Jovanovic, B. (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, Vol. 50
    (3), pp. 649—70.

[30] Jovanovic, B. (1994) “Firm Formation with Heterogeneous Management and Labor
    Skills,” Small Business Economics, Vol. 6(3), pp. 185—91.

[31] Kaldor, N. (1934) “The Equilibrium of the Firm,” Economic Journal, Vol. 44, pp. 60—76.

[32] Klein, P., and Ventura, G. (2006) “Do Migration Restrictions Matter?,” mimeo, Uni-
    versity of Western Ontario..

[33] Klenow, P. and Rodríguez-Clare, A. (1997) “The Neoclassical Growth Revival: Has it
    Gone too Far?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, MIT Press.

[34] Klenow, P. and Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2005) “Externalities and Growth,” Handbook of
    Economic Growth, volume 1A, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, eds., pp. 817—861.

[35] Lane, P., and Milesi-Ferretti, G., (2006) “ The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
    Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” IMF
    Working Papers 06/69, International Monetary Fund.

[36] Larrain, F., Lopez-Calva, L., and Rodriguez-Clare, A. (2001) “Intel: A Case Study of
    Foreign Direct Investment in Central America,” mimeo, Penn State University.



                                            40
[37] Lucas, R. (1978) “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Eco-
    nomics, Vol. 9 (2), pp. 508—23.

[38] Luttmer, Erzo (2006) “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[39] Markusen, J. (2004) “Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade,”
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[40] Monge-Naranjo, A. (2007) “On Multinational Firms and the Aggregate Accumulation
    of Skills”, mimeo, Northwestern University.

[41] Oi, W. (1983) “Heterogeneous Firms and the Organization of Production,” Economic
    Inquiry, Vol. 21 (2), pp. 147—71.

[42] Pérez-González, F. (2005) “The Impact of Acquiring Control on Productivity,” mimeo,
    Columbia University.

[43] Prescott, E., and Visscher, M. (1980) “Organization Capital,” Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, Vol. 88 (3), pp. 446—61.

[44] Ramondo, N. (2006) “Size, Geography, and Multinational Production,” mimeo, Univer-
    sity of Texas, Austin.

[45] Restuccia, D. and Rogerson R. (2003) “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
    with Heterogeneous Plants,” mimeo, Arizona State University.

[46] Rauch, J. (1991) “Reconciling the Pattern of Trade with the Pattern of Migration,”
    American Economic Review, Vol. 81 (4), pp. 775—96.

[47] Rosen, S. (1982) “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal
    of Economics, Vol. 13 (2), pp. 311—23.

[48] United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (1994) “World In-
    vestment Report 1994: Transnational Corporations, Employment and the Workplace,”
    New York and Geneva: United Nations.




                                             41
                                                                                                                                                           Assets/Liabilities
                                                                                                                                                   0   1   2              3     4   5
                                                                                                                                        Japan
                                                                                                                                  Switzerlan
                                                                                                                                      Finland
                                                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                                                                                           Italy
                                                                                                                                             UK
                                                                                                                                      France
                                                                                                                                      Norway
                                                                                                                                   Nethrland
                                                                                                                                    Germany
                                                                                                                                        Korea
                                                                                                                                    Denmark
                                                                                                                                     Canada
                                                                                                                                             US
                                                                                                                                     S. Africa
                                                                                                                                      Iceland
                                                                                                                                      Austria
                                                                                                                                     Belgium
                                                                                                                                    Australia
                                                                                                                                         Spain
                                                                                                                                         Brazil
                                                                                                                                         Israel
                                                                                                                                     Portugal
                                                                                                                                    Malaysia
                                                                                                                                     Jamaica
                                                                                                                                       Ireland
                                                                                                                                      Greece
                                                                                                                                  New Zland
                                                                                                                                  Venezuela
                                                                                                                                      Nigeria
                                                                                                                                  Cameroon
                                                                                                                                          Chile
                                                                                                                                   Argentina
                                                                                                                                   Colombia
                                                                                                                                   Indonesia
                                                                                                                                    Thailand
                                                                                                                                        Kenya
                                                                                                                                       Turkey
                                                                                                                                 Philippines
                                                                                                                                          India
                                                                                                                                    Morocco
                                                                                                                                    S. Arabia
                                                                                                                                         China
                                                                                                                                   Paraguay
                                                                                                                                        Latvia
                                                                                                                                    Pakistan
                                                                                                                                      Mexico
                                                                                                                                   Botswana
                                                                                                                                 El Salvador
                                                                                                                                          Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                        Stock of FDI Assets / Stock of FDI Liabilities, Geometric Average 1997-2000




                                                                                                                                     Uruguay
                                                                                                                                         Egypt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 1: Net sources and net hosts of Foreign Direct Investment




                                                                                                                                     Ecuador
                                                                                                                                 Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                 Dom. Rep.
                                                                                                                                  Banglades
                                                                                                                                   Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                                 Trin.&Toba
                                                                                                                                       Bolivia
Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). A country is a net-host of FDI if the ratio of assets to liabilites is less than one.




                                                                                                                                 Guatemala
                                                                                                                                       Jordan
                                                                                                                                      Tunisia
                                                                                                                                   Honduras
                                                                                                                                  Nicaragua
                                                                                                                                     Panama
                                                                                                                                          Syria
                      Figure 2: Sources of variation of R in the data

                                                          Panel A: R Static
                                          1                                                                 2




        1.5
                                                                                                      IRE
                                                                                                                               DOM
                                                                                                                               JAM

                                                                                                               GUAVEN THA
                                                                                                                      ISRICE
                                                                                                                     BRA




                                                                                                                                                  (1-τF)/(1-τD)
                                                                                                    CHI          PHI
                                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                                        MALCOS SPA
                                                                                                              POR
                                                                                                BOL          PERECU
(1-s)



                                                                                                            PAR
                                                                                                              URU
                                                                                                            MEX
        1




                        IND TUR                       ICE
                                    GRE       ECU ISR
                                IDN                                                                   NIC HON
                                                                                                          ELS
                       PAK                  URUSPA BRA
                                                    THA
                               JOR
                                ARG         PORPHI
                                          MEX
                                           PER
                             COL          PAR
                           MOR      HON
                                     ELS        VEN
                                         COS
                                         CHN GUA JAM                                                        GRE
                         BOT
                                      MAL       DOM                                SYREGY        ARG
                                                                                                JOR
                                NIC                                                             IDN
                                                                               TUN        BOT COL
                                                                                            MOR
                       EGY               CHI
                   TUN                                                                          TUR
                               BOL
                    SYR
                                                                                         PAK
                                                                                          IND
                                    IRE
        .5




              .4          .6              .8          1           1.2    .4               .6                .8         1              1.2
                                                                R static
        Graphs by panel



                                           3       Panel B: R steady state                                        4
        1.5




                                                                                                             IRE
                                                                                                                DOM
                                                                                                                                JAM

                                                                                                         GUA      VEN       THA
                                                                                                                          ICE
                                                                                                                    BRA ISR
                                                                                                                PHI




                                                                                                                                                    (1-τF)/(1-τD)
                                                                                                          CHI
                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                             COS
                                                                                                              MAL      SPA
                                                                                                                  POR
                                                                                                      BOL    URU ECU
                                                                                                                  PER
(1-s)




                                                                                                            PAR
                                                                                                               MEX
        1




                           IND TUR                ICE
                                         GRE
                                           ECU ISR
                           PAK IDN URU       BRASPA THA                                               ELS NIC
                                                                                                          HON
                                JORARG  MEX POR
                                         PHIPER
                               COL PAR
                              MOR
                              ELS HON      VEN
                                      COS
                                 GUACHN         JAM
                             BOT                                                                                      GRE
                                    DOMMAL                                                     EGY
                                                                                                SYR  JORARG
                                  NIC                                                                 IDN
                                                                                                TUN COL
                                                                                                  BOT
                                                                                                   MOR
                       EGY      CHI
                         TUNBOL                                                                         TUR
                        SYR
                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                IND
                                     IRE
        .5




              0                .5                 1                    1.5     0                      .5                   1                1.5
                                                                      RSS
        Graphs by panel
        1.2




                                                                                         GRE                                           THA
                                                                                                                      SPA
        1




                                                                                                                      JAMISR ICE
                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                  POR
                                                                                                 ECU
                                                                ARG           MAL
                                                                                 MEX             VENBRA
                                                 TUR NIC
 K/Y
  .8




                                                         CHI
                                                    IDNIRE                               PHI
                                                          HON           COS
                                                  JOR
                                                                      CHN
                                                                      PAR
                                                                        URU
                           TUN       BOT COL
                                      MOR
                                       BOL
                                                                      DOM
                       SYRPAK
                          IND
        .6




                                           ELS        GUA


                   EGY
        .4




              .2                    .4                     .6                       .8                           1                    1.2
                                                                      RSS
     Figure 3: Gains for host countries from unilaterally moving from
                    autarky to openness to foreign firms


                                           6                 Panel A: Static                   7
         15




                   TUN
                    SYR



                      EGY
                       PAK
                           BOT
         10




                          IND
                             MOR




                                                                                                                          C Gain
                              TUR
                               COL
Y Gain




                               BOL

                                     JOR
                                      NIC
                                      ARG
                                     IDN
                                      IRE
                                       CHI
                                            GRE
         5




                                            HON
                                             ELS                              TUN
                                              MAL                              SYR

                                                COS                              EGY
                                                                                  PAK
                                                 PAR
                                                 MEX
                                                CHN
                                                  PER                               BOT
                                                   URU                             INDMOR
                                                   POR
                                                    GUA                                TUR
                                                                                        COL
                                                     ECU                                BOL
                                                      SPA                                 JOR
                                                                                           NIC
                                                                                           ARG
                                                                                           IDN
                                                                                            IRE
                                                       PHI
                                                       VEN
                                                        DOM                                   CHI
                                                         JAM                                    GRE
                                                                                                HON
                                                                                                 ELS
                                                                                                  MALCOS
                                                           BRA
                                                            ISR
                                                             THA
                                                               ICE                                    PAR
                                                                                                      MEX
                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                        URU
                                                                                                        POR
                                                                                                         GUA
                                                                                                          ECU
                                                                                                           SPA
                                                                                                            PHI
                                                                                                            VEN
                                                                                                             DOM
                                                                                                              JAM
                                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                ISR
                                                                                                                 THA
                                                                                                                   ICE
         0




              .4           .6           .8               1         1.2   .4          .6        .8         1         1.2
                                                               R static
         Graphs by panel



                                           8            Panel B: Steady state                  9
         60




                      EGY
                           PAK
                           IND
                          SYR
                           TUN
                             BOT
                              MOR
                              ELS
                               COL
         40




                                TUR
                                JOR
                                 IDN
                                                                                                                          C Gain


                              BOL
Y Gain




                                     GUA
                                                                                 EGY
                                      ARG
                                      HON                                          PAK
                                                                                   IND
                                     NIC                                          SYR
                                       PAR
                                        URU                                        TUN
         20




                                                                                     BOT
                                                                                      MOR
                                      CHI                                             ELS
                                                                                       COL
                                         COS
                                        DOM                                             TUR
                                        CHN                                             JOR
                                           MEX
                                            GRE                                       BOLIDN
                                                                                         GUA
                                     IRE MALPHI                                             ARG
                                                                                           HON
                                                ECU                                        NICPAR
                                                                                               URU
                                                POR
                                                PER                                        CHI COS
                                                                                              DOM
                                                                                              CHN
                                                VEN
                                                 BRA                                             MEX
                                                                                                  GRE
                                                                                          IRE MAL PHI
                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                                    POR
                                                                                                    PER
                                                                                                    VEN
                                                                                                      BRAJAM
                                                        JAM
                                                        SPA
                                                         ISR
                                                           ICE
                                                             THA                                         SPA
                                                                                                          ISR
                                                                                                            ICE
                                                                                                              THA
         0




              0                 .5                  1              1.5   0                .5          1             1.5
                                                                   RSS
         Graphs by panel
       Table 1: Aggregate data for sample of net host countries, 1997-2000

                                  1                2            3                   4                    5
                                                          Aggregate Data
Host country                Yi /L i           Li              K i /Yi          si                  iF
                          Values as % of net source country                         Values in %

Argentina                       53.6             3.8              78.4          10.7                 43.4
Bolivia                         13.7             0.8              45.9          38.3                 28.2
Brazil                          37.7            15.2              74.8           7.4                 21.1
Chile                           49.7             1.4              63.3          33.8                 23.2
Colombia                        23.8             4.7              53.7          11.6                 47.3
Costa Rica                      28.5             0.4              61.7          18.0                 25.6
Dominican R                     30.2             0.6              42.5          23.5                 10.6
Ecuador                         23.5             0.9              81.7           4.8                 28.2
Guatemala                       26.6             0.8              33.0          18.7                 19.2
Honduras                        13.4             0.5              60.1          15.1                 34.4
Jamaica                         15.0             0.3              96.1          18.5                 13.9
Mexico                          46.1             8.3              73.5          10.0                 30.0
Nicaragua                       10.8             0.4              70.5          26.1                 33.5
Peru                            20.6             2.7              92.9          10.7                 28.2
Paraguay                        22.6             0.6              55.5          11.7                 29.0
El Salvador                     27.3             0.5              32.1          15.8                 33.5
Uruguay                         43.7             0.4              54.9           7.7                 29.0
Venezuela                       37.7             2.1              74.2          14.5                 18.9
China                           11.2           184.8              55.8          19.2                 24.3
Egypt                           26.9             4.6              23.9          32.8                 44.1
Indonesia                       18.3            20.3              62.9           6.5                 45.8
India                           11.8            96.0              40.1           3.8                 56.4
Israel                          86.7             0.6              97.3           5.5                 21.7
Jordan                          33.0             0.3              58.4          10.7                 44.1
Malaysia                        53.8             2.0              78.1          23.5                 26.0
Pakistan                        13.9             9.3              41.6           7.7                 56.4
Philippines                     16.5             7.3              64.5          10.0                 22.9
Syria                           32.1             1.0              40.3          40.2                 44.1
Thailand                        25.0             7.9             112.6           7.4                 19.5
Botswana                        41.5             0.1              52.2          20.4                 47.9
Morocco                         23.2             2.2              51.3          14.6                 47.9
Tunisia                         38.1             0.8              53.5          37.7                 47.9
Spain                           84.9             3.9             108.5           7.9                 25.5
Greece                          67.6             1.1             110.3           4.0                 41.6
Ireland                        116.2             0.4              62.9          48.6                  8.8
Iceland                         86.3             0.0              97.5           2.2                 20.9
Portugal                        66.5             1.1              88.1           9.5                 27.2
Turkey                          30.6             7.1              69.0           2.8                 52.2

Median                          29.3             1.1              62.9          11.7                 28.6
Average                         37.1            10.4              66.1          16.1                 32.2
Max                            116.2           184.8             112.6          48.6                 56.4
Min                             10.8             0.0              23.9           2.2                  8.8



Computed on the basis of data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Lane and
 Milesi-Ferretti (2006), and Penn-World Tables.
               Table 2: Model inference of country- and firm-embedded productivities
                            (benchmark parametrization, 1997-2000)

                               1            2          3           4         5          6


Host country             z̃ i /z̃ 1   x̃ i /x̃ 1   z i /z 1   x i /x 1   R istatic   R iSS


Argentina                   78.8         35.6       84.1        39.2      0.70        0.60
Bolivia                     42.1         8.0        49.1        10.7      0.64        0.42
Brazil                      62.6         36.2       67.1        39.1      1.07        0.92
Chile                       77.0         33.2       80.1        42.8      0.74        0.58
Colombia                    57.2         14.6       65.8        16.1      0.63        0.44
Costa Rica                  57.4         22.9       63.1        26.3      0.88        0.68
Dominican R                 64.5         27.2       69.3        32.4      1.02        0.66
Ecuador                     47.7         21.1       53.6        22.5      0.98        0.88
Guatemala                   65.8         23.0       72.3        26.5      0.96        0.53
Honduras                    38.9         9.8        46.1        11.1      0.79        0.59
Jamaica                     34.6         13.8       39.6        15.9      1.04        1.04
Mexico                      71.6         38.2       76.1        41.9      0.90        0.76
Nicaragua                   32.9         7.0        39.5        8.5       0.70        0.57
Peru                        42.7         17.4       48.5        19.1      0.92        0.89
Paraguay                    52.6         18.7       59.3        20.6      0.90        0.65
El Salvador                 69.4         20.1       77.3        22.8      0.79        0.42
Uruguay                     75.7         37.6       80.8        40.7      0.94        0.68
Venezuela                   62.5         34.4       66.6        38.6      1.02        0.88
China                       35.3         9.0        42.0        10.4      0.89        0.65
Egypt                       77.2         13.3       87.0        17.0      0.52        0.23
Indonesia                   47.0         12.2       55.2        13.1      0.69        0.52
India                       43.7         6.5        54.3        6.9       0.55        0.32
Israel                      91.7         84.4       91.5        90.2      1.08        1.07
Jordan                      66.1         21.7       73.6        23.8      0.68        0.50
Malaysia                    75.9         40.1       78.9        47.7      0.82        0.72
Pakistan                    47.1         7.4        57.8        7.9       0.53        0.31
Philippines                 41.8         15.1       48.0        16.5      1.01        0.80
Syria                       72.7         14.1       80.5        19.3      0.46        0.27
Thailand                    44.0         24.5       48.8        26.4      1.09        1.18
Botswana                    78.4         22.7       85.9        26.4      0.56        0.38
Morocco                     57.2         13.6       66.0        15.3      0.60        0.41
Tunisia                     74.2         16.3       81.5        21.7      0.44        0.30
Spain                       88.3         76.7       88.7        83.0      0.99        1.04
Greece                      80.5         49.9       84.2        52.9      0.78        0.80
Ireland                    119.9         71.7      113.9       107.3      0.70        0.56
Iceland                     91.2         87.9       91.2        92.3      1.13        1.13
Portugal                    82.5         57.7       84.7        63.0      0.95        0.89
Turkey                      61.7         18.7       70.2        19.7      0.62        0.49

Median                      63.6         21.4       69.8        23.3      0.81        0.62
Average                     63.4         28.5       69.0        32.5      0.81        0.65
Max                        119.9         87.9      113.9       107.3      1.13        1.18
Min                         32.9         6.5        39.5        6.9       0.44        0.23
                                           Table 3: Accounting for cross-country differences in output per worker


                                                                  1                       2                 3                    4                           5
                                                                                                     Decomposition (adds up to 100%)

                                                                                                i                    i                                         K i /Y i
                                                                      Y i /L i     1            z       1−v           x     1−v            1         v
                                                            log                  1−
                                                                                        log     1     1−v
                                                                                                              log     1   1−v
                                                                                                                                  log
                                                                                                                                        1−s i m 1   1−v
                                                                                                                                                           log
                                                                                                                                                                 K 1 /Y 1
                                                                      Y 1 /L 1                  z                     x
     Difference between Host and
     Source Countries, 1997-2000
     (average host vs. source)

1      Benchmark parametrization                             -118.4%                    60.5%                 27.2%                -4.9%                   17.2%

2        0. 8                                              -118.4%                    55.2%                 35.4%                -6.3%                   15.7%
3        0. 9                                              -118.4%                    66.1%                 18.6%                -3.3%                   18.6%

4      Reduced set of countries (FDI stocks)                 -111.3%                    63.2%                 26.4%                -4.7%                   15.0%
5      Reduced set of countries (employment shares)          -111.3%                    63.2%                 24.9%                -3.1%                   15.0%


     Variation within
     Host Countries, 1997-2000
     (variance-covariance decomposition)

6      Benchmark parametrization                              38.5%                     67.1%                 23.0%                0.3%                     9.6%

7        0. 8                                               38.5%                     60.8%                 29.9%                0.4%                     8.8%
8        0. 9                                               38.5%                     73.6%                 15.7%                0.2%                    10.5%

9      Reduced set of countries (FDI stocks)                  43.9%                     67.0%                 22.0%                1.2%                     9.8%
10     Reduced set of countries (employment shares)           43.9%                     67.0%                 22.5%                0.8%                     9.8%
              Table 4: Output and consumption percentage gains for host countries of unilaterally moving
                                      from autarky to openness to foreign firms

                            1                    2           3                       4       5                  6
                            Initial K and Fixed OC               SS K and Fixed OC            SS K and Endog. OC
     Host Country
                            Y                    C           Y                       C       Y                  C

Argentina                  6.8                 1.3         13.4                  5.0        26.8              9.4
Bolivia                    8.3                 1.7         22.7                  10.1       34.4              13.0
Brazil                     0.3                 0.0         3.4                   0.9        3.6               0.9
Chile                      5.9                 1.0         14.3                  5.5        17.5              5.5
Colombia                   8.4                 1.8         21.2                  9.2        41.2              17.6
Costa Rica                 3.2                 0.3         10.5                  3.7        16.4              5.1
Dominican R                0.9                 0.0         11.4                  4.1        16.1              4.9
Ecuador                    1.5                 0.1         4.6                   1.3        7.1               1.9
Guatemala                  1.8                 0.1         16.4                  6.6        30.5              11.1
Honduras                   4.9                 0.7         13.9                  5.3        25.9              9.0
Jamaica                    0.7                 0.0         1.0                   0.2        0.0               0.0
Mexico                     2.7                 0.2         7.6                   2.4        12.9              3.8
Nicaragua                  6.9                 1.3         14.7                  5.7        22.7              7.6
Peru                       2.5                 0.2         4.4                   1.3        4.6               1.2
Paraguay                   2.9                 0.2         11.5                  4.1        21.7              7.2
El Salvador                4.8                 0.6         22.3                  9.8        41.5              17.8
Uruguay                    2.2                 0.1         10.6                  3.7        21.0              6.9
Venezuela                  1.0                 0.0         4.7                   1.3        3.7               0.9
China                      2.6                 0.2         9.5                   3.2        15.2              4.6
Egypt                      11.7                3.1         38.6                  20.3       55.8              29.4
Indonesia                  6.8                 1.2         16.2                  6.5        35.6              13.6
India                      9.8                 2.3         26.3                  12.2       50.0              24.7
Israel                     0.1                 0.0         0.2                   0.1        0.0               0.0
Jordan                     7.1                 1.3         18.1                  7.4        37.7              14.7
Malaysia                   4.3                 0.5         9.2                   3.1        10.8              3.1
Pakistan                   11.3                3.0         30.1                  14.6       52.5              26.8
Philippines                1.1                 0.0         6.6                   2.1        10.4              2.9
Syria                      13.8                4.2         34.3                  17.3       48.1              23.2
Thailand                   0.0                 0.0         0.0                   0.0        0.0               0.0
Botswana                   10.4                2.6         25.0                  11.4       43.5              19.4
Morocco                    9.2                 2.1         23.2                  10.4       42.9              19.0
Tunisia                    14.5                4.7         31.3                  15.4       45.6              21.2
Spain                      1.3                 0.1         0.8                   0.2        0.0               0.0
Greece                     5.1                 0.8         6.6                   2.1        12.6              3.7
Ireland                    6.7                 1.2         15.2                  5.9        9.9               2.8
Iceland                    0.0                 0.0         0.0                   0.0        0.0               0.0
Portugal                   2.0                 0.1         4.4                   1.2        4.9               1.3
Turkey                     8.6                 1.9         18.3                  7.5        39.5              16.2

Median                     4.6                 0.6         12.5                  4.6        19.3              6.2
Average                    5.1                 1.0         13.7                  5.8        22.7              9.2
Max                        14.5                4.7         38.6                  20.3       55.8              29.4
Min                        0.0                 0.0         0.0                   0.0        0.0               0.0
                    Table 5: Output and consumption percentage gains for host countries of globally moving
                                           from autarky to openness to foreign firms

                                     1                   2          3                       4       5                 6

          Host Country               Initial K and Fixed OC             SS K and Fixed OC            SS K and Endog. OC
                                     Y                    C         Y                       C       Y                  C

Argentina                           5.0                 0.7        7.4                  2.4        16.1              5.0
Bolivia                             6.4                 1.1        16.0                 6.3        23.0              7.7
Brazil                              0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Chile                               4.1                 0.5        8.1                  2.6        6.8               1.8
Colombia                            6.5                 1.1        14.8                 5.7        34.1              12.8
Costa Rica                          1.3                 0.1        4.4                  1.3        5.6               1.5
Dominican R                         0.0                 0.0        5.3                  1.6        5.3               1.4
Ecuador                             0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Guatemala                           0.0                 0.0        10.1                 3.5        19.3              6.2
Honduras                            3.1                 0.3        7.6                  2.4        14.8              4.5
Jamaica                             0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Mexico                              1.0                 0.0        2.0                  0.5        2.7               0.7
Nicaragua                           5.0                 0.7        8.4                  2.8        11.7              3.4
Peru                                0.7                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Paraguay                            1.1                 0.0        5.4                  1.6        10.7              3.0
El Salvador                         3.0                 0.2        15.6                 6.1        34.2              12.9
Uruguay                             0.4                 0.0        4.5                  1.3        10.1              2.8
Venezuela                           0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
China                               1.3                 0.0        5.5                  1.6        7.8               2.1
Egypt                               9.8                 2.3        31.6                 15.6       49.9              24.6
Indonesia                           5.1                 0.7        10.4                 3.6        25.4              8.7
India                               8.7                 1.9        22.8                 10.1       46.9              22.2
Israel                              0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Jordan                              5.3                 0.8        11.6                 4.2        26.5              9.3
Malaysia                            2.5                 0.2        3.2                  0.9        0.2               0.0
Pakistan                            9.4                 2.2        23.3                 10.4       46.7              22.1
Philippines                         0.0                 0.0        0.8                  0.2        0.0               0.0
Syria                               11.8                3.2        27.0                 12.6       42.2              18.4
Thailand                            0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Botswana                            8.4                 1.8        18.1                 7.5        37.7              14.8
Morocco                             7.3                 1.4        16.6                 6.6        37.3              14.4
Tunisia                             12.5                3.6        24.1                 10.9       39.8              16.5
Spain                               0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Greece                              3.3                 0.3        0.8                  0.2        1.9               0.5
Ireland                             4.9                 0.7        8.9                  3.0        0.0               0.0
Iceland                             0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Portugal                            0.2                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
Turkey                              6.8                 1.3        12.1                 4.4        31.0              11.4

Median                              2.7                 0.2        6.5                  2.0        8.9               2.5
Average                             3.6                 0.7        8.6                  3.4        15.5              6.0
Max                                 12.5                3.6        31.6                 15.6       49.9              24.6
Min                                 0.0                 0.0        0.0                  0.0        0.0               0.0
          Table 6: Sensitivity of counterfactuals to alternative measures of taxes and parameter values


                 Steady-state percentage gains of unilaterally moving from autarky to openness to foreign firms

                            1            2          3                4        5               6

                         Benchmark taxes                      Alternative measure of taxes
                       and parameter values
                                                        τ F=τMaxF             τ F=τMinF

Host countries              Y            C          Y                C        Y               C

Median                    19.3          6.2       23.4              7.9      16.4            5.1
Average                   22.7          9.2       25.7              10.3     16.8            5.9
Max                       55.8          29.4      55.7              29.3     46.6            21.9
Min                       0.0           0.0       0.0               0.0      0.0             0.0


                            7            8          9               10        11             12     13            14

                                               Alternative parameter values

                                ν=0.8               ν=0.9                          α =0.23            γ =0.05

Host countries              Y            C          Y                C        Y               C      Y            C

Median                    23.7          7.3       14.8              4.9      11.0            2.7    15.9        5.3
Average                   30.3          11.8      15.4              6.5      14.6            4.8    19.3        7.8
Max                       79.5          39.7      34.9              19.4     37.9            16.3   53.0        27.1
Min                       0.0           0.0       0.0               0.0      0.0             0.0    0.0         0.0


                           15           16         17               18

                                    Reduced set of Countries

                       FDI Stocks-Based        Employment-Based

Host countries              Y            C          Y                C

Median                    12.6          3.7       11.8              3.4
Average                   17.8          6.9       16.5              6.4
Max                       55.7          29.3      51.2              25.7
Min                       0.0           0.0       0.0               0.0
