                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE STABILITY OF LARGE EXTERNAL IMBALANCES:
                       THE ROLE OF RETURNS DIFFERENTIALS

                                       Stephanie E. Curcuru
                                          Tomas Dvorak
                                        Francis E. Warnock

                                       Working Paper 13074
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13074


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2007




This paper will also be circulated as Federal Reserve IFDP#894. The views in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve
System. We thank for helpful comments Carol Bertaut, Ricardo Caballero, Charles Engel, Kristen
Forbes, Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Cedric Tille, Charles Thomas, Ralph Tryon, Eric van Wincoop,
Jon Wongswan, and seminar participants at the Dallas Fed. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation
for its generous support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Stephanie E. Curcuru, Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Stability of Large External Imbalances: The Role of Returns Differentials
Stephanie E. Curcuru, Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 13074
May 2007
JEL No. F3

                                               ABSTRACT

Were the U.S. to persistently earn substantially more on its foreign investments ("U.S. claims") than
foreigners earn on their U.S. investments ("U.S. liabilities"), the likelihood that the current environment
of sizeable global imbalances will evolve in a benign manner increases. However, utilizing data on
the actual foreign equity and bond portfolios of U.S. investors and the U.S. equity and bond portfolios
of foreign investors, we find that the returns differential of U.S. claims over U.S. liabilities is essentially
zero. Ending our sample in 2005, the differential is positive, whereas through 2004 it is negative; in
both cases the differential is statistically indecipherable from zero. Moreover, were it not for the poor
timing of investors from developed countries, who tend to shift their U.S. portfolios toward (or away
from) equities prior to the subsequent underperformance (or strong performance) of equities, the returns
differential would be even lower. Thus, in the context of equity and bond portfolios we find no evidence
that the U.S. can count on earning more on its claims than it pays on its liabilities.

Stephanie E. Curcuru                                   Francis E. Warnock
Board of Governors                                     Darden Business School
of the Federal Reserve System                          University of Virginia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW                Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Washington DC 20551                                    and NBER
stephanie.e.curcuru@frb.gov                            warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

Tomas Dvorak
Union College
Department of Economics
Social Sciences Bldg 215
Schenectady, NY 12308
dvorakt@union.edu
1. Introduction

        Substantial global imbalances are a central influence on the current international

economic order. Whether and how these imbalances might unravel have important implications

for economic stability in general and for the future path of the U.S. dollar in particular.

        One aspect of this situation that has attracted a great deal of attention recently is the

returns differential, the difference between the rate that the United States pays foreigners on its

international liabilities and that which it earns on its foreign claims. It is presumed that the returns

differential is positive, in large part because of the striking finding in Gourinchas and Rey

(2006a) that over the past three decades U.S. investors’ returns on foreign equities and bonds

have exceeded foreigners’ U.S. returns by 6.21 percent and 3.72 percent, respectively, per year.

        Understanding what is behind this substantial positive returns differential is important for

many reasons. A positive U.S. returns differential vis-à-vis the rest of the world would be a

source of stability in the current system. For example, in the model of Cavallo and Tille (2006) a

more positive returns differential impacts the dynamics of current account adjustment in a way

that lessens the probability of a disorderly unraveling of global imbalances. Similarly, Hausmann

and Sturtzeneger (2006) argue that global imbalances are more sustainable the more permanent is

the returns differential. Should a positive returns differential persist, the likelihood of a relatively

benign continuation of global imbalances would increase. Should a positive returns differential

cease, one barrier to an unsavory adjustment in the world economic order would be removed.

Any return differential, however large or small, becomes ever more important because of the

steady increase in the size of gross claims and gross liabilities positions (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti,

2006; Tille, 2005).

        Understanding what is behind the returns differential is important for another reason:

Theoretical work is rapidly progressing without a solid understanding of what has driven the

differential. The returns differential figures prominently in the models of Mendoza, Quadrini and

Rios-Rull (2006), Ghironi, Lee, and Rebucci (2006), Devereux and Saito (2006), and Obstfeld


                                                   1
and Rogoff (2005). In the model of Tille and van Wincoop (2007), a persistent returns differential

is shown not to have an important role and the authors sound almost apologetic in noting that

their “model can therefore not account for empirical findings by Gourinchas and Rey (2006b) that

net external debt is to some extent financed by differences in expected returns” (Tille and van

Wincoop 2007, page 31). Clearly, the presumption of a substantial and persistent positive returns

differential is influencing theoretical work, making it even more important to examine the

determinants of this differential.

        Existing work points to two sources for the differential. The first is the difference in the

composition of U.S. claims and liabilities: U.S. claims consist mostly of high-return equity, while

U.S. liabilities consist mostly of low-return debt (Obstfeld and Rogoff 2005, Gourinchas and Rey

2006a, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2005b and Meissner and Taylor 2006). The other is that U.S

investors earn relatively higher returns on their cross-border investments within each asset class.

As noted, Gourinchas and Rey (2006a) find that over the past three decades U.S. investors’

returns on both foreign equities and foreign bonds have substantially exceeded foreigners’ U.S.

returns in those asset classes.

        Our findings can be easily summarized: We find no returns differential. For our sample

(January 1994 through December 2005), the returns differential is positive 5.6 basis points per

month but statistically insignificant. Were we to end the sample a year earlier (end-2004), the

returns differential would be negative. In either case the differential is statistically

indistinguishable from zero. The finding of no returns differential is surprising given the

presumption in the literature of a substantial and positive returns differential for the United States.

Our findings suggest that while it might be desirable for theoretical models to allow for returns

differentials, the assumption of persistent differentials is on shaky footing.

        How is it that we do not find a positive returns differential? Indeed, we find a positive

composition effect, as all over the world equities had higher returns than bonds, U.S. claims are




                                                  2
weighted toward equities, and U.S. liabilities are weighted toward debt.1 But the composition

effect is offset by a negative return effect. U.S. equity markets performed very well over the past

twelve years, while bond returns were more or less equal around the (developed) world, so in sum

U.S. securities yielded higher returns than foreign securities. Given that the negative return effect

almost exactly offsets the positive composition effect, it is surprising that we find any return

differential (albeit one that is statistically insignificant). The explanation is that foreign countries,

especially developed ones, have exhibited poor skill in shifting between bonds and equities within

their U.S. portfolios. For example, foreigners tend to have a relatively high equity weight when

U.S. equity prices have already peaked and a relatively low equity weight when U.S. equity

prices are poised to rise. Thus, even though a positive composition effect exists, we do not find a

statistically significant positive returns differential for the United States, and the U.S. returns

differential would be even lower should foreigners exhibit more skill within their U.S. portfolios.

         Our approach differs from previous analysis in at least two ways. First, we use

information from actual bond and equity portfolios. Specifically, we utilize data on the country

and asset class composition of U.S. portfolio claims and liabilities. By matching precise country

and asset class weights to corresponding total market returns (and by being careful with the

currency composition by asset class and country), we are able to obtain accurate estimates of the

returns differential. Using data on bilateral positions also has the advantage of allowing us to

distinguish differentials vis-à-vis developed from those vis-à-vis developing countries.2

         The second way our study differs is methodological. Ascertaining the extent of the

America’s privileged status in having a positive returns differential vis-à-vis the rest of the world
1
  This structure of U.S. claims and liabilities is also noted by Gourinchas and Rey (2006a), Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2005), and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005b).
2
  It should be noted at the outset that by focusing on high quality data on bond and equity portfolios, we are
necessarily excluding foreign direct investment (FDI), another important component of cross-border
positions. There is a long-standing, positive returns differential for direct investment that most evidence
suggests owes to some combination of a maturity effect (much of the FDI in the United States is relatively
new, whereas U.S. direct investment abroad tends to have been placed a long time ago) and transfer pricing
(Mataloni 2000, Hung and Mascaro 2004 and Higgins et. al. 2006). However, Gros (2006) and Heath
(2007) argue that most of the differential on FDI owes to tax system effects, suggesting that for FDI any
differential may be more apparent than real.


                                                      3
is essentially an exercise in performance evaluation. Therefore, we utilize portfolio performance

evaluation techniques inspired by Grinblatt and Titman (1993). Specifically, we decompose the

return differential into its three components: composition, return, and timing effects. The first

two—the composition and return effects—capture average characteristics of U.S. claims and

liabilities. The composition effect would be positive were U.S. claims on foreigners weighted

toward asset classes with higher average returns. The return effect would be positive were U.S.

investors to earn higher average returns within each asset class. The third effect, timing, is driven

by reallocations across different asset classes. The timing effect captures investment skill as given

by the covariance between current weights and subsequent returns. A positive covariance

between current asset weights—themselves the outcome of a buy-and-hold strategy or active

trading—and subsequent asset returns would mean that portfolios were correctly positioned to

capture subsequent returns. If portfolio weights and subsequent returns covary more positively in

U.S. claims than in U.S. liabilities, U.S. investors display more skill abroad than foreign investors

in the U.S. and the timing effect would be positive.

        We perform many robustness checks. First, because our timing effect is a combination of

active trading and the failure to reallocate after valuation changes alter the portfolio’s

composition, we differentiate between these two components. The more active component—the

trading effect, a generally accepted metric of portfolio performance originated by Grinblatt and

Titman (1993)—summarizes the ability of countries to shift their investments into asset classes

that subsequently rise in value. We find that active trading plays an important role in the poor

timing of foreign investors. Second, our results might have been driven by the accumulation of

U.S. bonds by foreign officials, in particular the governments of emerging market countries. But

our analysis confirms that they are not. Our results are actually much stronger for developed

countries and carry through to private foreign investors. Finally, our sample period is long enough

so that the overall effect of currency changes is negligible. Over our sample period, the dollar first

appreciated and then depreciated; by the end it was roughly unchanged. Over shorter periods,


                                                  4
currency movements will be the dominant force on returns differentials and, specifically, on the

return effect (see, for example, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005a) and Forbes (2006, 2007)).

        As an additional robustness check we compare our results to those obtained using

publicly available data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We find that the calculated

returns differential depends crucially on whether one uses original data releases or the current

vintage of historical data available on BEA’s website. This is because the extent of revisions

differs for international investment positions (IIPs) and capital flows. While BEA fully adjusts

positions data to reflect the findings of new benchmark surveys, an examination of the flow

revisions reveals that BEA is only partially adjusting the flows data, perhaps because to

incorporate into balance of payments revisions the flows must be attributed to a particular country

and quarter. We show that the mismatch between the extent of revisions makes the U.S. returns

differential appear greater than it actually is. Indeed, using the current vintage of historical data

the returns differential appears large, but using the original data releases the returns differential is,

as we find in our main analysis, essentially zero.

        The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss the underlying data on

international portfolios and returns characteristics. In Section 3 we decompose the returns

differential into the composition, return, and timing effects. In Section 4 we show the difference

between the returns differential calculated using the current vintage of BEA data and using the

original BEA data releases. Section 5 concludes.



2. Returns Differentials from Actual Portfolios

        In this section we describe the bilateral positions and returns data and then calculate the

returns differentials. To compute returns differentials, we use monthly data on bilateral

international portfolio positions in bonds and equities. The bilateral aspect is important in

enabling us to differentiate between different types of foreign countries. For example, portfolio




                                                   5
considerations of emerging market countries might be very different from those of developed

countries.

2.1 Positions

         We use the highest quality data set available on the portfolio debt and equity investment

positions of U.S. investors abroad and foreign investors in the United States. This data was

designed in Thomas, Warnock, and Wongswan (2006), used in Warnock and Warnock (2006),

and refined in Bertaut and Tryon (2007). Monthly bilateral investment positions are constructed

using two components of data reported by the Treasury International Capital Reporting System

(TIC): infrequent but highly accurate benchmark surveys of holdings (both foreign holdings of

U.S. securities and U.S. holdings of foreign securities) and net monthly transactions (both net

purchases of U.S. assets by foreigners and net purchases of foreign assets by U.S. residents). The

technique to construct the monthly positions data is detailed in Appendix A. The end result is

high-quality estimates of monthly positions of foreigners in U.S. securities (“U.S. liabilities”) and

U.S. positions in foreign securities (“U.S. claims”).

         Our data cover portfolio investment in long-term securities, specifically debt instruments

with greater-than-one-year original maturity (“bonds”) and equities. 3 While the TIC system

includes most countries of the world, we include only those countries for which we have at least

fifty monthly observations on both equity and bond returns between January 1994 and December

2005. This leaves us with nineteen developed countries and nineteen emerging markets. These

countries account for the majority of U.S. portfolio investment abroad as well as the majority of

foreign investment in the United States.4




3
  We exclude bank lending, which would not affect our analysis because short-term deposits earn, if
anything, near zero returns and cross-border holdings of short-term securities are very small at less than 20
percent the size of holdings of long-term debt (Treasury et al. 2006a, 2006b).
4
  In 2004, the countries in our sample account for 84 percent and 80 percent of U.S. equity and bond
investment abroad and 77 percent and 73 percent of all foreigners’ equity and bond investment in the
United States. Of the international investment that we do not cover, Caribbean financial centers account for
more than half.


                                                      6
        One limitation is that the TIC data distinguish between private and official positions only

at the aggregate level. Therefore, our country-level analysis groups together official and private

flows. We recognize that foreign official purchases of U.S. assets may be for reasons other than

mean-variance optimization. With the exception of Japan, private positions dwarf official

holdings in developed countries, but for emerging market countries official positions are likely to

be more important. In robustness checks we delve further into this issue.

2.2 Returns

        We select the returns series that most closely correspond to actual international holdings.

For U.S. securities, for returns on U.S. bonds we use the weighted average of Lehman Brothers

U.S. Treasury, corporate and agency bond indices, with the weights being foreigners’ positions in

each respective bond type. Foreign investors, especially those from emerging markets, tend to

overweight Treasury and Agency bonds relative to a market-capitalization benchmark such as the

Lehman Brothers Aggregate U.S. bond index, so it is important to use the actual weights of

foreign investors in the three types of bonds to produce an accurate measure of their returns on

U.S. bonds. For returns on U.S. equities we use the return on the gross MSCI U.S. index. The

index is market capitalization weighted and, with roughly 300 large and liquid U.S. firms, is

comparable to the S&P 500 (which unfortunately includes some foreign firms).

        For foreign securities, for returns on foreign equities we use dollar returns on the gross

MSCI equity index for each country. MSCI indexes are appropriate because MSCI firms

represent almost 80 percent of U.S. investors’ foreign equity investment (Ammer et al. 2006).

For foreign bonds, to a large extent U.S. investors tend to hold local currency bonds in developed

countries and dollar-denominated bonds in emerging markets (Burger and Warnock, 2007). Thus,

for developing countries we use J.P. Morgan’s EMBI+ indices (which are comprised of dollar-

denominated bonds). In those developed countries where U.S. holdings of local currency bonds

are predominant, we use the MSCI bond index (which is an index of local-currency-denominated

bonds). In those developed countries where U.S. holdings of dollar-denominated bonds are


                                                7
significant we calculate returns as the weighted average of the MSCI bond index and MSCI

Eurodollar Credit index (which is an index of dollar-denominated bonds), with the weights on the

Eurodollar index being the shares of dollar denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of foreign

bonds.5 When calculating returns on the aggregate foreign bond and foreign equities portfolios,

we weight each country according to U.S. bond (or equity) holdings in that country. The average

weight of each country in U.S. foreign equity and bond portfolios and the average returns on each

country’s equities and bonds appear in Table I.

        Our sample period covers the 144 months between January 1994 and December 2005.

The starting point is determined by the availability of MSCI bond indices, which begin in

December 1993. The ending point is determined by the availability of U.S. foreign asset

positions, which are available through December 2005. For some countries, equity or bond

returns data begin after January 1994. We add these countries to the U.S. asset and liability

portfolios when the data for both equity and bond returns become available (see the last column

in Table I). Countries added after January 1994 tend to have very low weights in both U.S. claims

and liabilities portfolios, so our results are nearly identical if we restrict our study to countries

with returns data for the entire sample period.

2.3 Characteristics of U.S. foreign claims and liabilities

        Table II shows the descriptive statistics for aggregate equity weights in U.S. claims and

liabilities and aggregate returns on U.S. and foreign bonds and equities. It is evident from Panels

A and B that U.S. claims (that is, U.S. investors’ foreign portfolios) are weighted heavily toward

equities, while U.S. liabilities (foreigners’ portfolios in the U.S.) are weighted toward bonds. This

resembles the “venture capitalist” capital structure of the U.S. external balance sheet as pointed

out by Gourinchas and Rey (2006a). Specifically, the equity-to-bond ratio in U.S. claims is 71:29

across all countries, with equities having a higher weight in U.S. investors’ developed country

5
 The developed countries where U.S. holdings of dollar denominated bonds are significant include
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Sweden and the United
Kingdom.


                                                  8
portfolios (72:28 equity-to-bond ratio) than in the emerging market portfolios (60:40). By

contrast, the equity-to-bond ratio in U.S. liabilities is 42:58, roughly that (46:54) for developed

countries’ positions, but much lower for emerging markets’ portfolios (9:91).

        Returns are shown in Panels C and D. Note at the outset that, while over short periods

returns differentials between claims and liabilities are driven primarily by movements in the

exchange value of the dollar, over our 12-year sample the dollar was essentially flat. For example,

for the short period from end-2001 to end-2004 the dollar depreciated 10 percent per year against

the currencies of developed countries (that is, the Fed’s Major Currencies Index fell 10 percent

per year), but from January 1994 to September 2003 it was flat, and over our whole sample it

depreciated only 4.7 basis points per month, or 0.56 percent per year. Thus, for our sample the

effect on the returns differentials of exchange rate movements is very minor, whereas their effect

in shorter samples can be sizeable.

        Panel C shows that over the period from 1994 through 2005 data on actual portfolios

indicate that returns were higher on U.S. equities (0.94 percent per month) than on foreign

equities (0.77 percent overall, with 0.80 in developed countries and 0.85 in emerging markets).

For bonds (Panel D), returns on developed country bonds (0.57 percent per month) were

somewhat higher than returns on U.S. bonds (0.48), while returns on emerging market bonds

were much lower (0.20). Overall, there is no evidence in Panels C and D that U.S. claims have

substantially higher returns than U.S. liabilities. If we consider all countries, foreign bonds

provided slightly higher returns than U.S. bonds (about 18 basis points per year), but returns on

U.S. equities were substantially higher (about 209 basis points per year) than returns on foreign

equities. No return discount or premium is obvious within asset classes; to a first approximation,

the securities returns in the major markets are similar.

        Our finding that the United States does not earn substantially higher returns within each

asset class contrasts with that of Gourinchas and Rey (2006a). In particular, compared to our

returns they report substantially higher returns on U.S. equity claims and substantially lower


                                                  9
returns on U.S. debt liabilities. In addition to different time periods—we compare our 1994-2005

results to their 1973-2004 calculations—there are at least two other reasons for the differences.

First, in calculating returns on U.S. equity claims, we use country weights that change monthly,

while Gourinchas and Rey appear to use fixed weights. Specifically, when calculating returns on

U.S. equity claims, Gourinchas and Rey use constant country weights as of 1997, although

country weights in U.S. investors’ equity portfolios can change dramatically over time (Kho,

Stulz, and Warnock 2006; Thomas et al. 2006). Moreover, applying 1997 weights to the entire

1973-2004 period will naturally overstate returns, as all else equal 1997 weights will tend to be

high in countries that experienced high returns prior to 1997. Second, in calculating returns on

U.S. debt liabilities we take into account their composition into treasury, agency and corporate

bonds. Gourinchas and Rey use returns on U.S. short-term and long-term treasury securities as

the return on U.S. debt liabilities. Since higher yielding corporate bonds make up as much as 42%

of U.S. long-term debt liabilities (see Table 1 in Treasury et al., 2006a), this may understate

returns on U.S. debt liabilities.6

2.4 Actual and Hypothetical Portfolio Returns

        The returns data in Table II, together with the portfolio weights, suggest that U.S.

investors should not have earned a much higher return on their foreign portfolios than foreigners

earned on their U.S. portfolios. Indeed, if the average portfolio weights were maintained

throughout the period, the returns differential (of U.S. claims over U.S. liabilities) would be

roughly zero. This is shown in the column labeled “Hypothetical” in Table III. The hypothetical

returns are calculated by multiplying average weights and average returns and summing across

asset classes. This calculation shows that if the average weights were maintained throughout the




6
  There are other differences in the calculation of returns on U.S. equity assets. For example, we use
information on 39 countries, whereas Gourinchas and Rey use only 12. Also, we use MSCI indices which
tend to include the large firms that international investors tend to hold, whereas they use local market
indices that tend to be broader than the MSCI.


                                                   10
period, the returns differential would be 0.015 percent per month vis-à-vis all countries, 0.041

percent vis-à-vis developed countries, and 0.095 percent vis-à-vis emerging markets.

        In reality, actual portfolio returns (shown in the column labeled “Actual”) behaved quite

differently. Whereas the returns of emerging market investors on their U.S. positions were

roughly equal to the hypothetical returns, investors from developed countries earned far less than

the hypothetical returns. This sub-par performance by developed countries resulted in a slightly

positive returns differential in favor of U.S. claims. Overall, for all countries the returns

differential is positive but essentially zero (0.056 percent per month, essentially the amount of

monthly dollar depreciation over our sample). Vis-à-vis emerging markets, the returns differential

is substantially more positive at 0.110 percent per month, or 1.32 percent per year. In no case is

the differential statistically distinguishable from zero, in part because of the volatility of asset

prices and exchange rates.

        One implication of these calculations is clear. Over the period from 1994 to 2005—a

period of increasing financial globalization—there is no evidence that U.S. portfolio claims

provided substantially higher returns than U.S. portfolio liabilities. A positive returns differential,

and the stabilizing influence that it would lend to the global economic system absent a sustained

dollar depreciation, is not apparent when one examines actual bond and equity portfolios.

        Table III does leave one question unanswered: Why do the U.S. portfolios of investors

from developed countries perform so much worse than their average portfolio weights would

suggest? Specifically, why do developed countries’ actual portfolios return 0.043 percent per

month (52 basis points per year) less than the hypothetical returns? The answer is that any

difference between the hypothetical and actual returns must be attributed to the relationship

between the timing of changes in portfolio weights and subsequent returns. If actual returns are

lower than hypothetical returns, portfolio weights must covary negatively with subsequent

returns. This suggests that timing may be an important component of the return differential (or

lack thereof) between U.S. claims and liabilities. Therefore, in the next section we formally


                                                  11
decompose the returns differentials into components that depend on average weights and average

returns (composition and return effects) and components that depend on portfolio timing (foreign

and U.S. timing effects).



3. Returns Decomposition

        To further understand our result of no returns discount for U.S. liabilities relative to U.S.

claims, we decompose the returns differentials into three component effects: composition, return,

and timing.

3.1 Methodology

        The average return on any portfolio p can be written as the time series average of the sum

of the products of lagged asset weights and returns:

                                                         T        N
                                                    1
                                            rp =                        w jp,t −1r jp,t                       (1)
                                                    T   t =1     j =1


where wpj,t-1 is portfolio weight of asset j at the end of period t-1 (the beginning of period t), rpj,t is

the period t return on asset j in portfolio p,and N is the number of assets in the portfolio. Note that

equation (1) can be also written as:

                                        N                        T         N
                                                             1
                                rp =          w jp r j p +                       ( w jp,t −1 − w jp )r jp,t   (2)
                                       j =1                  T   t =1     j =1



where w jp and r j p are the time-series averages of the weights and returns on asset j. Equation (2)

shows that the average portfolio return depends on two components: (1) average returns and

average holdings, and (2) the covariance of portfolio weights with subsequent returns. For

investors whose portfolio weights and future returns move together, these covariances will tend to

be positive. Note that if either returns or weights remain constant, the second term in (2) is zero

and portfolio return will depend only on average weights and average returns. If, as is more

likely, investors change their portfolio weights and returns are not constant, the second term is

potentially important.


                                                         12
        Using equation (2) to express the average return on U.S. claims, r c , and liabilities, r l ,

the returns differential can be written as:

                                               N      (r jc + r jl )
                                r −r =
                                 c     l
                                                                        ( w jc − w jl )
                                               j =1          2
                                                N      ( w jc + w jl )
                                           +                                (r jc − r jl )
                                               j =1           2
                                                                                                    (3)
                                                      T       N
                                               1
                                           +                        ( w cj ,t −1 − w jc )r jc,t
                                               T      t =1   j =1

                                               1      T       N
                                           −                        ( w lj ,t −1 − w jl )r jl,t
                                               T      t =1   j =1


Each line in equation (3) represents a component of the decomposition of the difference between

the returns on U.S. claims and liabilities. The first line, the composition effect, is the weighted

sum of the differences between the average weights of each asset class in U.S. claims and

liabilities. The weight for each asset class is the average return of the asset class in claims and

liabilities. If both U.S. and foreign investors put the same average weight on each asset class, the

composition effect is zero. Should U.S. investors put a higher weight on higher yielding asset

classes, the composition effect would be positive.

        The second line, the return effect, is the weighted sum of the differences between returns

on U.S. claims and liabilities within each asset class. The weight for each asset class is the

average weight of the asset class in claims and liabilities. If each asset class has the same average

return in both claims and liabilities, the return effect is zero. If average returns in each asset class

tend to be higher for U.S. claims than for U.S. liabilities, the return effect will be positive.

        The timing of U.S. investors abroad is captured by the third line, while the fourth

captures the timing of foreign investors in the United States. Both lines are the sum of sample

covariances between investors’ weights on each asset class and subsequent returns on that asset




                                                             13
class. This is a version of Grinblatt and Titman’s (1993) measure of portfolio performance. 7 If

U.S. investors put relatively high weights on assets that have subsequent high returns, these

covariances will be positive and will contribute positively to the aggregate return differential

between U.S. claims and liabilities. In contrast, positive covariances between foreign investors’

weights and subsequent returns will contribute negatively to the aggregate return differential: The

better the timing of foreign investors in the United States, the lower the return on U.S. claims

relative to U.S. liabilities. Therefore, foreign timing enters equation (3) with a negative sign.

          The timing effects can be further broken down into the portion driven by returns on

existing positions and the portion driven by trading. We separate the two by constructing buy-

and-hold weights for each asset. The weight of asset j at the end of t-1 that would have resulted

from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted k periods ago can be calculated as follows:




                                   j ,t −1, k = w j ,t −1− k ∏τ = t − k (1 + r j ,τ ) /(1 + r p ,τ )
                                                                t −1
                                 w bh                                                         bh




where wj,t-1-k is the actual weight at the end of t-1-k. This weight is then updated according to

actual returns on asset j and returns on a buy-and-hold portfolio rpbh . 8 With this we can

decompose the timing effect into the part that depends on the deviations of actual weights from

buy-and-hold weights and the part that depends on the deviation of actual weights from average

weights:


7
  In general, the Grinblatt and Titman (1993) measure can be written as 1            ( w j ,t −1 − E[ w j ,t −1 ])r j ,t
                                                                            T t    j
where E(wj,t-1) is the expected weight on asset j at t-1 that needs to be estimated. As discussed in Wermers
(2006) there are many approaches to estimating this expected weight. One possibility is to use the time-
series average weight as an estimate of the expected weight. Our timing effect uses this approach. Another
possibility, suggested by Ferson and Khang (2003), is to use buy-and-hold weights as an estimate of
expected weights. Our trading effect, discussed below, uses the buy-and-hold weight as an estimate of the
expected weight.
8
  In order to construct the buy-and-hold weight at the end of t-1, we need the return on a buy-and-hold
portfolio in period t-1. This is not circular because the buy-and-hold portfolio return in t-1 uses buy-and-
hold weights from t-2.


                                                                14
        T      N                                        T      N                                                  T      N
    1                                               1                                                         1
                      ( w j ,t −1 − w j )r j ,t =                     ( w j ,t −1 − w bh
                                                                                      j ,t −1, k ) r j ,t +                         j ,t −1, k − w j ) r j ,t
                                                                                                                                ( w bh
    T   t =1   j =1                                 T   t =1   j =1                                           T   t =1   j =1




We call the first term on the right hand side the trading effect. It measures the covariance between

the deviations of actual weights from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns. If investors

tend to increase weights in assets that subsequently rise in value, this term will be positive. We

calculate this for both U.S. investors abroad and foreign investors in the United States. We call

the second term the passive effect. It measures the covariance between the deviations of buy-and-

hold weights from average weights and subsequent returns. This covariance will tend to be

positive if returns are positively serially correlated.

3.2 Return, Composition and Timing Effects

            In Table IV we decompose the difference between the return on U.S. claims and

liabilities into the composition, return, and timing effects. The composition effect is always

positive because U.S. claims are on average weighted toward stocks, which have high average

returns. The composition effect is considerably larger vis-à-vis developing countries (about 3.5

percent per year) than vis-à-vis developed countries (about 1.1 percent per year). In both cases,

however, the composition effect is statistically insignificant.9

            The return effect is negative. This indicates that within asset classes, U.S. claims tend to

have lower returns than U.S. liabilities. While U.S. investors earn slightly more on foreign bonds

than foreigners earn on U.S. bonds, U.S. investors earn much less on foreign equity. The

differences in returns within each asset class partially offset each other. However, since equities



9
  Because the composition effect is a product of two averages, its distribution is unknown. In order to
assess statistical significance of the composition effect, we calculate its standard error using bootstrapping.
We obtain 1000 different samples by drawing 144 observations from our data with replacement 1000 times.
Using these samples we calculate 1000 compositions effects. The standard error of our original
composition effect is the standard error of these 1000 composition effects. The z-statistic reported in the
table is the original composition effect divided by the bootstrapped standard error.


                                                                            15
have on average a higher weight, the return effect is negative. The return effect is even more

negative with respect to developing countries. This is driven by the poor performance of assets

(especially bonds) in developing countries during our sample period.

        The last two columns in Table IV show the foreign and U.S. timing effects, that is, the

sums of covariances between asset weights and subsequent returns. Using all countries we see

that the foreign timing effect is negative and statistically significant. This means that foreign

investors have relatively high weights on assets that subsequently have low returns. The

magnitude of the effect is about 0.06 percentage points per month. Thus, poor timing by foreign

investors reduces their U.S. return by 70 basis points per year and positively contributes to the

returns differential. In fact, negative foreign timing is the only statistically significant term in the

decomposition of the return differential between U.S. claims and liabilities. The U.S. timing

effect is also negative, but is considerably smaller and statistically insignificant.

        The significantly negative timing effect for foreign investors could owe to the mechanical

accumulation of dollar reserves. For example, foreign governments could, for various reasons,

accumulate U.S. bonds just before U.S. bonds underperform. To verify that the poor timing of

foreign investors is not driven by dollar reserve accumulation, we re-estimate our decomposition

using aggregate private positions in the United States (Panel B). Even when we consider only

private investment, foreign timing is negative and statistically significant. Because the split

between foreign private investors and foreign governments is murky in the TIC data (Warnock

and Warnock, 2006) and because with the exception of Japan official purchases are likely

negligible for developed countries, we also split between developed and developing countries

(Panels C and D). The foreign timing is significant and negative for developed countries, again

suggesting that the poor timing of foreign purchases of U.S. securities is not driven by

mechanical accumulation of dollar reserves by emerging markets. Indeed, for developing

countries foreign timing is statistically insignificant. We re-estimated Panel C without Japan,

without the United Kingdom (since some developing countries may trade through London), and


                                                  16
without both Japan and the United Kingdom, and we found nearly identical (unreported) results

in all cases: For developed countries, foreign timing is negative and statistically significant.

3.3. Timing due to trading vs. revaluation of existing positions

        The variation in weights on different asset classes is to some extent driven by returns on

existing positions. For example, when equities do particularly well and investors do not rebalance

their portfolio, the equity weight will rise. The sample period that we consider is characterized by

the worldwide boom in equities that ended in 2000 and re-emerged in 2003. This is shown in

Figures 1 and 2. The top panel in each figure shows year-over-year returns in equities and bonds;

in both the United States (Figure 1) and abroad (Figure 2), equity returns were generally higher

than bond returns from the beginning of the sample until 2000, and again from 2003 to the end of

the sample. The bottom panels of the two figures show equity weights from actual portfolios (the

thick lines) and theoretical 24-month buy-and-hold equity weights (thin lines).10 A relationship

clearly holds between relative performance for equities and the actual weight on equities; while

equities were outperforming bonds, investors (both U.S. and foreign) allowed their portfolios to

be more heavily weighted in equities. Neither foreign nor U.S. investors seem to rebalance their

portfolio when returns change the portfolio weights of asset classes.

        In order to distinguish between timing that is a result of a passive strategy versus

deliberate trading, we decompose the timing effect into trading and passive effects. As described

in Section 3.1 the trading effect is the covariance between the deviations of actual weights from

buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns. Table V shows the foreign and U.S. trading effects

as well as the passive effects. Both trading and passive effects are calculated for different lags

corresponding to different buy-and-hold weights. For example, lag 6 uses buy-and-hold weights

that would have resulted from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted six months ago.




10
  The buy-and-hold equity weight series begins only in January 1996 since it is the weight that foreigners
would have in equity had they not traded for twenty-four months starting in January 1994.


                                                    17
         Panel A shows the results using all countries. The foreign trading effect is always

negative and statistically significant. The passive strategy effect is also always negative and

sometimes significant. This indicates that the negative foreign timing effect that we documented

in Table IV is due to poor passive strategy but mostly to ill-timed trading. Foreign investors make

new purchases (sales) that tend to be followed buy low (high) returns. Interestingly, the foreign

trading effect is negative and significant for both developed and developing countries. Even

though the overall timing effect in Table IV was statistically significant only for developed

countries, the part of the timing effect that results from active trading is negative and significant

in both developed and developing countries. To the extent that we can interpret the negative

trading effects as a lack of investment skill, it appears to be low for investors from both

developed and developing counties. The magnitude of the effect is about 3 basis points per month

at the 12-month lag and 6 basis points at the 24-month lag. This translates to roughly 36 and 72

basis points per year. In contrast, the U.S. trading effect is almost always positive although never

statistically significant.11

         Poor timing on the part of foreign investors is apparent in Figure 1. For example, in the

twenty-four months after January 1994 U.S. equities outperformed U.S. bonds, so the buy-and-

hold weight for January 1996 is considerably higher than the actual weight from January 1994

and the actual weight for January 1996. In fact, actual equity weights are lower than the buy-and-

hold weights for most of the second half of the 1990s. Putting a relatively low weight on U.S.

equity during the late 1990s turned out to have been a poor decision, as U.S. equities performed

spectacularly during this period. When U.S. equities peaked in early 2000, foreigners’ actual

equity weights are higher than the buy-and-hold weights, indicating that foreign investors were

buying stocks (or selling bonds)—in hindsight a poor decision. We see similarly poor timing

toward the end of the sample. During 2003 and 2004, foreign investors’ weight in U.S. equity

11
  This is entirely consistent with Thomas et al. (2006), who found that U.S. investors beat foreign
benchmarks not by skilled month-to-month trading but as a result of longer standing differences from
benchmark allocations.


                                                   18
remains relatively low despite the strong performance of the U.S. stock market. Had foreign

investors allowed their equity positions to appreciate in 2003, their equity weight (and the return

on their portfolio) would have been higher in 2004. Instead, foreign investors sold U.S. equities

or bought U.S. bonds when equities were about to outperform bonds. 12

         Figure 2 allows a similar analysis for U.S. claims. In the late 1990s U.S. investors’ buy-

and-hold weight is mostly lower than the actual equity weight. Therefore, U.S. investors

deliberately shifted toward equity while equity returns were relatively high. U.S. investors

continued to shift toward foreign equities even as foreign equities were falling between 2000 and

2002. However, unlike foreign investors in the United States, U.S. investors abroad appear to

have deliberately shifted into equities before the 2003 and 2004 recovery in global equity

markets. As the insignificant coefficients on the U.S. trading effect in Table V show, in a

statistical sense U.S. timing is neither poor nor exceptional.

         In Table VI we calculate the trading and passive effects for the aggregate private

positions in the United States. We find that foreign private positions also exhibit a negative and

statistically significant trading effect. This means that private foreign investors tend to buy (sell)

assets that subsequently experience low (high) returns. This is further evidence that our aggregate

results are not driven by mechanical accumulation of dollar reserves but appear rather to be

driven by the behavior of private investors.

3.4 Decomposition over 1994-1999 and 2000-2005 subsamples

         In this subsection we investigate whether the decomposition of the return differential

varies over time. Our aim is to determine which components of the return differential are stable

over time and which vary. In part, this is motivated by the need to understand the permanency or

transitory nature of the return differential (or lack of thereof). In Table VII we split our sample

into two periods: January 1994 through December 1999, and January 2000 through December


12
   Poor timing of foreign investors is consistent with the findings of Choe et al. (2005) for foreign investors
in Korea.


                                                      19
2005. The table shows that the composition and return effects switch signs between the two

periods. For the return effect, from 1994 through 1999 U.S. equities and bonds outperformed their

foreign counterparts, so the return effect is negative (that is, within each asset class foreign

investors earned more in the United States than U.S. investors earned abroad). The return effect

becomes positive during the period from 2000 through 2005, when both U.S. equities and U.S.

bonds performed worse than their foreign counterparts. As regards the composition effect, from

1994 to 1999 it is positive; U.S. claims are weighted more heavily toward equities than U.S.

liabilities are and during this period equities outperformed bonds. But between 2000 and 2005

both U.S. and foreign equities performed far worse than bonds, so the composition effect

becomes negative. Neither the composition effect nor the return effect appears to be a permanent

feature of U.S. external positions.13

        The transitory nature of composition and return effects is driven by volatile returns. With

volatile returns, timing of reallocations becomes more important. Table VII shows that the

foreign timing effect is negative during both time periods but is statistically significant only in the

2000 to 2005 subperiod. As in the full sample, U.S. timing remains statistically insignificant

during both time periods. In Table VIII we decompose the timing effect into the trading and

passive effects. We see that at the 12- and 24-month horizons the foreign trading effect is

consistently negative and statistically significant in both sub-samples. The magnitude of the

trading effect is roughly the same in the two sub-samples as in the full sample. Therefore, poor

timing of new sales and purchases by foreign investors in the United States seems rather

persistent. It is worth emphasizing that the number of observations in the two sub-samples is

relatively low. Given this relatively small number of observations, the significance and the

robustness of the negative trading effect of foreign investors in the United States is striking. It




13
   Of course, to the extent that over very long periods of time equities outperform bonds, we would expect
the composition effect to be positive.


                                                    20
suggests that the poor timing found using the full sample represents a genuine difference in

investment style rather than bad luck on the part of foreign investors.



4. Why the Presumption of a Positive Returns Differential?

        A question raised by our analysis is why there is a presumption that the U.S. has a

positive returns differential. One reason, as noted in the introduction, is that overall data for the

United States also includes foreign direct investment; there is long-standing evidence of a

positive returns differential for direct investment, although some recent papers call this into

question (Gros 2006, Heath 2007). But aside from foreign direct investment, there is still the

presumption of a U.S. earning advantage within each asset class. Why?

        There are essentially two ways to compute total returns from publicly available data. One

involves gathering detailed information from each year’s U.S. international investment position

(IIP) presentation; we will refer to this as the IIP method. The other is much easier, as it entails

downloading from BEA’s web site the current vintage of historical data on the U.S. international

investment position (IIP) and international capital flows. Because IIP data are always fully

revised to reflect the findings of benchmark surveys, but international capital flows data are only

partially revised, the latter imparts a bias that makes the U.S. returns differential appear much

greater than it actually is. We call this latter method Partially Revised, because an important

aspect is that flows data are only partially revised. Details on the data underlying each method are

provided in Appendix B.

4.1 IIP Method

        In general, total returns arise from both capital gains and income streams (e.g., coupon

payments on bonds and dividend streams from equities). To compute the dollar value of capital

gains using IIP data, note first that since 1983 Table 1 of each year’s annual IIP presentation

decomposes the change in year-end positions into the contributions from net flows, valuation

adjustments due to price and exchange-rate changes, and “other changes”. For portfolio positions


                                                 21
in bonds and equities, “other changes” typically owe to changes in coverage or methodology, and

hence for our purposes should not be counted as valuation changes. Thus, from each annual IIP

presentation the dollar value of valuation changes are those that are from price and exchange rate

changes. For income streams, we gather the U.S. equity and debt income series (payments and

receipts) provided by BEA to the IMF. These data have been reported since 1986. To compute

total returns, we divide the sum of capital gains and income streams by the position at the end of

the preceding year plus, because flows early in the year will add to valuation changes later in the

year, half of the year’s flows.

4.2 Partially Revised Method

        The Partially Revised (PR) method differs from the IIP method in the calculation of

capital gains. The revised position estimates by product for 1976-2005 are available in Table 2 of

the International Investment Position area of the BEA website (www.bea.gov/international). The

revised flow estimates for 1982-2005 are available from the Balance of Payments area of the

same website. Capital gains can be estimated as the change in the year-end position less new

flows and, as in the IIP method, omitting valuation adjustments due to “other changes”. A

problem with the revised position estimates is that they contain series breaks that arise from

changes in coverage and other factors; some of these breaks are reported as other changes in each

annual IIP, so we subtract these other changes from the capital gains.

        As in the IIP method, to calculate total returns we add the same income streams (that

BEA reports to the IMF) and, to estimate total returns, we divide by the sum of the revised

position at the start of the year plus half of the year’s revised flows.

4.3 A Comparison of Methodologies

        Figures 3 and 4 show total returns from the IIP and PR methods as well as our estimates

(labeled CDW). The start date is governed by the availability of data on income streams, which

begins in 1986. The underlying data for our estimates begin in 1994.




                                                  22
        The top panel of Figure 3 shows that total returns on U.S. holdings of foreign bonds using

the PR method are almost always greater than returns computed using the IIP method or our

method. The same holds true for U.S. holdings of foreign equities until about 1998 (bottom

panel). Returns data on foreign holdings of U.S. securities are less problematic (Figure 4). For

bonds, returns computed using the PR method are high in the late 1980s, but somewhat lower

than the others starting in 1996. For equities, the differences between the three methods are small.

        Table IX shows the impact of these differences on the returns differential. For the 1986-

2005 period (Panel A), the PR method produces returns on U.S. claims that are far greater than

those computed using the IIP method. Foreigners’ returns on U.S. liabilities are comparable in the

two methods, so on net the returns differential is much higher using the PR method (8 percent vs.

1.4 percent). Panel B shows estimates for our sample period, 1994-2005; total returns using our

data are quite similar to those using the IIP method and the main conclusion from Panel A holds.

As was the case in the earlier sample, the PR method makes it appear that U.S. investors earn

substantially more on their foreign portfolios than foreigners earn on their U.S. portfolios.14

        The main reason for the discrepancy between estimates computed using the PR and IIP

methods is that the PR method is impacted by a disconnect in the revisions policies for data on

positions and capital flows. Positions data are typically fully revised to reflect new data from the

high quality but infrequent benchmark surveys. In contrast an examination of BEA’s flow

revisions reveals that flows data are only partially revised, perhaps in part because to incorporate

into the balance of payments presentation revision to flows must be attributed to a particular

country and quarter.

        Differential revisions policies need not result in a positive returns differential, but

systematic aspects of the revisions do indeed produce such a result. First, note that for positions

14
  As noted in Appendix B, capital gains computed using the PR method exclude valuation adjustments due
to other changes reported on each annual IIP. Were we to include other changes there would be only minor
differences in the total returns. For example, for the 1994-2005 period the equity liability total return
increases to 14.1 percent, the bond liability total return decreases to 2.9 percent, and the differential
increases to 5.0 percent.


                                                   23
the revisions in both claims and liabilities tend to be positive due to constantly expanding

coverage. Given that flows are only partially revised, such upward revisions would automatically

result in high returns (for both claims and liabilities) using the PR method. But on the liabilities

side, working against this general tendency of upward revisions are two things: (i) revisions to

U.S. liabilities, tend to be minor because BEA has better information on foreign holdings of U.S.

securities (especially for Treasury bonds), and (ii) any upward revisions to U.S. bond liabilities

are partially offset by downward revisions associated with repayments on asset-backed securities

that are not captured in the flow data. Therefore, the PR method will naturally produce a greater

returns differential as it tends to overstate capital gains on U.S. assets (because higher positions

without corresponding revisions to flows imply higher capital gains) but less so on U.S.

liabilities. In contrast, original IIP releases contain data on flows and positions that correspond to

each other and hence offer a more accurate estimate of capital gains and total returns. Table IX

shows that when using the original IIP data—or our data on actual portfolios—the returns

differential disappears.15



5. Conclusion

         Our original goal in this paper was to improve our understanding of the positive returns

differential that the United States is privileged to receive on its net international positions.

However, over 1994-2005, a period of rapid financial globalization, we do not find a statistically

significant difference between the returns on U.S. portfolio claims and liabilities. While U.S.

portfolio claims are weighted more heavily toward equity than are U.S. liabilities, and equities

have higher average returns than bonds, the effect of this “venture capitalist” structure of U.S.

external positions was neutralized by the superior performance of the U.S. equity market relative

to foreign equity markets. Moreover, the returns that foreigners achieved in the United States


15
  Note that our estimates in Table IX are based on averages, so they do not include timing effects and are
thus comparable to our Hypothetical returns in Table III.


                                                    24
would have been even higher if not for their poor timing in reallocating between stocks and

bonds. We find that poor timing lowered foreigners’ return in the United States by 70 basis points

per year.

        Our results have implications for current global imbalances. Our finding of no return

differential between U.S. claims and liabilities means that one stabilizing aspect of the current

international economic system is on shaky footing. In theoretical models, relative to the

presumption of a positive returns differential, a zero returns differential would increase the

likelihood of a disorderly adjustment in the U.S. current account and the dollar. While we find no

evidence of superior market timing ability by U.S. investors abroad, they do quite well relative to

foreign investors in the United States.

        Understanding why foreign investors consistently fail to anticipate shifts in relative

returns on different asset classes is an important question for future research. One possibility is

that foreign investors in the United States chase returns as suggested in Bohn and Tesar (1996).

Superior U.S. investment skill is also consistent with the evidence in Thomas et al. (2006), who

find that U.S. investors’ foreign equity portfolio outperforms capitalization-weighted

benchmarks. It is also possible that U.S. returns are less predictable than foreign returns, which

would be consistent with studies that find negative market timing among U.S. mutual funds (see,

for example, Ferson and Schadt 1996). Concerning current global imbalances, we need to know

whether poor foreign timing is permanent or transitory. Should foreign investors improve their

timing, the U.S. external position would worsen at a faster pace. Our estimate of poor foreign

timing is stable over our 12-year sample, but we have no confidence in its permanency.

Increasing financial integration, cross ownership of financial institutions, as well as improving

information flows suggest that any skill advantage is unlikely to persist.16




16
  For example, Dvorak (2005) finds that in Indonesia, U.S.-based global brokerages improve the
investment performance of both local and foreign investors.


                                                  25
        Another area for future research is foreign investors’ reallocations within each asset class.

Currently, we are assuming that foreigners invest in market indices for both equity and bonds,

that is, we assume that foreign investors’ allocation within each asset class matches that of the

benchmark index for each asset class. This assumption is on solid footing, as security-level

analysis of holdings suggests that at a point in time the bulk of cross-border holdings is in just

those securities that are in benchmark indices. But if over time foreign investors’ poor timing

within asset classes is as poor as is their timing between asset classes, then we underestimate the

true magnitude of the timing and trading effects.




                                                26
Appendix A. Position Estimates

           To estimate cross-border securities positions, one can utilize the method developed in

Thomas et al. (2006) and refined in Bertaut and Tryon (2007).17 This appendix provides a

summary of the methodology and necessary data.

A.1 Data

           Data on cross-border portfolio holdings of securities and monthly transactions are

collected as part of the TIC system, available at http://www.treas.gov/tic. The methodology to

estimate monthly asset and liability positions combines, for each security type and country,

holdings information collected on the periodic benchmark surveys with data on capital flows,

valuation adjustments, asset-backed repayments, and merger-related stock swaps. For claims, the

methodology effectively deals with the financial center bias identified in Warnock and Cleaver

(2003) and discussed further in Griever, Lee, and Warnock (2001) and Bertaut, Griever, and

Tryon (2006). For liabilities, the custodial center bias in the benchmark holdings data means that

any geographic bias is not completely alleviated.



Benchmark surveys. The starting point for the position estimates is the information on cross-

border securities holdings collected as part of the periodic TIC benchmark asset and liability

surveys. Our estimates of the foreign securities holdings of U.S. investors use information

available from the asset surveys conducted in March 1994 and year-end 1997, 2001, 2003, 2004,

and 2005; for U.S. securities holdings of foreign investors we use information available from the

liability surveys conducted as of December 1994, December 1997, March 2000, and June of

2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006. This information includes the unique security-level identifier,

so asset type and country of issuer are accurately identified.




17
     See also Warnock and Warnock (2006).


                                                  27
Valuation adjustments. The position estimates are adjusted for valuation changes using price

indices related to the total return indices closely associated with each security type. For equities,

the MSCI index for each country is used. For foreign bonds, MSCI indexes are used for

developed countries, while EMBI or GBI is appropriate for developing countries. At times a

country does not have an EMBI or GBI, but bond returns might be available on Bloomberg.

Survey data indicate that U.S. investors hold significant amounts of dollar-denominated debt in

several developed countries. For these countries the valuation adjustment is a weighted average

of the MSCI bond index, which is denominated in the local currency, and the MSCI Eurodollar

Credit index, which is denominated in U.S. dollars. The average is weighted by the fraction of

dollar-denominated debt held by U.S. investors in each country. For U.S. bonds, Lehman price

indices are used: for Treasuries, government indices appropriate for the maturity structure; for

corporates, ABS for asset-backed and corporate debt for non-ABS; and for agencies, MBS for

asset-backed and government-sponsored agency for non-MBS. Some liabilities are not in USD,

so the returns are adjusted for exchange rate changes.



Bilateral capital flows. The position estimates incorporate the cross-border securities transactions

occurring each month. The TIC system collects the market value of gross purchases and sales of

securities by asset type and location of the foreign counterparty to the transaction. U.S. domestic

securities types reported include U.S. Treasury debt, U.S. government agency debt, debt issued

by corporations and other institutions, and equity. Foreign securities are classified simply as debt

or equity.



Asset-backed repayments. Many asset-backed securities, including some U.S. agency and

corporate debt, include periodic principal repayments. While the correct market value of these

securities is recorded on the benchmark surveys, the flows associated with principal repayments




                                                  28
are not recorded in the TIC system. However, estimates of these repayments are published on the

TIC website and used to construct the monthly position estimates.



Stock swaps. The TIC data also do not include equities acquired through merger-related stock

swaps. As with asset-backed principal repayments, this information is available on the TIC

website and used to construct the monthly position estimates.



A.2 Methodology

         Using these data sources, the monthly cross-border position estimates are constructed in

two steps: a naïve estimate and then a benchmark-consistent estimate. For cross-border portfolio

holdings of U.S. investors, position estimates are constructed by asset type (equity or debt) and

country. For the U.S. holdings of foreign investors, positions estimates are constructed for each

country and equity or debt type (U.S. Treasuries, U.S. agency bonds, or corporate debt).



Naïve estimates: Naïve estimates of monthly positions are constructed for the period between

adjacent pairs of benchmark surveys. Starting with a benchmark survey position, there is an

adjustment for price and exchange rate changes and the current month’s capital flows. Reported

flows data are adjusted; U.S. corporate and agency debt positions are adjusted for flows from

asset-backed principal repayments, and equity positions are adjusted for net purchases and sales

acquired through stock swaps. Specifically, the resulting naïve position estimates of each security

type i evolve according to the equation:

               nhi ,t = nhi ,t −1 (1 + ri ,t ) + gp i ,t − gs i ,t + abi ,t + ssi ,t   (A1)

where:

nhi,t naive estimate of the net position in security i at the end of month t
ri,t return of security i from period t-1 to t, computed from the appropriate price index
gpi,t gross purchases of security i during month t
gsi,t gross sales of security i during month t



                                                             29
abi,t net flows from principal repayments on security i during month t
ssi,t quantity of security i acquired through stock swaps during month t .


Using (A1), naïve position estimates are constructed through the date of the next benchmark

survey. The naïve estimate as of the next survey date, nhi,T, generally differs from the holdings

reported on the subsequent benchmark survey, hi,T. The next step is to adjust the naïve position

estimates for this difference.



Benchmark-consistent estimates: To construct benchmark-consistent monthly position estimates,

the naïve estimates are adjusted to be consistent with the positions recorded on each benchmark

survey. As previously mentioned, the naïve baseline estimate generally differs from the

benchmark survey holdings by an amount gapi,T, such that:

                 gapi ,T = hi ,T − nhi ,T                                                       (A2)

Our estimates use an adjustment that assumes that this gap is caused by errors in the capital flow

data or returns and that these errors are larger in months with greater trading activity. With this

adjustment, the benchmark-consistent position estimates between each pair of benchmark surveys

evolve according to:



         hi ,t = hi ,t −1 (1 + ri ,t ) + gp i ,t − gsi ,t + abi ,t + ss i ,t + adj i * vai ,t     (A3)



where adji is the constant adjustment factor for security i between each pair of benchmark

surveys, and vai,t is the proportion of inter-survey trading activity that occurred in that month,

such that:

                                                               gpi ,t + gsi ,t
                                                vai ,t =   T
                                                                                    .
                                                                  gpi ,k + gsi ,k
                                                           k =1




                                                                  30
Combining (A1), (A2) and (A3), the survey gap can be expressed:



           gapi ,T = hi ,T − nhi ,T = (hi ,T −1 − nhi ,T −1 )(1 + ri ,T ) + adji * va i ,T .      (A4)



The initial naïve holdings estimates are equal to the benchmark-consistent position estimates (i.e.,

hi ,1 − nhi ,1 = 0 ). Thomas et. al. (2006) use a grid search method to solve for adji. Alternatively

(and equivalently), Bertaut and Tryon (2007) show that the assumption that errors are greater in

months of greater trading volume vai,t allows for an explicit solution of (A4) for adji, such that:

                                                 gapi ,T
                          adji =     T                 T
                                                                           .             (A5)

                                    k =1
                                           vai , k    ∏ (1 + r
                                                     m = k +1
                                                                i ,m   )


In effect, the end-of-period gap can be distributed between inter-survey months using each
month’s share of total transactions, discounted appropriately.                      Incorporating (A5) into (A3)
provides a benchmark-consistent position estimate for each month. In our work we use a
prelimary version of the soon to be publicly released Bertaut and Tryon (2007) data.18




18
   Compared to Thomas et al. (2006), the other innovation of Bertaut and Tryon (2007) is the use of more-
refined returns indices (described above) to estimate the positions. This is important—a big source of
improvements in holdings estimates will come from ever more-precise and more-specific returns data—but
for now this is still a second-order improvement; the resulting estimates are nearly identical to those in
Thomas et. al. (2006), with correlations as high as 0.999. Also, Bertaut and Tryon (2007) show that, for the
purpose of forming monthly positions, estimates including an adjustment for transactions costs as in
Thomas et. al.(2006) is unnecessary because it can be folded into the adjustment. For forming restated
flows data as in Warnock and Warnock (2006), an adjustment for transaction costs is necessary.


                                                                31
Appendix B. Details of Data Underlying IIP and Partially Revised Returns Estimates



This section details the data used in constructing IIP and PR returns.

B.1 IIP Returns

         The annual IIP presentation appears each year in the June or July edition of BEA’s

Survey of Current Business. Since 1983, Table 1 of each annual IIP decomposes the change in

year-end positions into the contributions from net flows and valuation adjustments due to price

and exchange-rate changes as well as from “other changes”.19 Although line numbers vary over

time, claims positions are always reported separately for foreign bonds and stocks. Liabilities

positions are reported separately for foreign official holdings of U.S. Treasuries, other

government (primarily agency debt), and other foreign official assets (which includes equities and

corporate bonds).20 Liabilities to private foreigners are reported separately for U.S. Treasuries,

corporate and other bonds, and equities.

         For international income streams, we use series on U.S. equity and debt income payments

and receipts that BEA provides to the IMF (IMF SDDS fields 2340, 2350, 3340, 3352, and 3354).

These data have been reported since 1986.

B.2 Partially-Revised Returns

         The revised position estimates by product for 1976-2005 are available in Table 2 of the

International Investment Position area of the BEA website (www.bea.gov/international). Revised

flow estimates from 1982-2005 are available from the Balance of Payments area of the same

website. From 1998-2005 the flow estimates by security type are reported in Table 7a, from

1982-1997 in Table 7b. Prior to 1982 flows were reported by BEA to the IMF (SDDS fields

4610, 4620, 4660, 4670).


19
   Prior to 1983 the year-end IIP positions were reported in Table 3 of the IIP, while the contributions of
flows, and price, exchange-rate and other changes were reported in Table 2.
20
   When we report bonds and stocks separately, we assume that half the securities in other foreign official
assets are stocks, the balance bonds. This assumption does not impact total liability returns.


                                                     32
References:
Ammer, J., S. Holland, D. Smith, and F. Warnock, 2006, Look at me now: The role of cross-
      listings in attracting U.S. shareholders. NBER Working Paper 12500.
Bertaut, Carol C., William L. Griever, and Ralph W. Tryon, 2006, Understanding U.S. cross-
      border securities data, Federal Reserve Bulletin, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
      System.
Bertaut, Carol C. and Ralph W. Tryon, 2007, Monthly estimates of U.S. cross-border securities
      positions, working paper.
Bohn, H., and L. Tesar, 1996, U.S. equity investment in foreign markets: Portfolio rebalancing or
      returns chasing? American Economic Review 86(2), 77-81.
Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2007, Foreign participation in local currency bond markets, Review
      of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Cavallo, Michele, and Cedric Tille, 2006, Could capital gains smooth a current account
      rebalancing? Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 237.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René M. Stulz, 2005, Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge?
      The Trading Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea, Review of Financial Studies 2005
      18(3):795-829.
Devereaux, Michael B. and Makoto Saito,2006. A Portfolio Theory of International Capital
      Flows, Institute for International Integration Studies Discussion Paper No. 124.
Dvorak, Tomas, 2005. Do domestic investors have an information advantage? Evidence from
      Indonesia, Journal of Finance 60, 817-839.
Ferson, Wayne, and Kenneth Khang, 2002, Conditional performance measurement using
      portfolio weights: Evidence for pension funds, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 249-
      282.
Ferson, W. and R. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing economic
      conditions, Journal of Finance 51(2), 425-461.
Forbes, Kristin, 2006, Global Imbalances: A Source of Strength or Weakness?, Comments at the
      Cato Institute 24th Annual Monetary Conference.
Forbes, Kristin, 2007, Why do foreigners really invest in the United States? manuscript.
Ghironi, Fabio, Jaewoo Lee, and Alessandro Rebucci, 2006, The valuation channel of external
      adjustment, working paper.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey, 2006a (forthcoming), From world banker to world
      venture capitalist: The U.S. external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege, in R. Clarida




                                               33
     (ed.) G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (Chicago, Univeristy
     of Chicago Press).
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey, 2006b, International financial adjustment, working
     paper.
Griever, W., G. Lee, and F. Warnock, 2001, The U.S. system for measuring cross-border
     investment in securities: A primer with a discussion of recent developments. Federal
     Reserve Bulletin 87(10), 633-650.
Grinblatt, Mark and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without benchmarks: An
     examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47-68.
Gros, Daniel, 2006, Why the U.S. Current Account Deficit is Not Sustainable, International
     Finance 9(2), 241-260.
Hausmann, Ricardo and Federico Sturzenegger, 2006, Global imbalances or bad accounting? The
     missing dark matter in the wealth of nations, CID working paper # 124.
Heath, A., 2007, What explains the U.S. net income balance? BIS Working Papers No 223.
Higgins, Matthew, Thomas Klitgaard and Cedric Tille, 2006, Borrowing without debt?
     Understanding the U.S. international investment position, Federal Reserve Bank of New
     York Staff Report 271.
Hung, J., and A. Mascaro, 2004, Return on cross-border investment: Why does U.S. investment
     abroad do better? CBO Technical Paper Series 2004-17.
Kho, B.-C., R. Stulz, and F. Warnock, 2006, Financial globalization, governance, and the
     evolution of the home bias. NBER Working Paper 12386.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2005a, Financial Globalization and Exchange
     Rates, IMF working paper # 05/3.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2005b, A global perspective on external
     positions, NBER working paper # 11589.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2006, The external wealth of nations mark II:
     Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004, IMF Working
     paper #WP/06/69.
Mattaloni, R., 2000, An examination of the low return of foreign-owned U.S. companies, Survey
     of Current Business (March): 55-73.
Meissner, Christopher M. and Alan M. Taylor, 2006, Losing our marbles in the new centrury?
     The great rebalancing in historical perspective, NBER Working Paper #12580.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, 2006, Financial
     intergration, financial deepness and global imbalances, working paper.



                                              34
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2005, Global Current Account Imbalances and
     Exchange Rate Adjustments, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:2005, 67-123.
Thomas Charles P., Francis E. Warnock and Jon Wongswan, 2006, The performance of
     international equity portfolios, NBER Working Paper 12346.
Tille, Cedric, 2005, Financial integration and the wealth effect of exchange rate
     Fluctuations, FRBNY Staff Report - No. 226.
Tille, Cedric, and Eric van Wincoop, 2007. International capital flows. NBER Working Paper
     12856.
Treasury Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the
     Federal Reserve System, 2006a. Report on Foreign Holdings of U.S. Securities as of June
     30, 2005.
Treasury Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the
     Federal Reserve System, 2006b. Report on U.S. Holdings of Foreign Securities as of
     December 31, 2005.
Warnock, F., and C. Cleaver, 2003, Financial centers and the geography of capital flows.
     International Finance 6(1), 27-59.
Warnock, F. and V. Warnock, 2006, International capital flows and U.S. interest rates. NBER
     Working Paper 12560.
Wermers, Russ, 2006, Performance evaluation with portfolio holdings information, North
     American Journal of Economics and Finance 17, 207-230.




                                            35
                                          Table I
           Country composition of U.S. portfolio of foreign equity and foreign bonds
Country’s weight in U.S. equity (bond) portfolio is the U.S. equity (bond) position in the country divided
by the total U.S. equity (bond) position in all 38 countries included in the sample. Country’s equity return is
the average of simple monthly returns on MSCI gross U.S. dollar total return index expressed in percent.
Developed countries’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns on the
country’s MSCI bond index and the MSCI Eurodollar Credit index where the weights on the Eurodollar
index are the shares of dollar denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds. Emerging markets’
bond returns are simple monthly returns on the EMBI+ U.S. dollar index. The time period is from January
1994 through December 2005 unless otherwise noted in the last column.
                  Country’s Avg.                             Country’s Avg.        Country’s         Country
                                        Country’s Avg.
  Country         Weight in U.S.                             Weight in U.S.        Avg. Bond         Included
                                        Equity Return
                  Equity Portfolio                           Bond Portfolio         Return             from
Australia              0.030                   1.076             0.037               0.567            Jan ‘94
Austria                0.003                   0.939             0.005               0.598            Jan ‘94
Belgiumlux             0.010                   1.078             0.022               0.597            Jan ‘94
Canada                 0.071                   1.225             0.227               0.574            Jan ‘94
Denmark                0.006                   1.239             0.016               0.649            Jan ‘94
Finland                0.023                   2.023             0.009               0.600            Jan ‘94
France                 0.076                   0.964             0.049               0.573            Jan ‘94
Germany                0.056                   0.896             0.092               0.565            Jan ‘94
Greece                 0.002                   1.346             0.003               0.720            Jun ‘97
Ireland                0.013                   0.971             0.010               0.651            Jan ‘94
Italy                  0.029                   1.165             0.036               0.750            Jan ‘94
Japan                  0.158                   0.329             0.072               0.262            Jan ‘94
Netherlands            0.081                   0.969             0.051               0.565            Jan ‘94
Norway                 0.007                   1.226             0.010               0.639            Jan ‘94
Portugal               0.003                   0.923             0.002               0.701            Jan ‘94
Spain                  0.024                   1.343             0.018               0.689            Jan ‘94
Sweden                 0.026                   1.505             0.025               0.698            Jan ‘94
Switzerland            0.055                   1.055             0.002               0.544            Jan ‘94
U. K.                  0.213                   0.813             0.136               0.618            Jan ‘94
Argentina              0.006                   1.112             0.029              -0.347            Jan ‘94
Brazil                 0.018                   1.966             0.027               0.622            Jan ‘94
Chile                  0.003                   0.965             0.010               0.223            Jun ‘99
China                  0.003                  -0.086             0.004               0.152            Apr ‘94
Colombia               0.000                   1.857             0.006               0.209           Mar ‘97
Hungary                0.002                   2.225             0.001              -0.019            Feb ‘99
India                  0.006                   0.994             0.001               0.095           Mar ‘96
Korea                  0.019                   1.458             0.015               0.057            Jan ‘94
Malaysia               0.007                   0.333             0.007               0.148           Nov ‘96
Mexico                 0.026                   1.202             0.050               0.225            Jan ‘94
Morocco                0.000                   0.980             0.001               0.332            Jan ‘95
Peru                   0.001                   1.618             0.002               0.994            Jan ‘94
Philippine             0.003                  -0.127             0.006               0.213            Jan ‘94
Poland                 0.001                   1.063             0.003               0.467            Jan ‘94
Russia                 0.004                   3.406             0.007               1.393            Jan ‘95
South Africa           0.009                   1.267             0.004               0.248            Jun ‘94
Thailand               0.005                   0.331             0.004               0.130            Jun ‘97
Turkey                 0.002                   2.167             0.003               0.355            Jul ‘96
Venezuela              0.001                   1.319             0.010               0.632            Jan ‘94


                                                       36
                                              Table II
                        Characteristics of U.S. foreign claims and liabilities
Equity weight in U.S. claims is the share of foreign equities in U.S. investors’ foreign bond and equities
portfolio. Equity weight in U.S. liabilities is the share of U.S. equities in foreign investors’ U.S. bond and
equities portfolio. Returns on U.S. equities are the monthly simple returns on the U.S. MSCI gross return
equity index. Returns on U.S. bonds are foreign-portfolio-weighted averages of Lehman Brothers Treasury,
Corporate and Agency bond indices. Returns on foreign equities are U.S.-portfolio-weighted averages of
each country’s simple monthly dollar return on its MSCI gross return equity index. Returns on foreign
bonds are U.S.-portfolio-weighted averages of each country’s bond returns. Developed countries’ bond
returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns on the country’s MSCI bond index
and the MSCI Eurodollar Credit index where the weights on the Eurodollar index are the shares of dollar
denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds. Emerging markets’ bond returns are simple monthly
returns on the EMBI+ U.S. dollar index. All data are from January 1994 through December 2005, unless
otherwise noted in Table I.

                                            Mean          Median      St.Dev.        Min          Max
                              Panel A: Equity Weight in U.S. Claims (%)
   All Countries                             70.8          71.1         3.8          62.7         78.3
   Developed Countries                       72.3          72.7         4.5          62.1         81.1
   Emerging Markets                       60.2       60.6          6.7               44.9         75.9
                            Panel B: Equity Weight in U.S. Liabilities (%)
   All Countries                             41.7          39.4         5.9          33.9         54.4
   Developed Countries                       45.8          42.8         6.0          39.0         59.1
   Emerging Markets                        9.0        9.4        2.8                  4.0         14.5
                                Panel C: Equity Returns (% per month)
   Return on U.S. Equities                  0.940         1.318        4.306       -13.905        9.984
   Return on Foreign Equities
      All Countries                         0.766         1.221        4.321       -14.791       10.726
      Developed Countries                   0.797         1.068        4.169       -13.004       10.540
      Emerging Markets                    0.849      2.181      7.433              -32.656       16.408
                                 Panel D: Bond Returns (% per month)
   Return on U.S. Bonds
      By All Countries                      0.478         0.576        0.922        -2.769        2.957
      By Developed Countries                0.484         0.594        0.954        -2.948        3.013
      By Emerging Markets                   0.451         0.481        0.794        -2.123        2.502
   Return on Foreign Bonds
      All Countries                         0.493         0.511        1.620        -4.641        5.528
      Developed Countries                   0.567         0.451        1.605        -3.558        5.149
      Emerging Markets                      0.197         0.716        3.798       -22.812        8.822




                                                     37
                                             Table III
                               Returns on U.S. Claims and Liabilities
All returns are monthly averages from January 1994 to December 2005, expressed in percent. Hypothetical
returns are average portfolio weights times average returns; average weights and returns are from Table II.
Actual returns are computed from the actual monthly portfolio weights. Standard t-statistics are in
parentheses. Bootstrapped z-statistics based on 1000 draws are in brackets.
                                                      Hypothetical      Actual
                          All Countries
                           U.S. Claims                    0.686         0.668
                           U.S. Liabilities               0.671         0.612
                              Difference                  0.015         0.056
                              z- or t-statistic           [0.09]        (0.31)
                          Developed Countries
                           U.S. Claims                    0.733         0.712
                           U.S. Liabilities               0.692         0.627
                              Difference                  0.041         0.084
                              z- or t-statistic           [0.25]        (0.48)
                          Emerging Markets
                           U.S. Claims                    0.590         0.599
                           U.S. Liabilities               0.495         0.489
                              Difference                  0.095         0.110
                              z- or t-statistic           [0.20]        (0.25)




                                                    38
                                        Table IV
  Decomposition of the Return Differential into Composition, Return and Timing Effects
Difference, the difference between the average monthly percentage return on the portfolio of U.S. claims
(foreign equities and U.S. bonds) and the return on U.S. liabilities (U.S. equities and U.S. bonds), equals
Composition Effect plus Return Effect minus Foreign Timing Effect plus U.S. Timing Effect. The
composition, return and timing effects are defined in section 2.1. Standard t-statistics are in parentheses.
Bootstrapped z-statistics based on 1000 draws are in brackets. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

     Difference                                                                 Timing Effects
                      Composition Effect        Return Effect
 (claims-liabilities)                                                     Foreign              U.S.
                                          Panel A: All Countries
       0.056                  0.107               -0.091            -0.058**                     -0.018
       (0.31)                 [1.07]              [-0.60]             (-2.67)                    (-1.48)
                               Panel B: Vis-à-vis Private Foreign Positions
       -0.002                 0.074               -0.112            -0.053**                     -0.018
       (-0.01)                [1.12]              [-0.62]             (-2.67)                    (-1.44)
                                      Panel C: Developed Countries
       0.084                  0.091               -0.050            -0.065**                     -0.022
       (0.48)                 [1.00]              [-0.33]             (-2.97)                    (-1.46)
                                   Panel D: Emerging Market Countries
        0.11                  0.292               -0.197              -0.006                     0.009
       (0.25)                 [1.45]              [-0.60]             (-0.72)                    (0.27)




                                                    39
                                         Table V
                Decomposing the Timing Effect into Trading and Passive Effects
The covariance between lagged weights and returns (the timing effect) is decomposed into (1) the
covariance between lagged deviations of actual from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns (the
trading effect), and (2) the covariance of the lagged deviation of buy-and-hold weights from average
weights and subsequent returns. Lag indicates the horizon of the buy-and-hold weight in months. T-
statistics are in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **,
and *, respectively.

                    Foreign Timing Effect                     U.S. Timing Effect                          # of
 Lag
            Trading Effect       Passive Effect       Trading Effect     Passive Effect                   obs
                                        Panel A: All Countries
   6           -0.011**             -0.049**              0.003               -0.019
                                                                                                           138
                 (-2.03)             (-2.45)              (0.69)              (-1.57)
  12          -0.034***              -0.029               0.000               -0.016
                                                                                                           132
                 (-3.38)             (-1.59)              (0.05)              (-1.34)
  24          -0.061***              -0.001              -0.003               -0.015
                                                                                                           120
                 (-3.48)             (-0.03)             (-0.37)              (-1.04)
                                   Panel B: Developed Countries
   6            -0.011*            -0.057***              0.004               -0.023
                                                                                                           138
                 (-1.93)             (-2.85)              (0.99)              (-1.56)
  12          -0.032***             -0.038**              0.003               -0.022
                                                                                                           132
                 (-3.17)             (-2.15)              (0.61)              (-1.51)
  24          -0.059***              -0.007               0.006              -0.028*
                                                                                                           120
                 (-3.31)             (-0.37)              (1.10)              (-1.71)
                                Panel C: Emerging Market Countries
   6            -0.007*               0.001               0.013               -0.009
                                                                                                           138
                 (-1.91)              (0.12)              (0.93)              (-0.23)
  12          -0.021***               0.013               0.023               -0.019
                                                                                                           132
                 (-3.34)              (1.29)              (1.19)              (-0.44)
  24           -0.029**               0.018              -0.016                0.029
                                                                                                           120
                 (-2.39)              (1.07)             (-0.67)              (0.62)




                                                       40
                                          Table VI
        Trading and Passive Effects of Aggregate Foreign Private Investors in the U.S.
The calculations in this table use aggregate private foreign positions in the U.S. The covariance between
lagged weights and returns (the timing effect) is decomposed into (1) the covariance between lagged
deviations of actual from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns (the trading effect), and (2) the
covariance of the lagged deviation of buy-and-hold weights from average weights and subsequent returns.
Lag indicates the horizon of the buy-and-hold weight in months.. T-statistics are in parentheses. Statistical
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                   Foreign Private Timing Effect                         # of
             Lag            Trading Effect              Passive Effect                   obs
                               -0.013**                    -0.042**
               6                                                                         138
                                (-2.45)                     (-2.26)
                              -0.032***                     -0.024
              12                                                                         132
                                (-3.58)                     (-1.42)
                              -0.058***                      0.003
              24                                                                         120
                                (-3.49)                      (0.11)




                                                    41
                                        Table VII
  Decomposition of the Return Differential into Composition, Return and Timing Effects:
                                      Subsamples
Difference, the difference between the average monthly percentage return on the portfolio of U.S. claims
(foreign equities and U.S. bonds) and the return on U.S. liabilities (U.S. equities and U.S. bonds), equals
Composition Effect plus Return Effect minus Foreign Timing Effect plus U.S. Timing Effect. The
composition, return and timing effects are defined in section 2.1. Standard t-statistics are in parentheses.
Bootstrapped z-statistics based on 1000 draws are in brackets. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

     Difference                                                                 Timing Effects
                      Composition Effect        Return Effect
 (claims-liabilities)                                                     Foreign              U.S.
                                            Panel A: 1994 -1999
       -0.127               0.304***              -0.452**                -0.009                  0.012
       (-0.41)                [3.01]               [-2.14]                (-0.39)                 -0.83
                                            Panel B: 2000 – 2005
       0.239                 -0.115                 0.279                -0.106***               -0.032
       (0.92)                [-0.74]                [1.46]                 (-2.88)               (-1.58)




                                                    42
                                        Table VIII
          Decomposing the Timing Effect into Skill and Passive Strategy: Subsamples
The covariance between lagged weights and returns (the timing effect) is decomposed into (1) the
covariance between lagged deviations of actual from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns (the
trading effect), and (2) the covariance of the lagged deviation of buy-and-hold weights from average
weights and subsequent returns. Lag indicates the horizon of the buy-and-hold weight in months. T-
statistics are in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **,
and *, respectively.

                       Foreign Timing                         U.S. Timing
  Lag                                                                                               Nobs
             Trading Effect     Passive Effect    Trading Effect      Passive Effect
                                       Panel A: 1994 -1999
    6             -0.013             0.004             0.008              0.010
                                                                                                     66
                  (-1.74)           (0.18)             (1.29)             (0.65)
   12          -0.037***             0.029             0.011              0.012
                                                                                                     60
                  (-2.53)           (1.37)             (1.22)             (0.70)
   24           -0.071**            0.080*            0.015*              0.011
                                                                                                     48
                  (-2.25)           (2.10)             (1.64)             (0.56)
                                       Panel B: 2000-2005
    6             -0.011          -0.095***            -0.003            -0.029
                                                                                                     66
                  (-1.19)           (-3.06)           (-0.55)            (-1.36)
   12            -0.030*          -0.054***            -0.009            -0.014
                                                                                                     60
                  (-1.94)           (-2.77)           (-1.00)            (-0.62)
   24            -0.047*            -0.013             -0.007            -0.008
                                                                                                     48
                  (-2.06)           (-0.57)           (-0.51)            (-0.21)




                                                       43
                                             Table IX
                        Average annual total returns on claims and liabilities
Total returns consist of returns on capital gains and income streams. For capital gains, returns in the IIP
column use capital gains implied using the valuation adjustments due to price and exchange-rate changes
reported on each annual IIP. The totals are divided by the IIP position at the start of the year, plus half of
the year’s IIP flows. Returns in the PR column use capital gains implied from the revised position and flow
series available on the BEA website. For each year, the implied capital gain is the change in the revised
position from the start of the year to the end of the year, less the revised flows that occur during the year
and the valuation adjustments from other changes reported on the IIP. These implied capital gains are
divided by the revised position at the start of the year, plus half of the year’s revised flows. For both IIP and
PR total returns we add the relevant income as reported to the IMF by BEA to the capital gains as estimated
above. The CDW total return is the annual compound return computed using our position estimates and
returns. The differential return between claims and liabilities is computed by weighting the products using
the average year-end IIP positions for the IIP differential, and the average year-end revised position
estimate for the partially-revised differential. The CDW differential weights claims and liabilities by the
average weight for each year. All data are expressed as percentages.

                                                         IIP              PR             CDW
                                             Panel A: 1986-2005
               Equity         Claims                    13.1             21.7
                              Liabilities               13.8             14.7
               Bond           Claims                     9.3             13.7
                              Liabilities                8.7              7.9


                              Differential             1.4                8.0
                                             Panel B: 1994-2005
               Equity         Claims                     9.2             12.2             9.8
                              Liabilities               12.0             14.0             12.5
               Bond           Claims                     5.6              9.7             6.1
                              Liabilities                5.7              3.0             5.9


                              Differential               0.8              4.9             0.4




                                                      44
                                                                             Figure 1
                                           U.S. equity and bond returns and the equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities
The 12-month total return on U.S. equities is the return on the MSCI U.S. total return index. The 12-month
total return on U.S. bonds is the foreign-portfolio-weighted average of Lehman Brothers Treasury,
Corporate and Agency bond returns. Actual equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities is the share of U.S.
equities in foreign investors’ U.S. bond and equities portfolio. The 24-month buy-and-hold weight is the
share of equity that would have resulted from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted 24 months ago.
                                          60
       12-month total return (% per year)




                                                                             U.S.
                                 40




                                                                            equities
                        20




                                                                                                                        U.S. bonds
     -20     0                                .55
     equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities




                                                                        24-month
                                                                       buy-and-hold
                                   .5




                                                                          weight
                        .45




                                                            actual
                .4




                                                            weight
      .35




                                                    1994   1995      1996    1997      1998   1999        2000   2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006




                                                                                                     45
                                                                  Figure 2
                                 Foreign equity and bond returns and the equity weight in U.S. portfolio claims
The 12-month total return on foreign equities is the U.S.-portfolio-weighted average of each country’s
dollar return on its MSCI gross return equity index. The 12-month total returns on foreign bonds are U.S.-
portfolio-weighted averages of each country’s bond returns. Developed countries’ bond returns are the
weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns on the country’s MSCI bond index and the MSCI
Eurodollar Credit index where the weights on the Eurodollar index are the shares of dollar denominated
bonds in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds. Emerging markets’ bond returns are simple monthly returns on the
EMBI+ U.S. dollar index. foreign bonds is the U.S.-portfolio-weighted average of the MSCI (for developed
countries) or EMBI+ (for emerging markets) bond return indices. Actual equity weight in U.S. claims is the
share of foreign equities in U.S. investors’ foreign bond and equities portfolio. The 24-month buy-and-hold
weights is the share of equity that would have resulted from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted 24 months
ago.
                                          60
       12-month total return (% per year)
                                 40




                                                                        foreign
                                                                        equities
                                                                                                                   foreign
                        20




                                                                                                                    bonds
     -20      0
      equity weight in U.S. portfolio assets
                          .7         .75




                                                       actual
                                                       weight
              .65




                                                                   24-month
                                                                  buy-and-hold
                                                                     weight
     .6




                                               1994   1995      1996    1997       1998   1999    2000   2001   2002     2003   2004   2005   2006




                                                                                                 46
                                                            Figure 3
                                   Total returns on U.S. holdings of foreign bonds and equity
In the IIP method capital gains are implied using the valuation adjustments due to price and exchange-rate
changes reported on each annual IIP. We add the relevant income as reported to the IMF by BEA to the
capital gains as estimated above. These total returns are divided by the IIP position at the start of the year,
plus half of the year’s IIP flows. In the partially-revised method, capital gains implied from the revised
position and flow series available on the BEA website. For each year, the implied capital gain is the change
in the revised position from the start of the year to the end of the year, less the revised flows that occur
during the year and the valuation adjustments from other changes reported on the IIP. The same income
series is added. These total returns are divided by the revised position at the start of the year, plus half of
the year’s revised flows. The CDW total return is the annual compound return computed using our position
estimates and returns.


                                                               U.S. Holdings of Foreign Bonds
                 30%




                                                partially-revised
                 20%




                                                                                                              CDW
  total return
                 10%




                                 IIP
                 0%
                 -10%




                                                              U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equity
                 70%




                            partially-revised
                 50%
                 30%
  total return
                 10%




                           IIP
                                                                            CDW
                 -10%




                    1986         1988      1990           1992      1994      1996      1998    2000   2002     2004   2006
                 -30%




                                                                            47
                                                                     Figure 4
                                            Total returns on foreign holdings of U.S. bonds and equity
In the IIP method capital gains are implied using the valuation adjustments due to price and exchange-rate
changes reported on each annual IIP. We add the relevant income as reported to the IMF by BEA to the
capital gains as estimated above. These total returns are divided by the IIP position at the start of the year,
plus half of the year’s IIP flows. In the partially-revised method, capital gains implied from the revised
position and flow series available on the BEA website. For each year, the implied capital gain is the change
in the revised position from the start of the year to the end of the year, less the revised flows that occur
during the year and the valuation adjustments from other changes reported on the IIP. The same income
series is added. These total returns are divided by the revised position at the start of the year, plus half of
the year’s revised flows. The CDW total return is the annual compound return computed using our position
estimates and returns.



                                                                     Foreign Holdings of U.S. Bonds
                     30%




                                   partially-revised
                     20%
  total return




                                                                                                              CDW
                     10%




                                    IIP
                     0%
                     -10%




                                                                     Foreign Holdings of U.S. Equity
                      70%




                                                                                                                     partially-revised
                                                 IIP
      total return
                      20%




                            1986          1988         1990   1992        1994       1996      1998    2000         2002        2004     2006

                                                                                                       CDW
                      -30%




                                                                                  48
