                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PERSISTENT APPRECIATIONS AND OVERSHOOTING:
                              A NORMATIVE ANALYSIS

                                         Ricardo J. Caballero
                                          Guido Lorenzoni

                                        Working Paper 13077
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13077


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




Respectively, caball@mit.edu and glorenzo@mit.edu. We are grateful to Arvind Krishnamurthy, Pablo
Kurlat, Enrique Mendoza, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel and seminar participants at Berkeley, Harvard, IMF,
MIT, IFM-NBER, WEL-MIT, the World Bank, San Francisco Fed, LACEA-Central Bank of Chile,
and Paris School of Economics for their comments, and to Nicolas Arregui, Jose Tessada, Lucia Tian,
and, especially, Pablo Kurlat for excellent research assistance. Caballero thanks the NSF for financial
support. First draft: September 2006. This paper circulated previously as "Persistent Appreciations,
Overshooting, and Optimal Exchange Rate Interventions." The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Persistent Appreciations and Overshooting: A Normative Analysis
Ricardo J. Caballero and Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 13077
May 2007
JEL No. E0,E2,F0,F4,H2

                                                 ABSTRACT

Most economies experience episodes of persistent real exchange rate appreciations, when the question
arises whether there is a need for intervention to protect the export sector. In this paper we present
a model of irreversible destruction where exchange rate intervention may be justified if the export
sector is financially constrained. However the criterion for intervention is not whether there are bankruptcies
or not, but whether these can cause a large exchange rate overshooting once the factors behind the
appreciation subside. The optimal policy includes ex-ante and ex-post interventions. Ex-ante (i.e.,
during the appreciation phase) interventions have limited effects if the financial resources in the export
sector are relatively abundant. In this case the bulk of the intervention takes place ex-post, and is concentrated
in the first period of the depreciation phase. In contrast, if the financial constraint in the export sector
is tight, the policy is shifted toward ex-ante intervention and it is optimal to lean against the appreciation.
On the methodological front, we develop a framework to study optimal dynamic interventions in economies
with financially constrained agents.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
MIT
Room E52-252a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
1        Introduction
Most economies experience episodes of large real exchange rate appreciations. There are many
factors with the potential to fuel these appreciations. For example, they can stem from domestic
policies aimed at taming a stubborn inflationary episode, from the absorption of large capital inflows
caused by domestic and external factors, from exchange rate interventions in trading partners,
from domestic consumption booms, from a sharp rise in terms of trade in commodity producing
economies or, in its most extreme form, from the discovery of large natural resources wealth (the
so-called Dutch disease).
        While there are idiosyncrasies in each of these instances, the common policy element is that,
when the appreciation is persistent enough, the question arises whether there is a need for inter-
vention to protect the export sector (often referred as “competitiveness” policies). This widespread
concern goes beyond the purely distributional aspects associated to real appreciations. The fear is
that somehow the medium and long run health of the economy is compromised by these episodes.
If this concern is justified, should policymakers intervene and stabilize the exchange rate before it
is too late? More generally, what does the optimal policy look like?
        In this paper we propose a framework to address this common policy element. We present a
dynamic model of entry and exit in the export sector where entrepreneurs face financial constraints
and exchange rate stabilization may be justified. In our model, when financial constraints damage
the export sector’s ability to recover, the economy experiences a large exchange rate overshooting
once the factors behind the appreciation subside and nontradable demand contracts. Although
not always present, overshooting episodes are pervasive, especially when financial frictions are
widespread. Figure 1 illustrates three recent examples: The Finnish, Mexican and Asian episodes
of the early 1990s, mid 1990s, and late 1990s, respectively. In each of them, the pattern is one
where the appreciation is followed by a depreciation of the real exchange rate that significantly
overshoots its new medium term level.1
        In our model, the overshooting results from the export sector’s inability to absorb the resources
(labor) freed from the contraction in nontradable demand. This inability leads to an amplified fall
in real wages, which is costly to consumer-workers.2 There is scope for policy intervention because
    1
        The figure shows real exchange rate indices normalized to 100 at date 0. The latter corresponds to June 1997 for
the Asian Crisis, November 1994 for Mexico, and October 1991 for Finland. The Asian crisis real exchange rate is a
simple average of the indices for Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. Data Source: IFS (Eﬀective
Real Exchange Rate) for Finland, Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines. Real Exchange Rate from Hausmann et al
(2006) for Mexico, Korea and Thailand.
    2
        In practice, the drop in the relative price of nontradables and real wages often takes the form of a sharp nominal
depreciation which is not matched by a rise in the nominal price of nontradables and wages. See, e.g., Goldfajn and
Valdes (1999) and Burnstein et al (2005).




                                                              1
      110




      100




      90
RER




      80




      70




      60




      50
            t-24 t-21 t-18 t-15 t-12 t-9   t-6   t-3   t+1 t+4 t+7 t+10 t+13 t+16 t+19 t+22 t+25 t+28 t+31 t+34 t+37 t+40 t+43 t+46
                                                                       Months

                                Asian Crisis (avg)                            Mexico                          Finland




              Figure 1: 1990’s Overshooting in Finland, Mexico and Asia




                                                                     2
there is a connection between the severity of the overshooting and the extent of the contraction in the
export sector during the preceding appreciation phase. If consumers were to reduce their demand
for nontradables in this phase, then there would be less destruction ex-ante and a faster recovery
ex-post. However, rational atomistic consumers ignore the eﬀect of their individual decisions during
the appreciation phase on the extent of the overshooting during the depreciation phase. It is this
pecuniary externality that justifies and informs policy intervention in our framework.
   Our analysis has two parts, a positive one and a normative one. The former consists of a
dynamic model of factor reallocation in the presence of financial constraints. Our model economy
starts by transiting into an appreciation phase, which it exits into a depreciation phase with a
Poisson probability. There are several regions of interest, indexed by the financial resources of
the export sector at the onset of the appreciation. When financial resources are plentiful, the
economy reaches the first best as real exchange rates (and real wages) are pinned down by purely
technological free entry and exit conditions, and hence are orthogonal to consumers’ actions. At
lower levels of financial resources, financial constraints may become binding during the appreciation
phase, the depreciation phase, or both. If they are only binding during the appreciation phase,
then the economy experiences bankruptcies but the recovery of the export sector is swift once
the depreciation phase starts and the exchange rate is again pinned down by purely technological
factors. In contrast, if the financial constraint is binding during the depreciation phase, the recovery
of the export sector is slow and the initial real depreciation overshoots the long run depreciation.
   On the normative side, we consider the optimal intervention of a benevolent planner that seeks
to maximize consumers’ welfare, subject to not worsening entrepreneur’ welfare. The planner faces
the same financial constraint present in the private economy. This limits the planner’s instruments,
as it rules out direct transfers across groups. Instead, we focus on market-mediated transfers
implemented through interventions that influence the real exchange rate. That is, interventions that
aﬀect consumers’ choices and, thus, the entrepreneurial sector through their eﬀect on equilibrium
prices. From this perspective, we show that consumers gain from stabilizing the appreciation
whenever this leads to a faster recovery of the export sector once the appreciation subsides. The
gain derives from the increase in real wages associated to a faster reconstruction of the export
sector.
   Importantly, even when overshooting is expected, intertemporal consumption allocation con-
siderations put limits on how much intervention is desirable during the appreciation phase. This
connects our analysis to a central consideration for policymakers when dealing with an asset appre-
ciation, be it the currency, real estate or any other asset with potential macroeconomic implications:
If there is a need for intervention, how much should be done as prevention (ex-ante) and how much
should be left for after “the crash” (ex-post)? In our framework, the answer to this question de-
pends primarily on the extent of the financial constraint in the export sector. On one end, when


                                                   3
the financial constraint is severe, ex-ante intervention is most eﬀective. On the other end, when
the constraint is loose, ex-post intervention is most desirable and eﬀective. In general, the optimal
policy has elements of both, ex-ante and ex-post intervention.
   The approach to optimal policy proposed in this paper resembles that of the literature on
dynamic optimal taxation. In this dimension, the main innovation of the paper is to apply this
methodology to an environment where a subset of agents are financially constrained, imposing
restrictions on the ability of policy to reallocate resources between these agents and the rest of
the economy. This approach and the solution method developed should prove useful outside our
particular application.
   Our paper belongs to an extensive literature on consumption and investment booms in open
economies, as well as on the role of financial factors in generating ineﬃciencies in these booms (see,
e.g. Gourinchas et al 2001, Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2001, Aghion et al 2004). There is a
growing theoretical and empirical literature on the eﬀect of financial frictions on the behavior of
exporters (e.g. Chaney, 2005, Manova, 2006), and on the slow response of exports after devaluations
(Fitzgerald and Manova, 2007). Our paper emphasizes the general equilibrium implications of this
behavior (overshooting). The idea that excessive exchange rate fluctuations can hurt financially
constrained export firms is also present in Aghion et al (2006), who explore its eﬀects on investment
in innovation and growth.
   The pecuniary externality that justifies intervention in our framework is related to those identi-
fied in Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1996), Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001, 2004), Loren-
zoni (2006) and Farhi et al (2006). Aside from its specific context, the main novelty of our paper is
to embed this externality in a tractable model of optimal policy, which allows us to fully characterize
the economy’s dynamics and to analyze the trade-oﬀ between ex ante and ex post interventions.
   In terms of its mechanism, the paper also belongs to the literature on Dutch disease. There,
intervention is justified by the presence of dynamic technological externalities through learning-by-
doing (see, e.g. van Wijnbergen 1984, Corden 1984, and Krugman 1987). In contrast, our paper
highlights financial frictions and the pecuniary externalities that stem from these. The policy
implications of these two approaches are diﬀerent: While learning-by-doing oﬀers a justification for
industrial policies as a development strategy, the financial frictions we highlight have intertemporal
reallocation implications of the sort that matter for business cycle policies.

   Section 2 presents a stylized model of creative destruction over appreciation and depreciation
cycles. Section 3 characterizes optimal exchange rate intervention in such setup. Section 4 discusses
diﬀerent extensions and their impact on optimal policy. Section 5 concludes and is followed by an
extensive appendix, containing all the proofs.




                                                  4
2        A Simple Model of a Destructive Appreciation and Overshoot-
         ing
In this section we present a model of an economy experiencing a temporary, but persistent, real
appreciation. The export sector faces large sunk costs of investment, which limit the extent of its
desired contraction, in order to keep capital operational and preserve the option to produce once
the appreciation is over. However, this waiting strategy generates losses that require financing.
If this financing is limited, the export sector experiences a larger contraction than desired. From
the point of view of the economy as a whole, these excessive contractions may compromise the
recovery of the export sector once the appreciation is over, leading to a prolonged period of deep
real depreciation and low wages.

2.1        The Environment
There is a unit mass of each of two groups of agents within the domestic economy: consumers and
entrepreneurs (exporters). There are two consumption goods: a tradable and a nontradable good.
The consumer supplies inelastically one unit of labor each period, which can be used as an input for
the production of tradables or nontradables. In both cases one unit of labor is needed to produce
one unit of output. In addition, the production of tradables requires one unit of capital, or an
“export unit,” i.e., the technology of the tradable sector is Leontief in labor and capital. Creating
an export unit requires investing f units of tradable goods. After an export unit has been set up,
it needs to be maintained in operation, otherwise it is irreversibly shut down.3 Entrepreneurs are
the only agents that have access to the technology to run and maintain export units. At date 0
they begin with n−1 open export units. The markets for tradables, nontradables and labor are
competitive.
        Entrepreneurs are risk neutral and only consume tradable goods. Their preferences are given
by the utility function
                                                            ∞
                                                            X
                                                        E         β t cT,e
                                                                       t ,
                                                            t=0

where       cT,e
             t     ≥ 0 denotes entrepreneurs’ consumption of tradable goods. Consumers have log-
separable instantaneous utility on the consumption of tradables and nontradables, cTt and cN
                                                                                           t .
Their preferences are given by the utility function
                                                ∞
                                                X           ¡ ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢¢
                                            E         β t θt u cTt + u cN
                                                                        t  ,
                                                t=0
    3
        These assumptions capture the fact that export oriented firms often have more specific (sunk) capital and op-
erations than firms producing primarily for domestic markets. Of course there are important exceptions to this
generalization. Later in the paper we discuss the eﬀect of introducing adjustment costs in the nontradables sector.


                                                                  5
where u (c) = log c and θt is a taste shock.
   The taste shock is the only source of uncertainty and is determined by the state st , which can
take two values in S = {A, D} and follows a Markov process with transition probability π (st+1 |st ).
The economy begins with a transition into the “appreciation” state st = A, with θt = θA . Each
period, with probability π (D|A) = δ, the economy switches to the “depreciation” state st = D,
with θt = θD . Once the latter transition takes place, D is an absorbing state, i.e., π (A|D) = 0.
We assume that:
                                               θA > θ D = 1.

In the appreciation state the taste shock drives up consumers’ demand for both tradable and
nontradables, putting upward pressure on the real exchange rate (since the supply of tradables
is fully elastic while that of tradables is not — see below). In reality, increases in consumption
demand are usually due to positive wealth shocks, e.g., an improvement in the terms of trade for a
commodity producing country, or to external shocks which generate positive capital inflows. The
taste shock is a convenient device to introduce a shift in consumption demand with minimal added
complications. We will return to this issue later in the paper, once we have developed our main
points.
   Both groups have access to the international capital market, where they can trade a full set of
state contingent securities. On each date t, agents trade one-period state-contingent securities that
pay one unit of tradable good in period t + 1 if state st+1 is realized. The entrepreneurs holdings
                              ¡ ¢
of securities are denoted by a st where st = hs0, s1 , ..., st i denotes the history of the economy up
to date t. Note that our simple Markov chain yields histories that are limited to a block of periods
in A, followed by D’s (there are no alternations).
   All entrepreneurs begin with an initial financial positions equal to a0 . For consumers, we set
it to zero without loss of generality. Consumers face no financial constraints, while entrepreneurs
face the financial constraint
                                                 ¡ ¢
                                                a st ≥ 0.                                             (1)

That is, entrepreneurs cannot commit to make any positive repayment at future dates. This is
a simple form of financial markets imperfection, which captures the idea that entrepreneurs have
limited access to external finance. This is the only friction we introduce in the model.
   The rest of the world is captured by a representative consumer with a large endowment of
                                                      P     t T,∗
tradable goods and linear preferences represented by E ∞
                                                       t=0 β ct . Therefore asset pricing is risk
neutral: at date t, the price of a security paying one unit of tradable in state st+1 is βπ (st+1 |st ).




                                                    6
2.2     Decisions and Equilibrium
     ¡ ¢
Let p st denote the price of the nontradable good in terms of units of tradable (the numeraire), or
the real exchange rate (defined à la IMF). Given the linear technology in the nontradable sector, the
equilibrium wage in terms of tradables must be equal to this price. Consumers and entrepreneurs
take the real exchange rate as given. Equilibrium prices and quantities are functions of the whole
history st . To save on notation, whenever confusion is not possible we only use the time subindex
                              ¡ ¢
t, e.g., pt is shorthand for p st .

2.2.1    Consumers

Since wages are equal to pt , markets are complete, and intertemporal prices are pinned down by
the world capital market, consumers face the single intertemporal budget constraint
                     X           ¡ ¢¡ ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢¢ X t ¡ t ¢ ¡ t ¢
                            β t π st cT st + p st cN st ≤ βπ s p s ,                             (2)
                     t,st                                       t,st
       ¡ ¢
where π st denotes the ex ante probability of history st . Thus, consumers’ demand for tradables
and nontradables take the simple form:

                                             cTt   = κθt ,
                                                     κθt
                                            cN
                                             t     =      ,
                                                      pt
where the constant κ is                 P          ¡ t¢ ¡ t¢
                                               t
                                       1 t,st β π s p s
                                     κ= P                         .                              (3)
                                       2 t,st β t π (st ) θ (st )
   There are two important features from the consumption block. First, during A periods the
demand curve for nontradables shifts upward. This is the source of the appreciation. Second, κ
is endogenous and is increasing in the value of the exchange rate at any future date. The latter
feature will be essential in the analysis of optimal policy.

2.2.2    Exporters and Equilibrium

Even though consumption volatility is not the result of any friction, it may create problems for
both firms and consumers, if the export sector has limited financial resources. Before discussing
this issue in detail, we need to understand exporters’ decisions.
   It is useful to separate the entrepreneurs’ decisions regarding consumption and investment from
the problem of creating new units. To this end, we assume that there is a competitive adjustment
sector that creates and destroys export units and makes zero profits. Let qt denote the price of an



                                                    7
export unit. Equilibrium in the adjustment sector requires that

                                               qt   ∈ [0, f ] ,                                               (4)
                                               qt = f if nt > nt−1 ,                                          (5)
                                               qt = 0 if nt < nt−1 .                                          (6)

That is, if units are being created their price must be equal to the creation cost f , while if they are
being destroyed their price must be zero.
    The entrepreneur’s flow of funds constraint can then written as
    ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢¡ ¡ ¢       ¡     ¢¢     X                 ¡­          ®¢ ¡    ¡ ¢¢ ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢
cT,e st + q st n st − n st−1 + β             π(st+1 |st )a st , st+1 , ≤ 1 − p st n st + a st ,
                                                st+1 ∈S
                                                                                                              (7)
Each period, the entrepreneur uses his current profits, (1 − pt ) nt , and his financial wealth, at , to
finance consumption, investment in new export units, and investment in state contingent securities.
Notice that our timing assumption is that production units created at date t are immediately
productive, i.e., they immediately generate unitary profits of 1 − pt .
                                                 ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢              ¡ ¢
   The entrepreneur chooses sequences for cT,e st , n st , and a st to maximize his expected
utility, subject to the flow of funds constraint (7) and the financial constraint (1) for each history st .
       ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡         ¢ ¢
Let V a st , n st−1 ; st denote the expected utility of an entrepreneur in state st who is holding
 ¡ ¢                         ¡       ¢
a st units of cash and n st−1 production units. Then we can write the Bellman equation:
  ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡          ¢ ¢                                 ¡ ¢      X                    ¡ ¡­        ®¢ ¡ ¢ ­            ®¢
V a st , n st−1 ; st =                max          cT,e st +β         π (st+1 |st ) V a st , st+1 , n st ; st , st+1
                               cT ,e (st ),n(st ),            st+1 ∈S
                            {a(st ,st+1 )}st+1 ∈S

s.t.
                                                ¡ ¢            ¡ ¢
                                      (7), cT,e st ≥ 0, n st ≥ 0,
                                         ¡­        ®¢
                                       a st , st+1    ≥ 0 for st+1 ∈ S.

It is straightforward to setup the entrepreneur’s problem in sequential form and argue directly that
                                  ¡ ¢        ¡     ¢
the value function is linear in a st and n st−1 , given that both the objective function and the
                                      ¡ ¢         ¡   ¢
constraints are linear.4 Moreover, a st and n st−1 only appear in the flow of funds constraint
                   ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢ ¡      ¢
(7), in the form a st + q st n st−1 . It follows that the value function takes the form
                     ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡       ¢ ¢      ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢ ¡ ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢ ¡     ¢¢
                    V a st , n st−1 ; st = ψ st + φ st · a st + q st n st−1 ,                                 (8)
       ¡ ¢
where φ st represents the marginal return on entrepreneurs’ wealth.
   4
                                                 © ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ª
       For the moment, we suppose that the prices p st , q st are such that the entrepreneur’s expected utility is
finite. We will check later, case by case, that this condition is satisfied in equilibrium.


                                                            8
      In each period, the entrepreneur chooses how many production units to operate, how much to
consume, and how many contingent claims to purchase. The first order conditions (and comple-
mentary slackness conditions) with respect to these choice variables are5
  ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡      ¡ ¢¢¢ ¡ t ¢ X                ¡­        ®¢ ¡­       ®¢     ¡ ¢
 − q st − 1 − p st  φ s +β   π (st+1 |st ) φ st , st+1 q st , st+1 ≤ 0, n st ≥ 0, (9)
                                          st+1 ∈S


                                   ¡ ¢                             ¡ ¢
                            1 − φ st ≤ 0,                     cT,e st ≥ 0,                                    (10)
                    ¡ ¢    ¡­         ®¢                        ¡­       ®¢
                  −φ st + φ st , st+1    ≤ 0,                 a st , st+1 ≥ 0, for all st+1 ∈ S.              (11)

The first condition states that the opportunity cost of the resources used in keeping the marginal
unit in operation must be equal to the expected value of that unit tomorrow. The cost of keeping
a unit in operation corresponds to the price of acquiring that unit, qt , minus the current profits,
1 − pt . Remember that an open unit must remain active, so if pt > 1 the firm is making current
losses and these losses add to the cost of keeping the unit open. The second condition states that
if the entrepreneur’s consumption is positive, the marginal value of wealth must be equal to one.
Otherwise, it can exceed one. The third condition says that the marginal value of wealth must be
non-increasing between two consecutive histories. Holdings of financial assets can only be positive
between two histories where the marginal value of wealth is constant.
      Finally, we are in a position to define a competitive equilibrium.
                                                                          © ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ª
Definition 1 A competitive equilibrium is given by a sequence of prices p st , q st and quanti-
    © ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ª                                                 © ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢ª
ties cT st , cN st , cT,e st , n st , a st such that: (i) the consumer’s decisions cT st , cN st
                                                 ©     ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ª
are optimal; (ii) the entrepreneur’s decisions cT,e st , n st , a st       are optimal; (iii) the se-
        © ¡ t ¢ª      © ¡ t ¢ª
quences n s       and q s      satisfy (4)-(6); (iv) the labor market clears for each st ,
                                                ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
                                               n st + cN st = 1.

2.3      The Appreciation and Depreciation Phases
Recall that our economy starts with a stock of export units, n−1 , and has just entered state A.
The situation that concerns us is one in which there is destruction of units during the appreciation,
and creation during the depreciation. Moreover, we also wish to focus on a scenario where the
option to wait is suﬃciently positive that it is not optimal to destroy all export units during the
appreciation.
  5
                                                                                                      ¡ ¢
      The envelope theorem implies that the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint is equal to φ st .




                                                          9
2.3.1        An Eﬃcient Benchmark

The export sector has financial resources a0 to finance the losses during the appreciation phase. As
a benchmark, let us first study a case where a0 is suﬃciently large that financial constraints are
never binding. In this benchmark, there is no need to keep track of the history st except for the
current state st , since, as we will see, equilibrium prices and quantities are constant both in the
A and in the D phase.6 Therefore, with a slight abuse of notation, we will simply index variables
using A or D.
                                                   ¡ ¢
         In the absence of financial constraints, φ st is constant and equal to one in both phases. We
show later that in equilibrium there is destruction when the economy enters phase A, and creation
when it switches to D. Correspondingly, qA = 0 and qD = f . It follows that the first order
conditions for n in the A and D phases, respectively, reduce to:

                                                  (1 − pA ) + δβf        = 0,
                                             −f + (1 − pD ) + βf         = 0,

which fully determine the real exchange rate in each phase:

                                                pfAb = 1 + δβf,                                            (12)
                                                pfDb = 1 − (1 − β)f.                                       (13)

We assume that
                                                       (1 − β) f < 1,                                     (A1)

ensuring that creation is profitable in the D phase and that pfDb > 0.
         Given these prices we can find the consumption of tradables and nontradables in each state:

                                                                          κf b θA
                                   cT,f
                                    A
                                        b
                                          = κf b θA ,         cN,f
                                                               A
                                                                   b
                                                                     =              ,
                                                                         1 + δβf
                                                                               κf b
                                   cT,f
                                    D
                                        b
                                          = κf b ,            cN,f
                                                               D
                                                                   b
                                                                       =              ,
                                                                         1 − (1 − β)f

where κf b is equal to:
                                                           1 − β(1 − δ)
                                              κf b =                      .
                                                       2 ((1 − β)θA + δβ)
Market clearing yields the number of units open in each state:

                                              κf b θA                            κf b
                                nfAb = 1 −            ,       nfDb = 1 −                 .                 (14)
                                             1 + δβf                        1 − (1 − β)f
     6
         By “A phase” we mean all the histories of the form st = hA, ..., Ai. By “D phase” all those of the form
 t
s = hA, ..., A, D, ..., Di.



                                                            10
                        1.5


                    p    1


                        0.5

                               0       2       4        6        8         10     12       14


                        0.6

                        0.5

                    n   0.4

                        0.3

                        0.2
                               0       2       4        6        8         10     12       14
                                                            t



                                              Figure 2: First Best

It is now easy to see that the following two assumptions guarantee that there is destruction when
the economy enters state A at date 0, and that there is positive creation when the economy shifts
from A to D:
                                                             κf b θA
                                            n−1 > 1 −                ,                                        (A2)
                                                            1 + δβf
                                                          1 + δβf
                                             θA >                      .                                      (A3)
                                                        1 − (1 − β)f
       Notice that, as long as the preference shock θA is suﬃciently large, the equilibrium prices are
fully determined on the supply side of the model, by (12) and (13). In particular, the price during
the appreciation is such that the current losses, pA − 1, equal the opportunity cost of creating a
unit when the switch to the D phase occurs, δβf in expected value.
       Figure 2 summarizes the benchmark economy, plotting the equilibrium dynamics of the real
exchange rate and of the number of export units in the event the appreciation lasts five periods.7
During the A phase, it is optimal for the economy to accommodate the increased demand for
   7
       The parameters to generate this figure are β = 0.97, δ = 0.2, f = 3, θA = 2.1. We choose n−1 = nfDb and
p−1 = pfDb as conventional initial conditions. These initial conditions arise if the economy makes an unexpected
transition from the D state to the A state in period 0. We plot an appreciation lasting 5 periods, since that is its
expected duration when δ = 0.2.


                                                        11
nontradables by contracting the export sector temporarily. However, since shutting down units
wastes creation costs, it is also optimal for the export sector to keep nfAb > 0 units in operation,
with each of them incurring flow losses of pfAb − 1.
   The following Proposition summarizes the case of high entrepreneurial wealth. The cutoﬀ âf b
is derived explicitly in the Appendix.

Proposition 1 (First best) There is a cutoﬀ âf b such that if the entrepreneurs’ initial wealth sat-
isfies a0 ≥ âf b , then the equilibrium real exchange rate and the number of firms are constant within
the A and D phases, and are given by (12), (13), and (14). The marginal value of entrepreneurial
         ¡ ¢
wealth, φ st , is constant and equal to 1.

2.3.2   The Constrained Economy and Overshooting

Suppose now that a0 is not large enough to implement the first best path (i.e., a0 < âf b ). There
are two margins through which this deficit can materialize. First, the export sector may not have
enough resources to finance the flow of losses (pfAb − 1)nfAb during the appreciation.
                                                                              ³        Second,
                                                                                          ´    even
                                                                                 fb    fb
if it can, it may not have enough resources left to finance the investment f nD − nA when the
appreciation phase ends.
   Relative to the benchmark case, we now need to keep track not only of the current exogenous
state st , but also of the number of periods since the D phase started. The reason for this is that
in this case there is a gradual transition in the D phase where the export sector rebuilds and
is constrained by limited financial resources. At the same time, due to complete markets the A
phase is still stationary, with constant prices and quantities. The next proposition summarizes the
properties of equilibrium prices and quantities that will be useful in the following characterization.
                                  ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢            ¡ ¢
Proposition 2 If a0 < âf b then p st , n st , and a st are constant in the A phase. In the D
        ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢
phase, p st , n st , and a st only depend on the number of periods that the economy has spent
                 ¡ ¢
in D. The price q st is equal to zero in the A phase and to f in the D phase.
                                        ¡ ¢                          ¡ ¢
   This proposition allows us to write p st = pA in the A phase and p st = pD,j in the D phase,
where j is the number of periods the economy has spent in D. Analogous notation is used for
 ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢          ¡ ¢
n st , a st and φ st .
   Let us focus on the A phase. The relevant optimality conditions for the entrepreneur are

                                     (1 − pA ) φA + δβf φD,0 = 0,                                 (15)

and
                                       φA ≥ φD,0        aD,0 ≥ 0.                                 (16)


                                                   12
The stationarity of entrepreneurial wealth in A implies that aA = a0 and the budget constraint (7)
can be written as8
                                    (1 − (1 − δ)β)a0 = (pA − 1)nA + βδaD,0 .                            (17)

The flow generated by the initial resources a0 can be used to finance the operational losses of the
export units that remain open during the appreciation, and to transfer financial resources to the
recovery phase in D. Going back to the first order conditions, the complementary inequalities in
(16) distinguish the case where the financial resources are used for both purposes (φA = φD,0 and
aD,0 > 0) and the case where they are only used to cover operational losses in A (φA > φD,0 and
aD,0 = 0).
      The first order condition for nA (equation (15)) yields an expression for the real exchange rate
in the A region:
                                                                φD,0
                                              pA = 1 + βδf           ≤ pfAb ,
                                                                 φA
where the inequality comes from (16). As in the benchmark case, the appreciation is such that
production units incur losses, as pA > 1. When aD,0 > 0 the real exchange rate is equal to that in the
first-best, and entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent between holding state contingent securities or holding
production units. This indiﬀerence means that these two assets have the same expected return,
which pins down the equilibrium exchange rate as in the unconstrained economy. Instead, when
aD,0 = 0, the expected return on export units is larger than that on state contingent securities. This
wedge is possible because only entrepreneurs can purchase export units, and they are financially
constrained. This depresses the exchange rate to a pA smaller than pfAb . Far from being good news,
this smaller appreciation reflects the fact that financially constrained firms are unable to keep open
as many production units as they would like and hence are forced to reduce production and labor
demand.
      For given parameters, we can show that the initial level of a0 determines which of the two cases
discussed in the previous paragraph arises in equilibrium.

Proposition 3 (Constrained appreciation phase) There is a cutoﬀ âA < âf b such that if a0 > âA
the real exchange rate in the A phase is pfAb and aD,0 > 0, while if a0 < âA the real exchange rate
in the A phase is pA < pfAb and aD,0 = 0.

      Let us focus now on the case where a0 < âA . To determine nA , note that from the consumption
side and labor market equilibrium, we have
                                                           κθA
                                                    nA +       = 1.
                                                           pA
  8
      As long as a0 < âf b we have φA > 1 and so cA is set to zero (see the proof of Proposition 2).



                                                           13
Solving for pA and substituting into the budget constraint (17) pins down the number of production
units that are kept active during the appreciation:
                                                   µ           ¶
                                                       κθA
                               a0 (1 − (1 − δ)β) =          − 1 nA
                                                     1 − nA
For a given κ, lower financial resources a0 reduce the number of production units that are kept
open during the appreciation (the right-hand side is increasing in nA ) and lead to more destruction.
Notice, however, that in general equilibrium κ falls as well (see the argument below in 2.3.3) so, in
extreme cases, an economy with lower a0 may end up with a higher level of nA .

   Let us now turn to the D region. Starting backwards, once the recovery phase is completed,
entrepreneurs consume and φD,j is equal to 1. Thus, from the first order conditions, we have that
in the stationary phase of D:
                                       pD,j = 1 − (1 − β)f = pfDb
Eventually, the real exchange rate converges to the benchmark level.
   From the equilibrium condition in the labor market and the fact that consumers’ demand is
lower in the constrained than in the benchmark case (as we show below), it follows that the long
run size of the export sector, after the recovery is completed, is:
                                                 κ           κf b
                                    n̄D = 1 −          >1−          = nfDb .
                                                pfDb         pfDb
Since in the constrained economy not only entrepreneurs but also consumers are poorer than in
the benchmark economy, demand is depressed and hence the export sector eventually expands to
absorb the labor freed by the smaller nontradable sector. However, unlike in the benchmark case,
this stationary state is not reached instantly since financial constraints also hamper the recovery
phase. The flow of funds constraint and the first order conditions for the transition are:

                                  f (nD,j − nD,j−1 ) = (1 − pD,j )nD,j ,                              (18)

                                       φD,j > 1, φD,j > φD,j+1 ,                                      (19)
                                 (−f + 1 − pD,j ) φD,j + βf φD,j+1 = 0,                               (20)
for j = 0, ..., J, where J is the last period of the transition phase in D and where nD,−1 is equivalent
notation for nA .
   Equation (18) states that during the recovery phase, firms use all their profits to rebuild the
sector. The inequalities in (19) reflect the fact that the financial constraint is tightest early on in the
recovery and gradually declines, and hence there is no reason to accumulate “cash” or to consume.
Reorganizing (20), we obtain an expression for the real exchange rate during the transition:
                                   µ              ¶
                                           φD,j+1
                       pD,j = 1 − f 1 − β           < 1 − f (1 − β) = pfDb .
                                            φD,j

                                                       14
That is, during the recovery phase the depreciation is deeper when the economy is constrained. We
refer to this deeper depreciation as the overshooting implication of financial constraints.
        The presence of overshooting means that wages are not only lower than in the benchmark case
during the appreciation phase, but also during the transition phase of D. This observation closes
our argument, as it explains why consumption levels are lower in the constrained case, given that
κ reflects the consumers’ lifetime income (see (3)), and that, history by history, the wages pt are
smaller than in the first best.

        Figure 3 depicts the constrained economy, assuming for simplicity that n−1 = n̄D and p−1 =
pfDb .9    The exchange rate appreciates in the A phase, as in the benchmark economy (represented
with dashes in each panel), and in the depreciation phase it experiences a large and protracted over-
shooting. The export sector contracts during the A phase and, unlike in the benchmark economy,
the recovery is only gradual during the D phase. The bottom panel shows the path of the marginal
value of a unit of wealth, which is highest in the A region, drops sharply upon the transition into
D, and gradually declines within the D region.
        Let us conclude with a summary proposition:

Proposition 4 (Constrained depreciation phase and overshooting) There is a cutoﬀ âD < âf b such
that if a0 ≥ âD the real exchange rate throughout the D phase is pfDb , while if a0 < âD the real
exchange rate in the D phase overshoots its long run value early on in the transition. That is,
pD,j < pfDb for j = 0, 1, ..., J and pD,j = pfDb for j = J + 1, ... for some J ≥ 0. (Note that the cutoﬀ
âD may be greater or smaller than âA , depending on the model’s parameters).

2.3.3        General Equilibrium Feedback

Our discussion above highlights the export firms’ problem for a given consumption demand. How-
ever, firms’ actions aﬀect households’ income through labor demand. The tighter is the financial
constraint on firms, the lower is labor demand and income. This feedback is captured by the re-
lation between a0 and κ. Figure 4 plots this relation and shows that κ is increasing in a0 until it
reaches its maximum for a0 ≥ âf b (see Lemma 2 in the Appendix).
        Note that this general equilibrium feedback generates some counterintuitive results. For exam-
ple, the model has a sort of sclerosis as a0 declines. Even though export firms are more financially
constrained when financial resources are low, in the long run they absorb a larger share of n. To
see this, recall that n̄D = 1 − κ/pfDb which rises as κ drops. This simply says that an economy with
poorer consumers allocates a larger share of its resources to satisfy foreign than domestic demand.
        Up to now, we have developed a model of equilibrium destruction and overshooting. The next
section turns to the other main concern in this paper. In particular, it shows that when a0 < âf b ,
    9
        The parameters are the same as those used for Figure 2, plus a0 = 0.5.


                                                           15
                                       Constrained Economy
    1.5
                                       First Best

p    1


    0.5


          0   2     4      6       8     10       12         14


    0.6

    0.5

n 0.4

    0.3

    0.2
          0   2     4      6       8     10       12         14


     3


     2
φ
     1


     0
          0   2     4      6       8     10       12         14
                               t




              Figure 3: Constrained Economy




                           16
                       0.45


                       0.44


                       0.43


                       0.42
                   κ
                       0.41


                        0.4


                       0.39


                       0.38
                              0          0.5               1           ^ fb   1.5
                                                  a0                   a0




                       Figure 4: Consumers’ Income and Financial Constraint


the social planner may be able to raise κ by inducing consumers to choose a diﬀerent path for cN
                                                                                               t
(and hence nt ).


3    Optimal Ex-ante and Ex-post Intervention
In the previous section we showed that when the export sector has limited financial resources,
the depreciation phase following a persistent appreciation may come with a protracted exchange
rate overshooting (a sharp real wage decline) while the export sector rebuilds. Either explicitly or
implicitly, in practice it is this overshooting phase that primarily concerns policymakers and leads
to a debate on whether intervention should take place during the appreciation phase. In particular,
the concern is whether by overly stressing the export sector during the appreciation, the economy
may be exposing itself to a costly recovery phase once the factors behind the appreciation subside.
In this section we study this policy problem and conclude that if an overshooting is expected, there
is indeed scope for policy intervention. The reason for such intervention is that the competitive
equilibrium is not constrained eﬃcient, as consumers ignore the eﬀect of their individual decisions
on the severity and duration of the overshooting during the depreciation phase.
    The optimal policy includes ex-ante and ex-post interventions. There are instances when the
focus of intervention is ex-ante, and the bulk of it consists in stabilizing the exchange rate during
the appreciation phase. There are others where the scope for appreciation stabilization is limited


                                                 17
and the policy intervention is concentrated in the first period of the depreciation phase (ex-post
intervention).

3.1       A Fiscal Intervention
We consider a government that uses a set of fiscal instruments to aﬀect the time profile of consumers’
                                                                               © ¡ ¢          ¡ ¢ª
demand. In particular, the government can impose a sequence of linear taxes τ T st , τ N st on
consumers’ spending on tradables and non-tradables (a negative tax rate corresponds to a subsidy).
Any tax revenue is returned to the consumers as a lump-sum transfer at date 0, T0 , so consumers
face the budget constraint
  X        ¡ ¢ ¡¡       ¡ ¢¢ ¡ ¢ ¡         ¡ ¢¢ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢¢ X t ¡ t ¢ ¡ t ¢
      β t π st   1 + τ T st cT st + 1 + τ N st p st cN st ≤ β π s p s + T0 .                                     (21)
   t,st                                                                            t,st
                        © ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢ª
For a given tax sequence τ T st , τ N st we can define a competitive equilibrium as we did in
the economy with no taxes (see Definition 1), replacing the consumers’ budget constraint with (21)
and adding the condition that the lump-sum transfer T0 satisfies the government budget balance
condition
                          X            ¡ ¢¡ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢          ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢¢
                                  β t π st τ T st cT st + τ N st p st cN st = T0 .
                           t,st
                                             © ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢ª
We study a benevolent government that chooses τ T st , τ N st so as to maximize the utility
of the representative consumer subject to the constraint of not making entrepreneurs worse oﬀ:
                                  XX           ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
                                          β t π st cT,e st ≥ U,                              (22)
                                             t   st

where U is the entrepreneurs’ expected utility in the competitive equilibrium.
       Notice that in this context the choice of linear taxes is not restrictive. The crucial constraint on
the set of feasible policies is the condition that no direct transfers can be made between consumers
and entrepreneurs. We choose to focus on this exercise for two reasons. First, if the government
could implement direct transfers, it would be simple in this economy to undo the eﬀects of the
financial constraint (1). The government would transfer resources to the entrepreneurs in the
A phase and in the early stage of the D phase, and then transfer resources back to consumers
later in the D phase, hence replicating the equilibrium of a frictionless economy. In practice,
targeted transfers of this kind take place but are limited by a host of informational and institutional
impediments which we do not model here. In this sense, the set of policies that we consider respect
the spirit of the financial constraint (1).10 Second, the policy described is more flexible than the
specific forms of macroeconomic interventions that are contemplated in the policy debate. Namely,
  10
       A “fundamental” view of constraint (1) is that it is impossible to extract payments from entrepreneurs, whether
in the form of financial payments or in the form of taxes.


                                                           18
most proposed interventions are geared towards increasing domestic savings, thus reducing the
pressure on the real exchange rate by reducing the demand of both tradables and nontradables. As
we will see, our policy-maker will choose not to distort tradable consumption decisions and will
only intervene on non-tradable consumption.
       In summary, we consider a general form of intervention but stay within the boundaries of a
constrained eﬃciency exercise by ruling out direct transfers between consumers and entrepreneurs.
This choice allows us to identify a basic pecuniary externality, which should play a relevant role in
all practical policy proposals that attempt to curb persistent appreciations.

3.2       Policy Perturbation and Pecuniary Externality
Before characterizing the optimal policy, let us identify the pecuniary externality by studying the
impact of small policy interventions around the competitive equilibrium. Consider a planner that
maximizes the consumer’s utility
                                                     ⎛                                     ⎞
                                                                         ∞
                                                                         X
                          ¡ ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢¢                  1   ¡ ¢                   ¡     ¢
                        θA u cTA + u cN
                                      A  + δβ ⎝              u cTD +           β j u cN
                                                                                      D,j
                                                                                           ⎠,
                                                         1−β
                                                                         j=0


where we have normalized expected utility by the factor (1 − β (1 − δ)).11 As usual in optimal
taxation problems, it is easier to characterize the problem directly in terms of equilibrium quantities,
rather than in terms of the underlying tax rates. Thus, we let the planner choose directly the
consumption paths for tradables and nontradables. Substituting the government budget balance,
the consumers’ budget constraint is (also multiplying through by (1 − β (1 − δ))):
                               ⎛                           ⎞
                                            X∞                         X∞
                T       N      ⎝   1 T            j     N ⎠
               cA + pA cA + δβ         c +      β pD,j cD,j ≤ pA + δβ      β j pD,j .                         (23)
                                 1−β D
                                                     j=0                             j=0

       Relative to the problem of an individual consumer, the planner’s problem is diﬀerent in that it
takes into account the eﬀect of consumers’ decisions on pA and {pD,j }. Consumers’ decisions aﬀect
the equilibrium prices by changing the demand for nontradables and, thus, equilibrium wages. The
entrepreneurs’ optimality condition and market clearing in the labor market give an equilibrium
relation between the quantities chosen by the planner and the prices pA and {pD,j }. Namely,
the planner chooses the cN      N                                     N                 N
                         A and cD,j , market clearing gives nA = 1 − cA and nD,j = 1 − cD,j ,
  11
       See the Appendix for a detailed setup of the planner problem. In the Appendix we show that the second best
allocation shares the following features with the competitive equilibrium: the consumption of tradables is constant
and equal to cTA and cTD , respectively, in the A phase and in the D phase, and the consumption of non-tradables is
constant and equal to cN
                       A in the A phase and only depends on j in the D phase. Therefore, also in the perturbation
argument we focus directly on allocations with these features.



                                                         19
and entrepreneur’s optimality gives the associated equilibrium prices. Finally, the constraint that
entrepreneurs cannot be made worse oﬀ is (also multiplying through by (1 − β (1 − δ))):
                                             ∞
                                             X
                                  cT,e
                                   A + δβ          β j cT,e
                                                        D,j ≥ (1 − β (1 − δ)) U.                             (24)
                                             j=0

       Let us study the eﬀect of stabilizing the appreciation phase, starting from the competitive
equilibrium studied in Section 2. Specifically, consider the eﬀect of reducing cN
                                                                                A or, equivalently,
increasing nA , while keeping the nD,j ’s unchanged. This change will aﬀect equilibrium prices and
thus the net present value of the consumer’s income. Suppose the planner adjusts cTA so that the
consumer’s budget constraint (23) is satisfied.
       The following expression captures the marginal eﬀect of a change in nA on the consumer’s
utility:

                                       −θA u0 (1 − nA ) + pA λ +
                                               µ                         ¶
                                                  ∂pA          ∂pD,0
                                           +λ         nA + βδ        nD,0 ,                                  (25)
                                                 ∂nA            ∂nA
            ¡ ¢
where λ = u0 cTA is the Lagrange multiplier on the consumer’s budget constraint in the competitive
equilibrium. The first row of (25) captures the direct eﬀect of the policy. It is equivalent to the
consumer’s first order condition in the competitive economy and so it is equal to zero at the
equilibrium allocation. The second row captures the net income eﬀect for the consumer.12 Since
we keep all the nD,j ’s constant, this policy only aﬀects the prices pA and pD,0 , and the entrepreneurs’
consumption at date tD,0 .
       We consider two cases. First, suppose the competitive equilibrium displays pA < pfAb and
pD,0 < pfDb (overshooting).
       Let us start with the eﬀect of a unit increase in nA on pA . If the planner wants entrepreneurs
to carry an extra unit of nA , then pA must drop for the firm to be able to finance the extra losses
of that unit. Recall that the firm’s budget constraint in phase A is

                                      (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 = (pA − 1) nA ,

from which we obtain:
                                               ∂pA    pA − 1
                                                   =−        .                                               (26)
                                               ∂nA      nA
       We now turn to the eﬀects of nA on pD,0 . Since pD,0 < pfDb , i.e., there is equilibrium overshooting,
the entrepreneur budget constraint at date tD,0 is

                                      f (nD,0 − nA ) = (1 − pD,0 ) nD,0 .
  12
                                              ¡ ¢                                           ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢
    Note that the consumer’s labor income is p st while its expenditure on nontradables is p st (1 − n st ). Thus,
               ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢
net income is p st n st .


                                                         20
The entrepreneur’s financial constraint is binding and he uses all his current profits to invest in new
units. In this case, a unit increase in nA aﬀects pD,0 since it reduces by f the investment required
to rebuild to nD,0 . Wages must rise to compensate for this fall in investment expenditure, so as to
keep the financial constraint exactly binding at nD,0 . Thus,

                                            ∂pD,0    f
                                                  =      .                                        (27)
                                            ∂nA     nD,0

Finally, notice that in the competitive equilibrium cT,e  T,e
                                                     A = cD,0 = 0, and the planner is keeping the
sequence nD,0 , nD,1 , ... unchanged. Therefore, the consumption of the entrepreneurs is unaﬀected
by a marginal change in nA and (24) is satisfied.
   Consumers are hurt by the decline in their wage (real exchange rate) during the A phase,
but gain from the rise in their wage in the first period of the D phase. Which eﬀect dominates?
Replacing (26) and (27) in the second row of (25) we have:
                            ∂pA         ∂pD,0
                                nA + δβ       nD,0 = 1 − pA + βδf > 0.
                            ∂nA         ∂nA

The inequality follows from pA < pfAb = 1 + βδf .       That is, in the planner’s problem there is an
extra term capturing the marginal benefit of increasing nA on the expected present value of wages.
The planner has an incentive to reduce nontradables consumption, so as to reduce the appreciation
(i.e. reduce pA ) and allow firms to keep a larger number of units open, which in turn raises wages
at tD,0 . Because φA > φD,0 , reducing wages in A generates an excess return in export firms that
is transferred back to workers in the form of higher wages at tD,0 . Summing up, when pA < pfAb
and pD,0 < pfDb the expression in (25), computed at the competitive equilibrium, is positive, so
consumers are strictly better oﬀ, while entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent to the change.

   Consider now a second case, where pA < pfAb and pD,0 = pfDb (no overshooting). In this case,
entrepreneurs are unconstrained at tD,0 and hence cT,e
                                                   D,0 > 0. This implies both

                                              ∂pD,0
                                                    =0
                                              ∂nA
and
                                              ∂cT,e
                                                D,0
                                                      = f.
                                              ∂nA
   Replacing these terms in (25) we obtain that the eﬀect on the consumer’s expected utility is
negative
                              −θA u0 (1 − nA ) + λpA + λ (1 − pA ) < 0,

given that λ < λpA . The consumer would benefit from increasing cN
                                                                 A and reducing nA . The reason
is that it makes no sense for consumers to cut their wage today if this action does not raise wages

                                                  21
in the future, which it will not when there is no overshooting to remedy and pD,0 is pinned down by
the technological free entry condition. Instead, the planner, representing the consumers, would like
to exercise its “monopoly” power during the appreciation phase and raise wages by increasing their
demand for nontradables. However this increase would reduce the consumption of entrepreneurs,
given that ∂cT,e
             D,0 /∂nA = f , and violate their participation constraint (24). In fact, when there
is no expected overshooting, it is optimal not to intervene. In this case, there exists a Lagrange
multiplier µ such that the planner’s first order condition for nA takes the form

                             −θA u0 (1 − nA ) + λpA + λ (1 − pA ) + µβf = 0,

where nA and pA are at their competitive equilibrium values. The following proposition shows that
no other feasible intervention can lead to a Pareto improvement.

Proposition 5 (Constrained eﬃciency) If a0 > âD (no overshooting), then the competitive equi-
librium with no taxes solves the planner’s problem. It is optimal not to stabilize the appreciation,
even if firms are financially constrained and the export sector contracts more than in the first best
(i.e., even if a0 < âA ).

    Put diﬀerently, if there is no overshooting, there is no intertemporal pecuniary externality
for consumers, so they cannot trade-oﬀ a wage reduction today for a wage increase in the recovery
phase. The flip side of this argument is that it is the presence of overshooting that makes individual
consumers underestimate the social cost of their increased demand during the appreciation phase.

    It is useful to show that the argument just made for nA can also be made for nD,j during the
depreciation phase. That is, suppose the planner can only intervene in period j of the D phase
and change nD,j by a small amount. Suppose the entrepreneurial sector has not fully recovered in
periods tD,j and tD,j+1 , i.e., we are in the middle of the overshooting phase with pD,j < pD,j+1 < pfDb .
Then, it is optimal to reduce cN
                               D,j further and exacerbate the depreciation in period j. By doing
so, the consumers accelerate the recovery of the export sector and of real wages. The first order
eﬀects of a small intervention are similar to those derived for nA . In particular, since future n’s are
taken as given, a change in nD,j only aﬀects the current and next period’s prices. As before, the
financial constraint is still binding after a small intervention, so cT,e      T,e
                                                                      D,j+1 = cD,j = 0. Therefore, the
marginal eﬀect of an increase in nD,j is given by
                                               µ                              ¶
                      0                          ∂pD,j          ∂pD,j+1
                   −u (1 − nD,j ) + pD,j λ + λ         nD,j + β         nD,j+1 .                     (28)
                                                 ∂nD,j           ∂nD,j

Proceeding as we did above for (26) and (26), we get
                     ∂pD,j          ∂pD,j+1
                           nD,j + β         nD,j+1 = − (f − (1 − pD,j )) + βf > 0,
                     ∂nD,j           ∂nD,j

                                                   22
The inequality follows from the fact that pD,j < pfDb = 1 − (1 − β) f . This, together with the
consumer’s first order condition, implies that a reduction in pD,j leads to a marginal welfare gain.
       In the competitive equilibrium, the firms’ financial constraint depresses labor demand, making
non-tradables cheaper and inducing consumers to demand more of them. The social planner oﬀsets
the consumers’ reaction to the overshooting and reduces cN
                                                         D,j (it taxes nontradable consumption).
Note that as a result of this reduction in cN
                                            D,j the overshooting is exacerbated, but this is precisely
what increases profits and allows financially constrained firms to accelerate investment. The trade-
oﬀ is between a deeper overshooting and lower wages today in exchange for a faster recovery in
wages. Because φD,j > φD,j+1 , reducing wages at tD,j generates an excess return in export firms
that is transferred back to workers in the form of higher wages at tD,j+1 .
       Once we allow the planner to set policy optimally in both phases, A and D, some of the incentive
to exacerbate the overshooting in the D phase goes away, because the planner can already achieve
higher levels of investment by protecting entrepreneurial wealth in the appreciation phase. This
interaction between preventive intervention and intervention in the depreciation phase is a central
aspect of the optimal policy discussion that follows.

3.3       Optimal Policy
We learned from the perturbation argument above that if there is an expected overshooting, then
the competitive equilibrium is constrained ineﬃcient and there is scope for policy. We now turn to
characterizing the economy’s dynamics under the optimal policy.
       Figure 5 plots the real exchange rate and the number of export units in the competitive equilib-
rium and in the “second best” allocation, in a baseline scenario.13 The first feature of the optimal
policy is that the planner attenuates the exchange rate appreciation. This attenuation has the
eﬀect of keeping more export units open in the appreciation phase, and makes the recovery of the
export sector faster during the depreciation phase. In turn, the faster recovery increases the de-
mand of non-tradables by entrepreneurs and reduces the extent and duration of the real exchange
rate overshooting during the depreciation phase. The final eﬀect of the intervention is a form of
real exchange rate stabilization.
       Two robust features of the optimal price path are that pA is lower than the competitive equilib-
rium level, and that the increase in the expected present value of the pD,j ’s more than oﬀsets the
decline in pA . The price path depicted in Figure 5 also displays a reduction in the initial overshoot-
ing at tD,0 . However, this feature is less robust and depends on the economy’s initial conditions.
We will discuss other possible cases below.
  13
       The parameters are the same as those used for Figures 2 and 3. As in those figures, we plot the realized path
when the appreciation lasts five periods. The optimal paths are computed using the characterization result in the
Appendix (proof of Proposition 6).


                                                          23
    1.4
                                                  Optimal Policy
    1.2                                           No Policy

p    1

    0.8

    0.6

    0.4
          0   2      4       6       8       10        12          14



    0.6


    0.5

n
    0.4


    0.3


    0.2
          0   2      4       6       8       10        12          14
                                 t




                  Figure 5: Optimal Policy




                            24
   Let us explore the optimal paths in more detail, by analyzing first the intervention in the A
phase (i.e., the choice of nA ) and then the intervention in the D phase (i.e., the nD,j ’s).
   There is an optimal degree of exchange rate stabilization during the A phase. Given that
pA < pfAb and pD,0 < pfDb we can substitute (26) and (27) in (25), simplify, and obtain the planner’s
first order condition:
                                  θA u0 (1 − nA ) = λpfAb = λ (1 + βδf ) .                        (29)

The social planner allocates nA as if prices were at first best. In the competitive equilibrium,
consumers increase their demand for nontradables in response to the taste shock, which leads to
an appreciation of the real exchange rate. However, due to the firms’ financial constraint, the
appreciation is smaller than it would be in the first best. This price gap implies that consumers
further increase their consumption of nontradables, at the expense of export units. The planner
taxes consumption of nontradables enough to oﬀset this additional eﬀect, and in so doing lowers
the real exchange rate and allows firms to maintain a larger number of production units open.
   Turning to the D phase, notice that along the recovery path the entrepreneurs’ financial con-
straint is exactly binding:
                                  f (nD,j − nD,j−1 ) = (1 − pD,j ) nD,j ,

until the point where nD,j reaches its “nondistorted” level, i.e., the value n̄D that satisfies

                                           u0 (1 − n̄D ) = λpfDb .

Entrepreneurs use all their profits for investment and delay their consumption until they have
reached n̄D (this happens at t = 11 in Figure 5). Notice also that some amount of overshooting
is still present in the second best, i.e., pD,0 < pfDb . Recall the argument made above on the social
benefits of the overshooting, which makes the recovery faster and increases future values of pD,j .
At the optimum, the argument is subtler since pD,1 is equal to pfDb . If the planner were to increase
pD,0 he would have to reduce nD,0 . But then, since the entrepreneurs are exactly constrained at
tD,1 , this would imply a wage loss at that date, i.e., pD,1 < pfDb . For consumers, the net eﬀect of a
reduction in nD,0 would be, rearranging (28),

                              u0 (1 − nD,0 ) − λpD,0 − λ (1 − f − pD,0 + βf ) =
                              u0 (1 − nD,0 ) − λpfDb < 0.                                         (30)

On the other hand, if the planner tried to increase nD,0 , the current wage would drop but there
would be no gain in terms of future wages, given that the entrepreneurs’ would be unconstrained
and would employ the extra funds for consumption. In this case, there would be a benefit in terms
of relaxing the entrepreneur’s participation constraint and the marginal eﬀect would be

                         −u0 (1 − nD,0 ) + λpD,0 + λ (1 − f − pD,0 ) + µβf ≤ 0,

                                                     25
where µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the entrepreneur’s participation constraint.14 The two
conditions just derived show that the planner is at a ‘kink,’ where neither decreasing nor increasing
nD,0 leads to an improvement. Notice that the reasoning behind these conditions applies only
because pD,j = pfDb for all the periods following tD,0 . This is key since it shows that under the
optimal policy, the overshooting can only happen in the first period of the recovery. If we had
pD,j < pfDb in some other period, then in the previous period it would be optimal to increase
nD,j−1 and accelerate the adjustment toward n̄D . Essentially, the optimal path requires that if the
planner wants to allow for some depreciation in the D phase to speed up the recovery, it completely
frontloads this depreciation.
       In terms of consumption of non-tradables, a distortion is also concentrated in the early periods
of the D phase (although, not only in the first period). In these periods the following inequality
holds,
                                              u0 (1 − nD,j ) < λpfDb ,

which can be derived in same way as (30). An individual consumer would like to decrease his
consumption of nontradables (i.e., increase nD,j ). However, since the entrepreneurs financial con-
straint is exactly binding, increasing nD,j in any of these periods would reduce the current wages,
pD,j , below their first best level. This has no advantages in terms of future wages, given that
pD,j+1 is already at its maximum level pfDb . The potential cost in terms of current wages (plus the
shadow cost of the entrepreneurs’ participation constraint) exactly compensates for the distortion
in nontradable consumption.
       Let us summarize the main results of this section with a proposition. The superscript ce is used
to denote prices and quantities in the competitive equilibrium with no intervention, while starred
variables denote the second best.

Proposition 6 (Optimal policy) If a0 < âD , then the competitive equilibrium is constrained inef-
                                                fb
ficient. Suppose φce                       ce                                     ∗    ce
                  A ≤ (f − 1) / (βf ) and nA ≤ nA . Then, the optimal policy has pA ≤ pA and
p∗D,0 ≤ pfDb . Depending on parameters, the optimal policy involves some depreciation of the exchange
rate in A (relative to the competitive equilibrium), p∗A < pce
                                                            A , some overshooting in the first period
of the D phase, p∗D,0 < pfDb , or some combination of both. The overshooting phase lasts at most one
period. If p∗D,0 < pfDb the optimal tax on non-tradables in A is such that p∗A (1 + τ ∗A ) = pfAb .

       Let us briefly discuss the role of the assumptions on φce     ce
                                                              A and nA . The first assumption is
  14
       It is possible to complete this argument by deriving the optimal value of µ at the optimum. The proof of
Proposition 6 in the Appendix reaches the same conclusion using a diﬀerent approach. The reason for the diﬀerent
approach is that, given the nonconcavity of the problem, the perturbation arguments derived here only yield necessary
conditions for an optimum, while the argument in the Appendix can be used to show suﬃciency as well.




                                                         26
made for simplicity, as it ensures that the planner can disregard the constraint pD,j ≥ 0.15 The
second assumption is made to rule out the extreme case discussed in 2.3.2, where the wealth eﬀect
on consumers is so large that the constrained equilibrium displays less destruction than the first
best.16
       For completeness, note that in terms of quantities the optimal policy reduces the fluctuations in
n and the long run size of the export sector. The former result is just the counterpart of exchange
rate stabilization. The reason for the latter result is that consumers are richer in the “second best,”
and hence use a larger share of their labor resources to produce nontradables. To illustrate this
wealth eﬀect, Figure 6 compares the value of κ in the competitive equilibrium and the “second best,”
for diﬀerent levels of financial resources in the export sector, a0 . As expected, for high values of a0
the competitive equilibrium is close to the second best (and they coincide for a0 ≥ âD ), which in
turn is closer to the first best. However, for low levels of a0 , the pecuniary externality is significant
and the second best income is substantially higher than that of the competitive equilibrium. Of
course, if the government had eﬀective direct transfer instruments, then by increasing a0 it would
be able not only to narrow the wedge between the competitive equilibrium and the second best,
but also that between the latter and the first best.

3.4       Ex-ante versus Ex-post Intervention
In our discussion of the optimal policy, we touched on a pervasive policy concern in the presence
of an appreciation in the value of the currency or of any other asset with potential macroeconomic
consequences (e.g., real estate or stocks). Should the intervention take place ex-ante (i.e., during
the appreciation phase) or ex-post (i.e., after the “crash” or depreciation takes place)?
       In the example we used in Figure 5, the optimal policy involved a combination of both. The
planner stabilized the exchange during the appreciation, but preserved some of the overshooting
in the first period of the depreciation phase as well, both helping export companies accelerate the
recovery.
       In contrast, panel (a) of Figure 7 represents a case in which the intervention to oﬀset the
pecuniary externality is entirely done ex-ante.17 An attenuation of the appreciation in A, by
increasing nA , increases pD,0 . Therefore, it is possible that, before reaching the level of nA that
satisfies (29), pD,0 reaches its first best level pfDb . At this point there is no gain for the consumer
  15
       The characterization can be easily extended to the case φce
                                                                A > (f − 1) / (βf ). In that case, the optimal path may
involve a real exchange rate equal to zero for the first period(s) of the D phase. The overshooting is still frontloaded
to the early periods of D, but may last more than one period.
  16
     See the discussion on page 14. The condition holds in all the examples presented (and in all reasonable parame-
trizations we have looked at).
   17
      Parameters are the same as those used for Figures 5 except for a0 = 0.15 in panel (a), a0 = 0.5 in panel (b),
a0 = 1.1 in panel (c).


                                                           27
                             0.45
                                                                           Optimal Policy
                                                                           No Policy
                             0.44


                             0.43


                             0.42
                         κ
                             0.41


                              0.4


                             0.39


                             0.38
                                    0              0.5               1            ^ fb      1.5
                                                                                  a0
                                                            a0




                                Figure 6: Consumers’ Income and Optimal Policy


from cutting wages further during the A phase, since this has no eﬀect on wages in the D phase.
Remember that (29) was derived under the assumption that pA < pfAb and pD,0 < pfDb . Once nA
reaches the level such that pD,0 = pfDb , the Lagrangian for the planner problem has a kink similar
to the one discussed above in the D phase. A marginal reduction in nA now gives

                                    θA u0 (1 − nA ) − λpA − λ (1 − pA + βδf ) =
                                                         u0 (1 − nD,0 ) − λpfDb < 0,               (31)

while an increase in nA gives18

                                    −θA u0 (1 − nA ) + λpA + λ (1 − pA ) + µδβf ≤ 0.

In this case, the optimal values of nA and pA are determined by the entrepreneurs’ participation
constraint.
      The polar opposite happens in panel (c) of Figure 7 (panel (b) simply reproduces Figure 5),
where the policy is all ex-post. This takes place if the competitive equilibrium price during the
appreciation is equal to pfAb , for in such case there is no scope for intervention during this phase.
The only diﬀerence between this scenario and that in panel (a), is the level of financial resources
a0 , which is relatively low in panel (a) and high in (c) (while it is at an intermediate level in panel
 18
      See footnote 14.


                                                           28
                               (a)
 1.5                                              Optimal Policy
                                                  No Policy

p 1



 0.5
         0      2      4       6         8   10        12          14


                               (b)
 1.5



p 1



 0.5
         0      2      4       6         8   10        12          14


                                   (c)
 1.5



p 1



 0.5
         0      2      4       6         8   10        12          14
                                    t




       Figure 7: Ex-ante and Ex-post Optimal Intervention




                              29
(b)). When financial resources are relatively abundant, the price-distortion during the appreciation
phase is small and hence the cost of distorting intertemporal consumption by taxing consumption
of nontradables is high. Thus the social planner opts for postponing the intervention.19
         Figure 8 generalizes the message of the previous figure and shows the level of pA and pD,0
in the competitive equilibrium (solid) and optimal policy (dashes) for a wide range of financial
resources a0 . At low levels of a0 the intervention during the appreciation phase has a large impact
on allocations and there is no need to exacerbate the initial overshooting in the depreciation phase.
In fact, the latter is significantly reduced in this case. However, as a0 rises there is less scope for
ex-ante intervention and a larger share of the adjustment is deferred to the depreciation phase.
Eventually, when a0 is suﬃciently large, the policy is mostly concentrated ex-post, even to the
point of causing an over-overshooting (the region where the dashed line is below the solid line in
the bottom panel). Finally, as a0 is suﬃciently high that there is no overshooting in the competitive
equilibrium, there is no longer scope for policy.

         In terms of implementation of the optimal policy in each of these scenarios, Figure 9 reports
the paths of nontradable consumption taxes, τ N , corresponding to the three panels in Figure 7.
The pure ex-ante policy in panel (a) requires strictly positive taxes during the appreciation phase
and a subsidy during the depreciation phase. That is, the ex-ante aspect of the policy refers to
the fact that the pecuniary externality is entirely resolved during the appreciation phase. The
subsidy component of the policy is simply a mechanism by which, through higher wages consumers
take back any surplus transferred to the entrepreneurs during the intervention in the appreciation
phase. Panel (b) shows the intermediate case, where the exchange rate is allowed to depreciate in
the first period of the D phase. In this case the path for the subsidy is kept lower in tD,0 , increases
in tD,1 and then converges to zero. Panel (c), the pure ex-post policy case has no taxes during
the appreciation phase, and instead the tax is concentrated in the first period of the depreciation
phase.


4         Further Considerations for Intervention
In this section we briefly discuss three important considerations for intervention: The persistence
of the appreciation, distortions in consumers’ perceptions, and frictions in the nontradables sector.
    19
         Note also that when export firms have abundant financial resources, there is a sort of Ricardian equivalence, in
that any (at least small) intervention can be undone by the private sector (this is an exact result whenever φA = φD,0 ).




                                                             30
        2
                                                  Optimal Policy
       1.8                                        No Policy


pA 1.6

       1.4


       1.2


        1
             0            0.5               1                      1.5
                                   a0

        1

       0.9

       0.8
pD,0
       0.7

       0.6

       0.5

       0.4
             0            0.5               1                      1.5
                                   a0




       Figure 8: Entrepreneurs’ Wealth and Optimal Intervention




                                 31
                               (a)
    0.6

    0.4

    0.2
τ     0

    -0.2

    -0.4


           0    2      4      6       8    10     12     14


                               (b)
    0.6

    0.4

    0.2
τ     0

    -0.2

    -0.4


           0    2      4      6       8    10     12     14


                               (b)
    0.6

    0.4

    0.2
τ     0

    -0.2

    -0.4


           0    2      4      6       8    10     12     14
                                  t




     Figure 9: Implementation: Optimal Tax on Nontradables




                              32
4.1       Appreciation Persistence
In our complete markets context, persistence matters only in an ex-ante sense and is captured by
the parameter δ. On one extreme, if δ is close to one (very short lived appreciations) then the
losses to be financed are not much and entrepreneurs’ internal resources may suﬃce. On the other
extreme, if δ is very close to zero (very persistent appreciations), then the option value of keeping
units is low, and there is no reason to protect the export sector either. It is for intermediate δ’s
that policy intervention may be needed.
       Figure 10 illustrates this non-monotonicity by showing the region where policy intervention is
called for in the (1/δ, a0 ) space. The shaded region corresponds to the case where the equilibrium
is constrained ineﬃcient and exchange rate intervention is warranted. Note that there are many
general equilibrium eﬀects hidden in this figure. For example, as δ changes, so does κ. Also,
when δ rises, firms reluctance to destroy during the appreciation rises. This reluctance exacerbates
the (now shorter lived) appreciation, and hence the resources required to survive each period of
appreciation. However, none of these additional eﬀects is strong enough to change the qualitative
shape of the figure and the conclusion that follows from it. Medium run appreciations are most
likely to justify intervention.20

4.2       Consumers’ Overoptimism and Incomplete Insurance
In reality, consumption binges rarely occur by themselves. In the international context, they often
come as a response to a rise in national income due to a positive terms of trade shock in commodity
producing countries, or due to a large increase in the supply of capital flows to the country. Adding
external income shocks to our complete markets, rational representative agent setup, would have
no eﬀect on the path of consumption, given that consumers fully insure against these shocks. We
need to add some “friction” on the consumption side as well.
       One extension along these lines is to replace the taste shocks with income (terms of trade)
shocks, but assume that either foreigners charge an insurance premium to consumers, or that the
  20
       In an earlier draft we relaxed the complete markets assumption and studied the polar opposite case, where export
firms only have access to a riskless bond. In this context, the export sector resources dwindle as the appreciation
progresses. The main policy implication that follows from this modification is the timing of the exchange rate
stabilization in the appreciation phase. Early on in the appreciation, the optimal policy is to postpone much of
the intervention to the D phase. However, as the appreciation continues and the export sector’s resources dwindle,
the optimal policy shifts a larger share of the intervention to the appreciation phase (essentially, this amounts to a
gradual leftward movement in Figure 8 .)




                                                           33
                            1.45




                          a0
                               1.4




                            1.35
                                     1   2   3     4      5         6   7     8     9      10
                                                              1/δ




                               Figure 10: Expected Duration and Policy Intervention

latter are overoptimistic with respect to the expected duration of the high income phase A:21

                                                       δ cons < δ.

In either case, consumers find D-insurance too expensive and choose not to insure fully. The analysis
is more complex in this case since incomplete insurance introduces wealth and price dynamics
within the appreciation phase, however the important point for us is that the basic structure of
our environment is preserved. In particular, nontradables demand drops at the time of the switch
and consumers still ignore the pecuniary externality associated to their high expenditure during
the appreciation. Of course, if the social planner does not share in the consumers’ optimism, then
it would be justified to implement some sort of saving policy, with the goal of reducing not only
cN           T
 A but also cA . More importantly, even if the planner does share consumers’ view on the expected
duration of the appreciation, there is a role for intervention to oﬀset the pecuniary externality, as
in our main case.
  21
       Alternatively, we could introduce procyclical consumption (or short horizons) through non-representative agents.
The extreme version of this formulation is one where consumers live for only one period and must consume their
income in that period. The social planner Pareto-weighs a generation t periods from the current one by β t . If no
intergenerational transfer mechanism other than through the real exchange rate is available, then we are again in
the situation just described. The constrained goal of the social planner is to reallocate consumption away from non-
tradables during the appreciation phase. Relative to the pure taste shock scenario, a larger share of the adjustment
is done in the A phase, in order to reduce the burden of the adjustment on the first generation in the D phase.


                                                              34
4.3         Rigidities in the Nontradables Sector
Frictions in the nontradable sector generally shift a share of the intervention toward the A phase.
For example, this is typically the case in the sudden stops literature, particularly when liabilities are
dollarized. The latter limits the possibility and desirability of implementing a large overshooting
in D, even if short lived.
         Another example is the presence of a real wage rigidity, either as the result of a distortion or
of a reservation wage.22 Yet another is that some of the inputs of production in the nontradables
sector are tradables.
         Let us develop the simplest of these examples and assume that workers have a reservation wage
of w units of tradable goods, which is not binding except, possibly, during the overshooting phase.
Suppose that this reservation wage is binding for the optimal policy but not for the competitive
equilibrium. That is, in the over-overshooting scenario the social planner would like to bring psb
                                                                                                D,0
below w, but it cannot. What is the impact of this binding constraint on the optimal policy? In
particular, how much of the intervention is reallocated to the appreciation phase? Let us return to
the complete markets environment to answer the latter question. We know that in this context the
social planner’s first order condition in the A phase is:

                                         θA u0 (1 − nA ) = λpfAb = λ (1 + βδf ) .

         It follows immediately that psb,w
                                      A    < psb         sb,w
                                              A , where pA    and psb
                                                                   A stand for the second best real
exchange rate during the appreciation with and without a reservation wages w, respectively. The
reason for the inequality is that the binding constraint must necessarily lower κ relative to the
unconstrained case, and this implies that λ = u0 (θA κ) rises with the constraint. In turn, the latter
implies that nA increases, which given the firms financial constraint can only be achieved with a
larger intervention that drops the real exchange rate below that of the unconstrained case.


5         Final Remarks
This paper shows how financial frictions lend support to the view that persistent appreciations
may justify intervention, even if agents are fully rational and forward looking. The reason for
the intervention is not to improve the health of the export sector per se, as our social planner
is primarily concerned about consumers (workers), but a pecuniary externality within consumers.
By putting excessive cost pressure on financially constrained export firms during the appreciation
phase, consumers reduce these firms’ ability to recover once the factors behind the appreciation
    22
         See Blanchard (2006b) for a more thorough discussion of wage rigidities and appreciations; and Blanchard (2006a)
for an application to the case of Portugal.



                                                             35
subside. The result is a severe overshooting and real wage collapse at that stage, which hurts
consumers more than they gain from the extra consumption during the appreciation.
   Our normative framework sheds light on the perennial policy problem of the timing of inter-
vention. We show that, other things equal, if financial constraints on the export sector are tight
during the appreciation phase, then it is optimal to intervene ex-ante. Conversely, if the export
sector has substantial financial resources (although not enough to fully finance the recovery), then
ex-ante intervention is either costly or ineﬀective, and it is optimal to postpone intervention until
after the “crash.”
   In abstract, the optimal policy can be implemented through an appropriate sequence of taxes
and subsidies on nontradable consumption. In reality, the flexibility of such policies is limited,
leaving to expenditure policy and central bank’s reserves management most of the burden. While
these are not perfect substitutes for taxes and subsidies, much of our insights still carry over to
them.
   Let us conclude with a few clarifying remarks and extensions. When thinking about policy, it
is worth noting the distinction between an “appreciation” and an “overvaluation.” The latter is
an elusive concept in practice but it has a well defined meaning in ours: an overvaluation refers
to a situation where the exchange rate is higher than it is socially optimal. However, this gap is
not limited to an appreciation episode as it can also take place during a depreciation phase. The
over-overshooting result is an example of an overvaluation during the depreciation phase. A wage
rigidity is an example of when such overvaluation cannot be cured fully with intervention within
the depreciation phase. The latter example also illustrates the role of early intervention in limiting
future overvaluations.
   We note that our model uses a single reason –a financial friction– for constrained production
in the appreciation and depreciation phases. However, some of our conclusions extend to other
scenarios as well. In particular, we could replace the financial constraint in the depreciation phase
for a technological time to build assumption. In such case, the overshooting is also directly linked
to excessive export destruction in the appreciation phase and there is a reason for intervention.
The main diﬀerence in this instance is that the optimal policy does not prolong the intervention
into the depreciation phase.
   Finally, while our analysis focuses on the real exchange rate, it seems suitable for other im-
portant relative prices within an economy. For example, a real estate boom can have important
cost consequences for sectors that compete with the construction sector for inputs and factors of
production. More broadly, ours is a model of the optimal management of sectoral reallocation in
the presence of temporary (but persistent) shocks, when some sectors have limited financial and
technological flexibility.




                                                 36
6     Appendix
6.1     Proof of Proposition 1
The cutoﬀ is given by
                                      ³        ´          ³           ´    ³        ´
                                       pfAb − 1 nfAb + βδf nfDb − nfAb − βδ 1 − pfDb nfDb
                            âf b =                                                              ,
                                                           1 − β (1 − δ)

where pfAb , pfDb , nfAb , and nfDb are defined in the text. Let us conjecture and verify that if a0 ≥ âf b these
prices and quantities form an equilibrium. Given the conjectured prices it is possible to show (by guessing
and verifying) that V (a, n− ; st ) = a + q (st ) n− (i.e., ψ (st ) = 0 and φ (st ) = 1). Then, inspecting the
entrepreneur’s optimality conditions (9)-(11) shows that the entrepreneur is, at each st , indiﬀerent among
all feasible choices of cT,e (st ) , n (st ) , and {a (hst , st+1 i)}st+1 ∈S If the entrepreneur begins with a0 , he can
consume the diﬀerence a0 − âf b and then adopt the following rule: set n (st ) = nfAb , a (hst , Di) = f (nfDb −
nfAb ) − (1 − pfDb )nfDb and a (hst , Ai) = âf b , for each history st = {A, A, ..., A}; set n (st ) = nfDb , a (hst , Di) = 0
for each history st = {A, ...A, D, ..., D}. These decisions are consistent with labor market clearing. One
final check, which we left aside in the main text, is that nfAb > 0. This follows from substituting κf b in the
definition of nfAb and using the inequalities 1 − β(1 − δ) < 1, θA / ((1 − β)θA + δβ) < 1, and 1/ (1 + δβf ) < 1.


6.2     Proof of Proposition 2
First, we establish a preliminary lemma.

Lemma 1 Define the function                              µ               ¶
                                                                    κ
                                            H (n) ≡ f n − 1 −                n − x,
                                                                   1−n
the equation H (n) = 0 has a unique solution n∗ ∈ (0, 1), for each κ > 0 and x > 0. Moreover, H (n) > 0
for each n > n∗ . The solution n∗ is increasing in x. If x = 0 the equation can have one or two solutions,
one of which is 0. In this case, the properties above apply to the largest solution.

    Proof. A solution exists because H is continuous in [0, 1), H (0) = −x and limn→1 H (n) = ∞. Consider
the case x > 0. Let n∗ be a solution, then f − (1 − κ/ (1 − n∗ )) > 0 must hold. If n > n∗ , H 0 (n) =
                                  2
f − (1 − κ/ (1 − n)) + κn/ (1 − n) > 0 follows from f − (1 − κ/ (1 − n)) > f − (1 − κ/ (1 − n∗ )) > 0. This
implies that H (n) > 0 for each n > n∗ , and the solution is unique. The comparative statics result with
respect to x follows from the implicit function theorem. When x = 0 the solution n∗ = 0 is trivial. If there
is another solution n∗ > 0, the properties stated can be proved following the steps of the case x > 0.

    The proof will proceed in three steps. First, we define a map T for the coeﬃcient κ. Second, we derive
some properties of this map. Finally, we show that this map has a unique fixed point. From this fixed point
we can construct an equilibrium with the desired properties.
                               £       ¤
    Step 1. Fix a value for κ ∈ 0, κf b and construct an equilibrium as follows.



                                                              37
    Phase A. If                                               Ã       !
                                                     ³      ´     κθA
                                                       fb
                                 (1 − β (1 − δ)) a0 > pA − 1   1 − fb ,                                 (32)
                                                                   pA

then set pA equal to pfAb , set nA = 1 − κθA /pfAb and

                                      1 h                     ³        ´ i
                             aD,0 =       (1 − β (1 − δ)) a0 − pfAb − 1 nA > 0.                         (33)
                                      βδ

Notice that nA > 0. Since κ ≤ κf b we have 1 − κθA /pfAb ≥ 1 − κf b θA /pfAb > 0, where the last inequality
follows from assumption (A1).
     If (32) does not hold, then set pA equal to the solution of
                                                                 µ       ¶
                                                                     κθA
                                   (1 − β (1 − δ)) a0 = (pA − 1) 1 −       ,                          (34)
                                                                     pA

(which has a unique solution in [1, pfAb ]), set nA =h1 − κθA /p
                                                               i A and aD,0 = 0. Notice that when pA = κθA ,
                                                            fb
the right-hand side of (34) is zero, therefore pA ∈ κθA , pA and nA ≥ 0.
    Phase D. Define
                                                             κ
                                                  n̄D = 1 − f b .
                                                           pD
Construct the sequence {nD,j } that satisfies:
                                            µ            ¶
                                                   κ
                           f (nD,0 − nA ) =  1−            nD,0 + aD,0                                  (35)
                                                1 − nD,0
                                            µ            ¶
                                                   κ
                       f (nD,j − nD,j−1 ) =  1−            nD,j for j = 1, 2, ..., J                    (36)
                                                1 − nD,j

until nD,J+1 is larger than n̄D . From then on set

                                           nD,j = n̄D for all j > J.

Letting x = aD,0 + f nA , Lemma 1 ensures that (35) has a solution for nD,0 (if aD,0 + f nA = 0, pick the
solution with the largest nD,0 ). To show that nD,0 ≥ nA consider the following: Either H (n̄D ) ≤ 0, and the
solution will be larger than n̄D . In this case the economy converges to n̄D immediately and
                                                   θA             1
                                      nA ≤ 1 − κ          ≤1−κ          = n̄D ,
                                                   pfAb          pfDb

where the inequality in the middle follows from assumption (A3). If, instead H (n̄D ) > 0 then H (nD,0 ) = 0.
Notice that                      µ            ¶             ³         ´
                                      κ
                       H (nA ) =           − 1 nA − aD,0 ≤ pfDb − 1 nA − aD,0 < 0
                                   1 − nA
where the inequality in the middle follows from
                                     κ       κθA 1           1
                                         =           < pfAb    < pfDb < 1,
                                  1 − nA   1 − nA θA        θA
(the second inequality follows from (A3)). Therefore, Lemma 1 implies that nD,0 > nA . In a similar way, it
is possible to prove that (36) implies nD,j ≥ nD,j−1 for each j.

                                                          38
    From these two steps we obtain a sequence pA , {pD,j }, which can then be substituted in expression (3),
                                     £       ¤ £       ¤
to obtain κ0 . This defines a map T : 0, κf b → 0, κf b .

    Step 2. It can be shown that the map T is continuous. Furthermore, let us prove that

                                       κ0 = T (κ (1 + ∆)) < (1 + ∆) T (κ) .

In the construction in Step 1, an increase in κ leads to a (weak) reduction in nA and nD,j for all j (for the
initial conditions of phase D notice that if (32) is satisfied, then, using the definition of pfAb , it is possible to
show that aD,0 + f nA is independent of κ; if (32) is not satisfied, then an increase in κ leads to a decrease in
nA ). But since nA = 1 − θA κ/pA , nD,j = 1 − κ/pD,j , this implies that the prices pA and pD,j must increase
less than proportionally than κ. Therefore, κ0 increases less than proportionally.

    Step 3. Define the following map for z ≡ log (κ) :

                                           z 0 = T̃ (z) ≡ log (T (expz )) .

Step 2 shows that this map is continuous and has slope smaller than 1. Therefore this map has a unique fixed
point (uniqueness is not needed for the statement of this proposition, but will be useful for the following
results). Let κ be the fixed point and consider the prices and quantities constructed in Step 1. To ensure
that they are an equilibrium, it remains to check that the sequence of prices and quantities are optimal for
the entrepreneur. Derive the marginal utility of money at tD,0 from the recursion:

                                                           f
                                          φD,j = β                  φ      .                                     (37)
                                                     f − (1 − pD,j ) D,j+1

By construction we have pD,j ≤ pfDb , which implies that φD,j ≥ 1. Moreover, entrepreneurs’ consumption
and cash savings, aD,j+1 , are zero until the point where φD,j = 1. To check optimality in phase A, notice
that
                                                     βδf
                                              φA =        φ
                                                    pA − 1 D,0
and φA > φD,0 iﬀ pA < pfAb , and, by construction aD,0 is zero iﬀ pA < pfAb . Notice that as long as a0 < âf b
either pA or some pD,j will be strictly below their first best value. Therefore, φA > 1.


6.3    Proof of Propositions 3 and 4
The following lemma provides a useful preliminary result.

Lemma 2 The equilibrium value of κ is non-decreasing in a0 .
                                            £     ¤       £      ¤
      Proof. Let T (κ; a0 ) be the mapping 0, κf b → 0, κf b defined in the proof of Proposition 2, indexed
by the initial wealth a0 . Choose two values a00 < a000 . Let κ0 and κ00 be the corresponding equilibrium values
of κ. Now, fixing κ0 we want to show that T is monotone in a0 , i.e., T (κ0 ; a000 ) ≥ T (κ0 ; a00 ). If (32) holds at
a00 , then an increase in a0 leaves pA unchanged, and it increases aD,0 (from (33)) and leaves nA unchanged.
If (32) does not hold, an increase in aD,0 leads to an increase in pA , and an increase in aD,0 + f nA , since


                                                          39
aD,0 either remains zero or becomes positive and nA increases. In both cases, aD,0 + f nA increases. This
means that, in phase D, there will be a (weak) increase in nD,j for all j, and, thus, a (weak) increase in pD,j
for all j. Therefore, T (κ0 ; a000 ) ≥ T (κ0 ; a00 ) = κ0 . This implies that T (κ; a000 ) has a fixed point in [κ0 , κf b ].
Since T has a unique fixed point and T (κ00 ; a000 ) = κ00 , by construction, this implies κ00 ≥ κ0 .

     Now we can prove the two propositions. Consider first Proposition 3. Suppose that at a00 we have
pA = pfAb in equilibrium. This means that (32) holds at a00 . Since κ00 ≥ κ0 , (32) holds a fortiori for a00D,0 , κ00 ,
it follows that at the new equilibrium pA = pfAb and aD,0 > 0.

    Consider next Proposition 4. Suppose that at a00 we have pD,0 = pfDb in equilibrium. This means that
the following inequality holds
                                        µ             ¶
                                     0         κ0
                                 f n̄D ≤ 1 −            n̄0D + f n0A + a0D,0                        (38)
                                             1 − n̄0D

where n̄0D = 1 − κ0 /pfDb . Now we want to prove the following inequality

                                               f n00A + a00D,0 ≥ f n0A + a0D,0 .                                          (39)

If (32) holds at a00 then some algebra (using the definition of pfAb ) shows that
                                                                     1
                                 f n00A + a00D,0 = f n0A + a0D,0 =      [(1 − β (1 − δ)) a0 ] .
                                                                     βδ
If (32) does not hold at a00 , then we have a00D,0 ≥ 0 = a0D,0 . Furthermore, we can show that n00A ≥ n0A .
Notice that κ00 ≥ κ0 holds because, on average, equilibrium prices are larger. However, p0D,j = pfDb at a00 , and
p00D,j ≤ pfDb . This implies that
                                                   p00A  κ00
                                                    0   ≥ 0,
                                                   pA    κ
and since nA = 1 − κ/pA this implies n00A ≥ n0A . Therefore, (39) holds in all cases. This implies that (38)
also holds at a000 , and therefore pD,0 = pfDb . Notice that if (32) holds at a00 then, we can proceed as in the
proof of Proposition 3 and show that a00D,0 > a0D,0 and n00A = n0A .


6.4     Setup of the Optimal Policy Problem
The set of feasible allocations is defined as follows.

Definition 2 (Feasibility) The allocation {cT (st ) , cN (st ) , cT,e (st ) , n (st )} is feasible iﬀ there exists a se-
                    ©                    ª
quence of tax rates τ T (st ) , τ N (st ) , wealth levels {a (st )}, and prices {p (st ) , q (st )} such that the prices
and quantities {p (st ) , q (st )} and {cT (st ) , cN (st ) , cT,e (st ) , n (st ) , a (st )} constitute a competitive equilib-
                             ©                 ª
rium under the tax rates τ T (st ) , τ N (st ) .

    We now derive three necessary conditions, (40) to (42) below, that any feasible allocation must satisfy.
Then, we define the problem of a planner that chooses an allocation subject only to the consumer’s budget
constraint, the entrepreneur’s budget constraint (7), and conditions (40)-(42). This is a relaxed version of
the original planning problem, given that this set of constraints is necessary but, in general, not suﬃcient

                                                              40
for feasibility. We also perform a change of variables that makes the relaxed planning problem a concave
problem and we derive first-order conditions which are suﬃcient for an optimum. In the proof of Proposition
6 we make use of these first-order conditions to find allocations that solve the relaxed planning problem.
    First, notice that the entrepreneur’s optimality implies that a feasible allocation must satisfy the condition
                      ¡ ¡ t¢ ¡    ¡ ¢¢¢ ¡ t ¢ X                ¡­        ®¢ ¡ ¢
                       q s − 1 − p st  n s ≥β   π (st+1 |st ) q st , st+1 n st .                               (40)
                                                                     st+1 ∈S


To prove this inequality, multiply by n (st ) both sides of (9), and use the complementarity condition to
obtain
         ¡ ¡ t¢ ¡    ¡ ¢¢¢ ¡ t ¢ ¡ t ¢ X                ¡­        ®¢ ¡­       ®¢ ¡ ¢
          q s − 1 − p st  φ s n s =β     π (st+1 |st ) φ st , st+1 q st , st+1 n st .
                                                               st+1 ∈S


Moreover, the entrepreneur’s optimality condition for a (st ) implies that φ (hst , st+1 i) ≥ φ (st ) for all st+1 .
Substituting in the equation above, gives (40).
   Second, recall that q (hst , st+1 i) ≤ f which implies
                                                   ¡­               ®¢ ¡ t ¢   ¡ ¢
                                               q        st , st+1     n s ≤ f n st .                           (41)

Finally, define the function
                                                        G (x) ≡ f max {x, 0} ,

for a generic variable x, and notice that equilibrium in the adjustment sector implies that, for all st and
st+1 ,
                      ¡­         ®¢ ¡ ¡­ t     ®¢   ¡ ¢¢      ¡ ¡­       ®¢     ¡ ¢¢
                     q st , st+1     n s , st+1 − n st = G n st , st+1 − n st .                         (42)

We perform a change in variables, defining
                                  ¡ ¢   ¡ ¡ ¢    ¢ ¡ ¢   ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢
                                 z st ≡ p st − 1 n st + q st n st ,
                                  ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢ ¡     ¢
                                 y st ≡ q st n st−1 ,

for all consecutive histories st−1 and st .
    Substituting the government budget balance in the consumer’s budget constraint (21), and using the
market clearing condition cN (st ) = 1 − n (st ), we obtain the budget constraint
                                X            ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ X t ¡ t¢ ¡ t¢ ¡ t¢
                                        β t π st cT st ≤ β π s p s n s .
                                 t,st                                 t,st

Substituting z and y and using (42) on the right-hand side we get
             X           ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ X t ¡ t¢ £ ¡ t¢  ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢    ¡ ¡ ¢    ¡     ¢¢¤
                    β t π st cT st = β π s z s − y st + n st − G n st − n st−1     .                           (43)
             t,st                       t,st

Substituting z and y in the entrepreneur’s flow of funds constraint gives
                          ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢     X              ¡­          ®¢  ¡ ¢
                      cT,e st + z st − y st + β   π(st+1 |st )a st , st+1 , ≤ a st .                           (44)
                                                               st+1 ∈S




                                                                      41
     The relaxed planner problem is to choose sequences {cT (st ) , cT,e (st ) , n (st ) , a (st )} and {z (st ) , y (st )},
to maximize the consumer’s expected utility subject to (22), (40), (41), (43), and (44). The relaxed problem
is a concave problem, so the first order conditions are suﬃcient for an optimum. It is possible to show that
the solution is stationary in phase A and that, in phase D, quantities and prices only depend on the number
of periods since the transition. To save space and help the interpretation, we write the problem directly in
terms of variables indexed by A and (D, j). Moreover, we normalize the utility of the consumer, the budget
constraint, and the entrepreneur’s participation constraint by the constant (1− β (1 − δ)). Then, the planner
maximizes
                                                     X∞
                          £               ¡ ¢¤                 £                              ¤
                       θA u (1 − nA ) + u cTA + δβ       β j θD u (1 − nD,j ) + u(cTD,j ) ,
                                                                  j=0

subject to
                         ∞
                         X                                                                 ∞
                                                                                           X
                 cTA +         β j cTD,j + G (nA − n−1 ) + δβG (nD,0 − nA ) + δβ                 β j G (nD,j − nD,j−1 )
                         j=0                                                               j=1
                                                                        ∞
                                                                        X
                                        ≤ (zA − yA + nA ) + δβ                β j (zD,j − yD,j + nD,j ) ,             (λ)
                                                                        j=0

                                             ∞
                                             X
                                   cT,e
                                    A + δβ         β j cT,e
                                                        D,j ≥ (1 − β (1 − δ)) U,                 (µ)
                                             j=0


             (1 − β (1 − δ)) a0 − βδaD,0 + yA − zA − cT,e
                                                      A                 ≥ 0,                                    (ν A )         (45)
                         aD,0 − βaD,1 + yD,0 − zD,0 − cT,e
                                                       D,0              ≥ 0,                                    (δβvD,0 )      (46)
                      aD,j − βaD,j+1 + yD,j − zD,j −         cT,e
                                                              D,j       ≥ 0 for j ≥ 1,                    (δβ   j+1
                                                                                                                      vD,j )   (47)

and conditions (40)-(41), which take the form

                                 yA   ≤ f nA ,                                        (γ A )
                               yD,j   ≤ f nD,j       for all j,                      (δβ j+1 γ D,j )
                                 zA   ≥ δβyD,0 ,                                         (η D,0 )
                               zD,j   ≥ βyD,j+1        for all j.                     (δβ j+1 η D,j+1 )

Next to each constraint we write the respective Lagrange multiplier.
   Let us take first-order conditions with respect to n

                                                             −θA u0 (1 − nA ) − δβf λ + λ + f γ A            = 0,
                −δβ j+1 θD u0 (1 − nD,j ) − δβ j+1 f λ + δββ j+1 f λ + δβ j+1 λ + δβ j+1 f γ D,j             = 0,

with respect to y and z

                                                                         −λ + ν A − γ A        = 0,
                                −λδβ j+1 + δβ j+1 ν D,j − δβ j+1 γ D,j − βδβ j η D,j           = 0,
                                                                         λ − ν A + η D,0       = 0,
                                             λδβ j+1 − δβ j+1 ν D,j + δβ j+1 η D,j+1           = 0,

                                                                  42
and with respect to a and cT,e

                                           −ν A + ν D,0    ≥ 0 (aD,0 ≥ 0),                             (48)
                                     −ν D,j + ν D,j+1      ≥ 0 (aD,j ≥ 0),                             (49)


                                            µ ≥ νA         (cT,e
                                                             A ≥ 0),                                   (50)
                                            µ ≥ ν D,j          (cT,e
                                                                 D,j ≥ 0).                             (51)

   Rearranging these conditions shows that a suﬃcient condition for an optimum is that there exist Lagrange
multipliers λ ≤ ν A ≤ ν D,0 ≤ ν D,1 ≤ ... ≤ µ, such that

                                    −θA u0 (1 − nA ) + λ (1 + δβf ) + f (ν A − λ) = 0,                 (52)
                          −θD u0 (1 − nD,0 ) + λ (1 − (1 − β) f ) + f (ν D,0 − ν A ) = 0,              (53)
                            0
                      −θD u (1 − nD,j ) + λ (1 − (1 − β) f ) + f (ν D,j − ν D,j−1 ) = 0,               (54)

and conditions (48)-(51) are satisfied.


6.5     Proof of Propositions 5 and 6
We prove Proposition 6 by giving a complete characterization of the optimal allocation. The proof is split
in three steps. In the first step, we define two maps J and J.˜ In the second step, we use these maps to
construct a candidate optimal allocation and we show that this allocation is indeed optimal. The proof of
5 is a side product of this step. In the third step, we derive the implications for the optimal path of the
exchange rate and for the optimal tax in A.

                                          ˜ Define the map J : [1 + δβf /φce      fb
    Step 1. We define the two maps J and J:                                  A , pA ] → R as follows (notice
                                fb                                           ce f b
that 1 + δβf /φce                        ce
               A < 1 + δβf = pA since φA > 1). For any pA ∈ [1 + δβf /φA , pA ] find the unique ξ that
solves                                   ⎛           ⎛                              ⎞⎞
                                                                  X∞
                             1−β         ⎝pA nA + δβ ⎝pD,0 nD,0 +
                   ξ=                                                 β j pfDb nD,j ⎠⎠ ,                (55)
                       (1 − β) θA + δβθD                          j=1

where pD,0 = 1 − f + δβ 2 f 2 / (φce
                                  A (pA − 1)) , and the sequence {nA , {nD,j }} is given by

                                                   1
                                          nA =          (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 ,                           (56)
                                                 pA − 1

                                               1
                                  nD,0     =        φce
                                                     A (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 ,                            (57)
                                             δβ 2 f
                                                  ©             ª
                                  nD,j     = min β −j nD,0 , n̄D for j ≥ 1,                            (58)

where
                                                 n̄D = 1 − ξθD /pfDb .                                 (59)

To show that such a ξ exists and is unique, notice that the right-hand side of (55) is a continuous non-
increasing function of ξ, and ranges between a positive value, at ξ = 0, and −∞ for ξ → ∞. Set J (pA ) = ξ

                                                          43
(the function J is allowed to take negative values but we will see below that at the relevant values of pA ,
J (pA ) > 0). Combining the terms containing pA on the right-hand side of (55) we obtain the expression
                                            µ                     ¶
                pA                                     1 δβ 2 f 2     1
                     (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 + δβ 1 − f +                       φce
                                                                            A (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 ,
              pA − 1                                 pA − 1 φA      δβ 2 f
which is monotone decreasing in pA . Applying the implicit function theorem, it follows that J 0 (pA ) < 0.
    Define the map J˜ : [0, (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 /(pfAb −1)] as follows: For any nA ∈ [0, (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 /(pfAb −1)]
find the unique positive ξ that solves
                                              ⎛                ⎛                               ⎞⎞
                                                                            X ∞
                                1−β           ⎝pf b nA + δβ ⎝pD,0 nD,0 +
                   ξ=                             A                              β j pfDb nD,j ⎠⎠ ,
                         (1 − β) θA + δβθD                                   j=1

where pD,0 = 1 − f + βf /φceA , and the sequence {nD,j } is given by (57)-(58). Again, it is easy to show that
such a ξ exists and is unique. Set J˜ (nA ) = ξ. It is immediate to show that J˜0 (nA ) > 0.

    Step 2. Define the function
                                               θA J (pA )         1
                               L (pA ) ≡ 1 −                −          (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 .
                                                  pfAb          pA − 1

From step 1, we know that L (pA ) is an increasing function of pA . Therefore, three mutually exclusive cases
                                                              ce f b
are possible. Either there³exists ´ a unique pA ∈ [1 + δβf /φA , pA ] that solves the equation L (pA ) = 0, or
              ce               fb
L (1 + δβf /φA ) > 0, or L pA < 0. We can construct an optimum for each of these cases. We will analyze
in detail the first case, which correspond to the case depicted in Figure 5. Let p∗A be such that L (p∗A ) = 0.
Set
                                                                   2
                                                          1 δ (βf )
                                          p∗D,0 = 1 − f + ce ∗       ,
                                                         φA pA − 1
                                                                                     fb
the assumption φce                                     ∗                      ∗
                    A ≤ (f − 1) / (βf ) ensures that pD,0 ≥ 0, given that pA ≤ pA . In the case φA >
                                                                                                        ce

(f − 1) / (βf ) the argument needs to be amended to allow for a number of periods in which pD,j = 0, this
requires a slightly more involved definition of the function J, but otherwise the argument is analogous to
the one for the case analyzed here. Set p∗D,j = pfDb for all j ≥ 1, qA
                                                                     ∗            ∗
                                                                       = 0, and qD,j  = f for all j ≥ 0. Let
 ∗         ∗            T        ∗      T         ∗
                                                                       © ∗
                                                                            ©   ∗
                                                                                  ªª
ξ = J (pA ) and set cA = θA ξ and cD,j = θD ξ . Set the sequence nA , nD,j            according to (56)-(58).
Finally, the values for the entrepreneur’s consumption are set as

                           cT,e∗
                            A      = (1 − β (1 − δ)) a0 + (1 − pA ) nA ,
                           cT,e∗
                            D,0    = (1 − pD,0 ) nD,0 − f (nD,0 − nA ) ,
                           cT,e∗
                            D,j    = (1 − pD,j ) nD,j − f (nD,j − nD,j−1 ) for j ≥ 1.
                                         ©       ©        ªª
Given the construction of the sequence n∗A , n∗D,j , entrepreneur’s consumption is always non-negative.
                                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                                             © ∗ ª
   Having defined a candidate optimal allocation, we can define the corresponding sequences for yA          , yD,j
     ∗
        ©   ∗
              ª
and zA , zD,j  , and show that we have found an optimum for the relaxed problem defined in 6.4. To do so,
we need to find Lagrange multipliers λ∗ , ν ∗A , {ν ∗D,j }, and µ∗ such that conditions (48)-(54) are satisfied. Set
λ∗ = 1/ξ ∗ . Notice that the condition L (p∗A ) = 0 can be re-arranged to give

                                               λ∗ p∗A = θA u0 (1 − n∗A ) .                                       (60)

                                                            44
Moreover, by construction
                                            n∗D,j ≤ 1 − ξ ∗ θD /pfDb for all j,

with equality for j greater or equal than some J ∗ . This implies that
                                                         ¡         ¢
                                          λ∗ pfDb ≤ θA u0 1 − n∗D,j for all j,

with equality for j ≥ J ∗ . Then we can set ν ∗A = λ and
                                                1³       ¡         ¢         ´
                              ν ∗D,0    = νA +      θD u0 1 − n∗D,0 − λ∗ pfDb ,
                                                f
                                                     1³      ¡         ¢         ´
                              ν ∗D,j    = ν D,j−1 +     θD u0 1 − n∗D,j − λ∗ pfDb .
                                                    f
By construction ν ∗D,j will be constant for j ≥ J ∗ and we can set µ∗ = ν ∗D,J ∗ . This confirms that (51) is
satisfied for all j and we can check that cT,e∗                  ∗               ∗      ∗
                                           D,j > 0 only for j ≥ J , i.e., when ν D,j = µ .
    Furthermore, we can check that the proposed allocation satisfies the consumer’s budget constraint and
the entrepreneur’s participation constraint. The consumer’s budget constraint can be rewritten as
                                          ∞
                                          X                                ∞
                                                                           X
                                 cTA∗ +         β j cTD,j
                                                       ∗
                                                          ≤ p∗A n∗A + δβ         β j p∗D,j n∗D,j ,
                                          j=0                              j=0

the construction of the functions L and J (in particular equation (55)) guarantees that this condition holds
as an equality. Some lengthy but straightforward algebra, using the flow of funds constraints, shows that
                                ⎛                        ⎞
                                            X∞                       ∞
                         1      ⎝cT,e∗ + δβ       j T,e∗ ⎠    βδf Y           βf
                                   A            β  cD,j    =  ∗
                                                                           ³         ´ a0 .
                  1 − β (1 − δ)             j=0
                                                             pA − 1 j=0 f − 1 − p∗
                                                                                                     D,j

                        ©      ª
Given the prices p∗A and p∗D,j , the right-hand side of this equation is equal to φce
                                                                                   A a0 , which is equal to the
entrepreneur’s expected utility U in the competitive equilibrium, since
                                                  ∞
                                           βδf Y          βf
                                   U=      ce
                                                        ³         ´ a0 = φce
                                                                          A a0 .                              (61)
                                          pA − 1 j=0 f − 1 − pce
                                                              D,j

This completes the argument that the candidate allocation solves the relaxed planning problem. It remains
to show that this allocation is feasible. To do so, we first derive values for the φ∗A and φ∗D,j . We set φ∗A = φce
                                                                                                                 A,

                                                        ∞
                                                        Y        βf
                                             φ∗D,0 =           ³         ´,
                                                                     ∗
                                                        j=0 f − 1 − pD,j


and φ∗D,j = 1 for all j ≥ 1. These, can be used to check that entrepreneur’s behavior is optimal, i.e. that
(10) and (11) are satisfied. To check these conditions notice that φ∗A ≥ φ∗D,0 ≥ φ ∗D,1 and φ∗D,j = 1 for all j,
while cT,e∗
        A    = cT,e∗          ∗                                                              T∗    T∗
                D,0 = 0 and aD,j = 0 for all j. Finally, the tax rates are set as follows: τ A = τ D,j = 0 for
                     ©    ª
all j and τ N ∗        N∗
            A and τ D,j are such that


                                         θA u0 (1 − n∗A ) = λ∗ p∗A (1 + τ ∗A ) ,                              (62)
                                            ¡          ¢             ¡           ¢
                                       θD u0 1 − n∗D,j    = λ∗ p∗D,j 1 + τ ∗D,j .                             (63)

                                                              45
                                                                       ³ ´
                                                                         fb
      Let us discuss briefly the cases where L (1 + δβf /φce
                                                          A ) > 0 and L pA  < 0. In the first case, we have
that condition (60) now holds as an inequality, and we have ν ∗A > λ∗ . The rest of the construction is
analogous to the one derived above. In the second case, we make use of the function J˜ to find the value of
ξ ∗ . In particular, define the function

                                                                 θA J˜ (nA )
                                               L̃ (nA ) ≡ 1 −                       − nA ,
                                                                      pfAb
                                                                                            ³                              ´
and find an n∗A ∈ [0, (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 /(pfAb −1)] such that L̃ (n∗A ) = 0 (notice that L̃ (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 /(pfAb − 1) =
  ³ ´
L pfAb < 0 and L̃ (0) > 0). Then, set ξ ∗ = J˜ (n∗A ) and λ∗ = 1/ξ ∗ . In this case, (60) holds as an equality.
but we have n∗A < (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 /(pfAb − 1), so the entrepreneurs have positive financial savings when they
enter phase D,
                                   a∗D,0 = (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 − (pfAb − 1)n∗A .

This is consistent with feasibility, given that pA = pfAb , so that φ∗A = φ∗D,0 (which implies that (11) is satisfied
with a∗D,0 > 0). The rest of the proof proceeds as in the baseline case.

     Step 3. That p∗A ≤ pfAb and p∗D,j ≤ pfDb follows immediately from the construction of the optimal
                                                                                           ce
allocations. We want to show that p∗A ≤ pce                                 ∗
                                         A . Consider first the case where pA = 1 + δβf /φA . In this case,
                                                                Y∞
                                 fb                        ce
                                                                        ¡    ¡        ¢¢
it follows from (61) and pce              ce
                          D,j ≤ pD that (pA − 1) / (δβf ) φA =      βf / f − 1 − pce
                                                                                  D,j    ≥ 1. This implies
                                                                                     j=0
                                                              ce
that pce       ∗
        A ≥ pA . Next, consider the case where pA ≥ 1 + δβf /φA . In this case, we have, by construction
L (p∗A ) ≤ 0, which implies

                                        κf b          θA J (p∗A )                  1
                         nfAb = 1 − θ          ≤ 1−                   ≤               (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 ,      (64)
                                        pfAb              pfAb               p∗A   −1

                                                                                                   fb
where the first inequality follows because it is possible to show that J (p∗A ) ≤ κf b . If pce
                                                                                             A = pA then it immedi-
                                                                      fb
ately follows that pce     ∗                                   ce                 ce
                    A ≥ pA . Therefore, consider the case pA < pA , where nA = (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0 / (pA − 1)
                                                                                                fb
(recall the construction of the equilibrium in Proposition 2). The assumption nce       A ≤ nA and inequality (64)
imply
                                     (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0     (1 − (1 − δ) β) a0
                                                         ≤                     ,
                                          pA − 1                  p∗A − 1
giving the desired inequality.
      Let us derive the optimal tax τ A when p∗D,0 < pfDb . By construction, p∗D,0 < pfDb implies p∗A > 1+δβf /φce
                                                                                                                A.
                                    ∗              ce                                                      ∗ fb
Also by construction, whenever pA > 1+δβf /φA the following condition holds as an equality 1−θA ξ /pA =
n∗A , which, together with (62), implies that p∗A (1 + τ ∗A ) = pfAb .




                                                                 46
References
 [1] Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee, “Financial Development and the Instability of
    Open Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51 (6), pp. 1077-1106, September 2004.

 [2] Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, R. Ranciere, and K. Rogoﬀ, “Exchange Rate Volatility and Pro-
    ductivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development,” mimeo, Harvard, 2006.

 [3] Blanchard, O.J. “Adjustment within the Euro: The diﬃcult case of Portugal,” MIT mimeo,
    February 2006a.

 [4] Blanchard, O.J. “Current Account Deficits in Rich Countries,” MIT mimeo, October 2006b.

 [5] Burnstein, A., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange
    Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), pp. 742-784, August 2005.

 [6] Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy, “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints
    in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics 8 (3), pp. 513-548,
    2001.

 [7] Caballero, R.J. and A. Krishnamurthy, “Smoothing Sudden Stops,” Journal of Economic The-
    ory 119(1), November 2004, pp. 104-127

 [8] Chaney, T., “Liquidity Constrained Exporters,” mimeo, University of Chicago, 2005.

 [9] Corden, W.M., “Booming Sector and Dutch Disease Economics: Survey and Consolidation,”
    Oxford Economic Papers 36 (1984), 359-380.

[10] Fitzgerald D. and K. Manova, “Why Don’t Exports Respond to Large Devaluations?” mimeo,
    Stanford, 2007.

[11] Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski, “A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of Financial
    Intermediation,” MIT mimeo 2006.

[12] Geanakoplos, J. and H.M. Polemarchakis. “Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Subopti-
    mality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is Incomplete.” in General Equilib-
    rium Theory. Vol. 2. ed. by Gerard Debreu, 67-97, 1996. (First published 1986.)

[13] Golfajn, I. and R. Valdes, “The Aftermath of Appreciations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    114(1), February 1999, pp. 229-262.

[14] Gourinchas, P.O., R. Valdes, and O. Landerretche, “Lending Booms: Latin America and the
    World,” Economia, 1(2), Spring 2001.

                                              47
[15] Hausmann, R., U. Panizza and R. Rigobon, “The Long Run Puzzle of the Real Exchange Rate
    Volatility”, Jounal of International Money and Finance, 25 (1), (2006), pp. 93-124.

[16] Krugman, P., “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive Conse-
    quences of Mrs. Thatcher,” Journal of Development Economics 27 (1987), 41-55.

[17] Lorenzoni, G., “Ineﬃcient Credit Booms,” MIT mimeo 2006.

[18] Manova, K., “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms and International Trade,” mimeo,
    Harvard, 2006.

[19] Wijnbergen, S. van, “The Dutch Disease: A Disease After All?” The Economic Journal, March
    1984.




                                              48
