NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAS NEW YORK BECOME LESS COMPETITIVE IN GLOBAL MARKETS? EVALUATING
FOREIGN LISTING CHOICES OVER TIME
Craig Doidge
G. Andrew Karolyi
Rene M. Stulz
Working Paper 13079
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13079

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

We are grateful to Alvaro Taboada, Jérôme Taillard, and Peter Wong for research assistance and to
Carrie Pan for comments. We also thank Matthew Leighton of the London Stock Exchange and Jean
Tobin of the New York Stock Exchange for their help with the data on listing counts. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Has New York Become Less Competitive in Global Markets? Evaluating Foreign Listing
Choices Over Time
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 13079
May 2007
JEL No. F30,G15,G34
ABSTRACT
We study the determinants and consequences of cross-listings on the New York and London stock
exchanges from 1990 to 2005. This investigation enables us to evaluate the relative benefits of New
York and London exchange listings and to assess whether these relative benefits have changed over
time, perhaps as a result of the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of Congress (SOX) in 2002. We
find that cross-listings have been falling on U.S. exchanges as well as on the Main Market in London.
This decline in cross-listings is explained by changes in firm characteristics rather than by changes
in the benefits of cross-listings. We show that, after controlling for firm characteristics, there is no
deficit in cross-listing counts on U.S. exchanges related to SOX. Investigating the cross-listing premium
from 1990 to 2005, we find that there is a significant premium for U.S. exchange listings every year,
that the premium has not fallen significantly in recent years, that it persists even when allowing for
unobservable firm characteristics, and that there is a permanent premium in event time. In contrast,
there is no premium for London listings for any year. Cross-listing in the U.S. leads firms to increase
their capital-raising activity at home and abroad while a London listing has no such impact. Our evidence
is consistent with the theory that an exchange listing in New York has unique governance benefits
for foreign firms. These benefits have not been seriously eroded by SOX and cannot be replicated
through a London listing.
Craig Doidge
University of Toronto
105 St. George St.
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6
Canada
craig.doidge@rotman.utoronto.ca
G. Andrew Karolyi
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
karolyi@cob.osu.edu

Rene M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER and ECGI
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
In 1998, the major New York exchanges (New York Stock Exchange, NYSE, American Stock
Exchange, AMEX, and NASDAQ) collectively attracted 31% of all the foreign listings in the world, the
London Stock Exchange’s (LSE) Main Market and Alternative Investment Market (AIM) had 16%, and
no other exchange had more than 7%.1 In recent years, London’s market share of foreign listings has
increased while the market share of the U.S. has fallen. It is now almost conventional wisdom in policy
circles and in the financial press that London has become more competitive in attracting foreign listings
than New York.2 In this paper, we investigate how and why the flow of listings on the New York and
London stock exchanges has evolved as it has and whether one should infer from this evolution that
foreign corporations now find a New York exchange listing less attractive.
A popular explanation for the decrease in foreign listings on the exchanges in New York is that the
passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of Congress in 2002 has made U.S. listings significantly less
attractive to foreign companies – so much so, it is argued, that many listed firms would delist if it were
easy to do so.3 The argument is that SOX makes a U.S. listing less advantageous because it imposes
severe costs on companies and their managers, especially through the compliance requirements of Section
404, which aims to reduce the market impact of accounting “errors” from fraud, inadvertent
misstatements, or omissions, by assuring effective management controls over reporting and which, in
turn, creates significant legal exposures for companies as well as for executives.
A number of observers have taken the view that a decrease in the flow of new listings in New York
and an increase in the flow of new listings in London is, in and of itself, evidence that New York has
1

Technically, the listings of foreign firms are cross-listings of their existing shares in home markets. It has become
common to refer to listings by foreign firms as foreign listings. In this paper, we use the term “foreign listing” to
denote a cross-listing of the home-market shares of a firm in an market abroad.
2
See, for example, the Interim Report of the Committee on Capital Market Regulation (November 30, 2006) and
several related news reports, such as “London calling” Forbes (May 8, 2006), “Wall Street: What went wrong?” The
Economist (November 25, 2006), “Is a U.S. listing worth the effort?” Wall Street Journal (November 28, 2006), “Is
Wall Street losing its competitive edge?” Wall Street Journal (December 2, 2006), and “In call to deregulate
business, a global twist” Wall Street Journal (January 26, 2007).
3
See, among others, Witmer (2006), Berger, Li, and Wong (2005), Hostak, Lys, and Yang (2006), Li (2006),
Marosi and Massoud (2006), Smith (2006), Woo (2006), Zingales (2006), Piotroski and Srinivasan (2007),
Chaplinsky and Ramchand (2007), and Litvak (2006, 2007).

1

become less attractive.4 A listing has both costs and benefits. If all firms for which it is advantageous to
list in New York are already listed there and nothing else changes, we would not expect new listings in
New York. In this case, this dearth of new listings in New York would not be evidence that New York
has become less competitive. It would just be evidence that all firms that can benefit from a New York
listing already have one. For the purpose of our analysis, we regard New York as having become less
competitive if it no longer attracts listings it would have attracted in the past – say, for example, during
the 1990s.
A London listing is not the same as a New York listing; each listing location offers a unique bundle of
attributes. For a firm to choose to cross-list when it was not cross-listed before, the attractiveness of a
listing must have changed. The attractiveness of a listing to a firm can change because the bundle of
attributes of the listing location has changed or because the firm itself changed so that a different bundle
of attributes has become more attractive. Consequently, London listings could have become more
attractive even if the bundle of attributes of a listing in New York did not change. After all, changes in
firm characteristics may have rendered London listings more valuable for firms that did not yet have a
listing. To use an analogy, an increase in Nice’s market share of the tourism market compared to St.
Moritz’s does not necessarily mean that St. Moritz has become less competitive – it could just mean that
the season has changed. Similarly, it could be that the firms that did not list in the U.S. in the 1990s have
characteristics that now make a London listing advantageous compared to a U.S. listing. Such an outcome
could be possible even if the New York exchanges are as competitive as ever in attracting listings from
the types of firms that found these listings valuable in the 1990s.
As reviewed in Karolyi (2006), there are many benefits to listing. In particular, through cross-listing,
firms can access new investors, can have their stock traded on a more efficient market, can overcome
barriers to international investment, and so on. However, much of the recent literature on cross-listings
4

The CEOs of both the NYSE and NASDAQ have also voiced their concerns about the costs that foreign companies
have to bear to comply with SOX and the implications of these costs for the flow of listings (Thain, 2004; Greifeld,
2006). See also “Taking their business elsewhere: Foreign companies are spurning U.S. exchanges” BusinessWeek
(May 22, 2006).

2

has emphasized the governance benefit of cross-listing on a major U.S. exchange. By the term
“governance benefit,” we mean the fact that firms that list on a U.S. exchange benefit from opting into the
U.S. regulatory environment, which includes securities laws and regulations, regulatory oversight and
enforcement by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and monitoring by “gatekeepers” such
as analysts and institutional investors. We focus on this benefit because it crucially distinguishes among
different types of listings and because the benefit of listing that most financial economists focused on in
the past - namely, overcoming barriers to international investments - is losing its relevance in an
increasingly global financial marketplace.5
The typical foreign firm has a controlling shareholder and comes from a country where controlling
shareholders have more of an opportunity to make themselves better off at the expense of minority
shareholders compared to the U.S. There is a governance benefit from cross-listing on a U.S. exchange
because listing reduces controlling shareholders’ ability to extract private benefits from the corporations
they control (see, e.g., Doidge, 2004, for empirical evidence). Some controlling shareholders are willing
to bear the cost of better governance because it enables them to raise capital on better terms to fund their
firm’s growth opportunities. Consequently, controlling shareholders trade off the cost of cross-listing,
defined by the improved governance systems which reduce their private benefits, against the benefit of
cross-listing, captured by their ability to fund growth opportunities on better terms. Only firms where the
benefit more than offsets the cost will list in the U.S. As a result, U.S. cross-listed firms are worth more –
there is a “cross-listing premium” (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004). It will always be the case that many
firms will choose not to list in the U.S. as long as, by not doing so, controlling shareholders have more
freedom to run their corporations to benefit themselves at the expense of minority shareholders.

5

The bonding hypothesis, originally proposed by Coffee (1999, 2002) and Stulz (1999), predicts that after listing on
a U.S. stock exchange, foreign firms become subject to more stringent investor protections and it becomes more
difficult for insiders to expropriate from minority shareholders. Benos and Weisbach (2004) and Karolyi (2006)
provide comprehensive surveys of the cross-listing literature and, in particular, of the emergence of corporate
governance explanations of the cross-listing phenomenon.

3

For a listing on a U.S. exchange to have become less attractive, it has to be that the net benefit from
such a listing for a firm with given characteristics has fallen. The net benefit from a listing on a U.S.
exchange that is relevant for the listing decision is the gain made by the controlling shareholder of a
corporation from listing in New York rather than listing in London or not listing at all. If the costs for the
controlling shareholder of a U.S. exchange cross-listing rise or if the benefits fall, there will be fewer new
listings and the value of firms with listings will fall relative to the value of firms without listings.
To examine if cross-listings on the major exchanges in New York have become less attractive, we
first evaluate aggregate evidence on the market share of foreign listings in New York and London.
Strikingly, the market share of the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ increased from 1998 to 2005 relative to
the market share of the LSE’s Main Market. However, once the LSE’s Alternative Investment Market is
taken into account, the picture changes and London’s market share increased relative to New York’s.
Though the number of foreign listings in New York and on London’s Main Market has fallen in recent
years, the total number of foreign listings in London has increased because of the increase in foreign
listings on AIM. The number of listings on AIM has increased most dramatically in recent years: foreign
listing counts increased from only 2 within one year of its launch in 1995 to 220 at the end of 2005.
We show that, though the success of AIM is impressive, it is critical to understand that the typical
firm that lists on AIM is a small firm that would not have listed on a U.S. exchange, either in the 1990s or
in more recent years. Consequently, it is simply wrong to interpret the success of AIM and the resulting
growth in market share of London as evidence of a decline in the attractiveness of U.S. exchanges.
However, U.S. exchanges could have become less attractive because they no longer attract new listings
that they would have attracted in the 1990s. We therefore examine next whether a firm with given
characteristics is less likely to list on a major exchange in New York now than it would have been in the
1990s. We find little evidence to support such a conclusion. In particular, we find that firm attributes that
affect the listing decision are mostly the same now as they were then. Further, and strikingly, we find no
evidence that the number of listed firms is smaller than that we would have expected based on how firms

4

made the choice to cross-list in the pre-SOX period before 2001. These results are sensitive to how we
define the pre-SOX base period: as we adjust the base period to be more recent (e.g., 1997-2001 instead
of 1990-2001), evidence of a shortfall in actual U.S. exchange listing counts emerges for 2004 and 2005.
However, this additional evidence is of little help to those who blame the SOX legislation, because we
uncover a larger shortfall among London exchange listing counts.
If New York has become less attractive, we would expect the cross-listing premium originally
uncovered by Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004) to decrease, everything else remaining constant. We
investigate this hypothesis in several steps. We first estimate the listing premium on U.S. exchanges every
year from 1990 to 2005. Not only is this premium significantly positive every year, but there is no
convincing evidence in our data that it has fallen in recent years. Next, we test and confirm that there is no
evidence that the listing premium in New York decreased relative to the listing premium in London. In
fact, we show that there is no listing premium in London over the 1990 to 2005 period. Consequently,
firms that list in London do so for reasons other than for a governance benefit. Our conclusions on the
listing premium hold using several different estimation approaches, including an approach that allows for
unobservable firm characteristics to influence the valuation of firms. Thus, the listing premium in our
approach does not proxy inadvertently for such characteristics. Finally, we show that the listing premium
on U.S. exchanges is not a temporary phenomenon but that it is permanent.
It is surprising that we find no evidence of a cross-listing premium in London, but this result is fully
consistent with our evidence on the actions of firms following a listing. Earlier work by Reese and
Weisbach (2002) shows that, following a U.S. cross-listing, firms raise more funds, both in their home
markets and abroad, than firms without such a listing because investors believe that they are better
protected when investing in such firms. We build on the work of these authors by investigating the
security issuance behavior of firms cross-listed in New York compared to firms cross-listed in London.
We provide evidence that firms listed in New York raise more funds after the listing (including in the

5

home, U.S., U.K., and other markets) than firms that list in London, so that there is more evidence of a
benefit of listing for firms that list in New York than for firms that list in London.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our data and show the evolution of the
number of listings over time across types of listings in New York and London. We compare the
characteristics of new cross-listings in New York and London in Section 3. We then examine in Section 4
the determinants of the listing decision in New York and London and investigate whether there are fewer
New York listings in recent years than we would expect given how firms made their listing decision in the
1990s. In Section 5, we report evidence on the listing premium over time across types of listings. In
Section 6, we show the capital raising activities of firms before and after listings in New York and
London. We conclude in Section 7.

2. The evolution of cross-listings in New York and London over time
Before we commence with a detailed examination of the cross-listing flows in New York and London
over time, it is useful to first show the importance of New York and London in the world of cross-listings
using data from the World Federation of Stock Exchanges (WFE). These data rely on reports from
member exchanges of the Federation and include companies which have shares listed on a specific
exchange, excluding investment funds and unit trusts. Companies with multiple classes of shares are
counted once. The Federation reports separately data for major exchanges, for markets specifically
designed for small and medium sized enterprises (such as London’s AIM), and other markets (such as
affiliated and correspondent exchanges that are not members).
Figure 1 shows that New York and London have attracted the lion’s share of foreign listings during
the past decade relative to the other exchanges that are members of the Federation. In 1998 (Figure 1a),
the LSE’s 466 foreign listings together with AIM’s 21 listings constituted 16% of the 2,978 foreign
listings around the world, and those on the three major exchanges in New York totaled 894, or 30% of the
total. The next three largest exchanges in terms of the global market share of foreign listings in 1998 were

6

the Luxembourg exchange (7%), Deutsche Börse (7%), and the Swiss exchange (6%). By 2005, London’s
Main Market and AIM exchanges increased their global market share to 19% thanks to the growth of
AIM (220 listings, or 8% global market share). The New York-based exchanges together maintained their
30% market share (884 listings out of the 2,929 globally). Both the Deutsche Börse and the Swiss
Exchange lost market share (4%) and, though Euronext (a consolidation of the former Paris, Amsterdam,
Brussels, and Lisbon bourses) emerged as the next largest with a 10% global market share, its market
share was actually lower than what it would have been in 1998 (15%).6
Figure 1b shows that, by 2005, the AMEX, NASDAQ, and NYSE had increased their market share
relative to London’s Main Market. In 1998, the New York exchanges had 92% more foreign listings than
London. But, by 2005, the New York exchanges had 165% more foreign listings than London’s Main
Market. However, when we include the foreign listing counts on AIM in addition to the LSE’s Main
Market, the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ had only 60% more foreign listings than London in 2005. The
growth of the share of foreign listings of London is due fully to a dramatic increase in AIM that offsets a
decrease in foreign listings on London’s Main Market. Over the period from 1998 to 2005, the Main
Market’s foreign listings dropped from 466 to 334, while those on AIM jumped from 4 to 220.
The data from the WFE cannot be used to assess whether London’s increased market share relative to
New York’s implies that New York is now less attractive. The WFE provides aggregate data only, which
makes it impossible to track the characteristics of listed firms by type of listing and to evaluate the
success of New York and London in attracting new listings and retaining existing listings. It could be
therefore that London was more successful in attracting new listings on the Main Market than were the
exchanges in New York, but this increased competitiveness of London is not discernible with aggregate
data on listing counts. The WFE data also ignores listings that do not take place on the exchanges but are
important in the U.S.: namely, Rule 144a private placements and OTC listings. For our analysis, it is

6

Of course, this decline may be over-estimated because the sum of foreign listings of the Paris, Brussels,
Amsterdam, and Lisbon stock exchanges in 1998 ignores double-counting of cross-listings among the four
exchanges, which would not have been included in the 2005 Euronext count.

7

therefore necessary for us to construct a database that tracks listings at the firm-level and distinctly by
listing type. Before we turn to the construction of that database, however, we review the types of listings
available in New York and in London and the implications of these types of listings for corporate
governance.

2.1. Regulatory and listing requirements for foreign listings in New York and London
To understand the corporate governance and regulatory implications of listing in New York and
London, it is important to make a distinction between listing rules required by the exchanges, the laws
and regulations that listed firms must satisfy, and, most importantly, the specific combination of listing
rules, laws, and regulations that apply to foreign listed firms.
Firms that list in the U.S. via Rule 144a or in the OTC market are exempt from SEC registration and
many disclosure requirements and therefore face very few additional obligations when they list. In
contrast, foreign firms that list on U.S. exchanges have to register with the SEC and become subject to
U.S. securities laws. These laws not only increase disclosure and financial reporting requirements (e.g.
reconciliation of financial accounts with U.S. GAAP and other disclosures), but also reduce agency costs
and restrain controlling shareholders by imposing substantive obligations on them.7 Since 2002, foreign
firms listed on U.S. exchanges have been subject to some of the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.8 In
addition to the SEC’s requirements, foreign firms also have to satisfy the listing requirements and
governance standards of the individual exchanges, although the exchanges can waive some of the
governance standards on a case-by-case basis. In general, firms are subject to SEC oversight, they are

7

Because the regulatory and listing requirements for U.S. listings have been discussed extensively in the literature,
our discussion of these requirements does not detail all of the specific rules. We refer readers to papers by Coffee
(1999, 2002, 2007), Doidge (2004), and Greene, Beller, Rosen, Silverman, Braverman, and Sperber (2000) for a
more complete discussion.
8
Actually, reporting foreign companies initially were expected to comply with the internal control reporting
provisions of Section 404 in connection with their fiscal years ending on or after June 15, 2004. On February 24,
2004, the SEC, in recognizing the importance of these provisions and the time needed to implement them properly,
extended these compliance dates to fiscal years ending July 15, 2005. The deadlines were extended a second time on
March 2, 2005 and a third time on September 22, 2005 for fiscal years ending July 15, 2007. See SEC Release No.
33-8618 (Sept. 22, 2005) [70 FR 56825] at www.sec.gov.

8

exposed to class action lawsuits, and face additional monitoring by market participants, such as analysts
and institutional investors. The bottom line is that controlling shareholders of foreign firms that list on a
U.S. exchange face more constraints and obligations than controlling shareholders of similar firms that
are not listed.
In London, firms can list on the Main Market as a Depositary Receipt (DR) or ordinary issue or they
can list on the Alternative Investment Market. There are different requirements for each listing type.9
Firms that list as ordinary issues must be admitted to listing by the U.K. Listing Authority (UKLA), part
of the Financial Services Authority (FSA), and then be admitted to trading by the LSE. Most foreign
firms that list as ordinary issues in London seek a “secondary” listing (the “primary listing” being the
home market – foreign firms typically do not incorporate in the U.K.). In general, the provisions of the
UKLA’s listing rules that seek to protect minority investors do not apply to foreign firms with a
secondary listing (Coffee, 2007).10 For example, the Combined Code on Corporate Governance applies
only to companies incorporated in the U.K., which means that firms with foreign listings are not required
to comply with the code.11 Moreover, these firms are not required to explain why they have chosen not to
comply. The main requirement for firms with ordinary listings on the Main Market is to file financial
information prepared in accordance with U.K. or U.S. GAAP or International Accounting Standards
(IAS), although exceptions are made to this requirement in some cases. For example, the UKLA will
accept local accounting standards from Japanese firms. The requirements for firms that list on the Main

9

See “Listing in London: Listing depositary receipts” (2000, 2003), “Listing in London: Listing shares” (2000),
“How to Join the London Markets” (2001), “A guide for Japanese companies listing on the London Stock
Exchange” (2003), “London Stock Exchange Admission and Disclosure Standards” (2005), and “Joining AIM: A
Professional Handbook” (2005), all published by the London Stock Exchange. Additional details on the listing and
reporting requirements of the U.K. Listing Authority can be found in the “Index to Listing, Disclosure and
Prospectus Rules” (particularly LR 18.1 – 18.4 and 19.1 – 19.3) at the U.K. Financial Services Agency website
(http://fsahandbook.info/FSA/html/handbook/D85).
10
See MacNeil and Lau (2001) for further details on listing requirements. They conclude that the considerable
exceptions from the listing rules made for foreign firms suggests a deliberate policy of competing for foreign listings
and that bonding is not the main explanation for London’s success in attracting foreign listings.
11
The Cadbury Report, published in 1992 included a “Code of Best Practice”. In 1998, the Hampel Report led to the
publication of the Combined Code of Corporate Governance (“Combined Code”). The Combined Code, which is
annexed to the UKLA’s listing rules, contains two sections, “Principals of good governance” and “Code of best
practice.” In 2003, the code was further revised.

9

Market via DRs are even less demanding than those for ordinary listings in that financial information
need not be prepared in accordance with IAS, U.K., or U.S. GAAP.12
Firms listing in London can also choose to list on AIM. It is well-known that listing requirements on
AIM are minimal – there is no prior trading requirement, prior shareholder approval for transactions is not
required, admission documents are not pre-vetted by the exchange or by the UKLA, there is no minimum
market capitalization, and there is no minimum public float requirement. In fact, all that is required for a
firm to be admitted to AIM is that it has the support of a nominated advisor (“Nomad”) and subsequently
the firm has to satisfy only the exchange’s weak disclosure duty. AIM rules impose a “general duty of
disclosure requiring information which it (the issuer) reasonably considers necessary to enable investors
to form a full understanding of the financial position of the applicant.” Although there is a common belief
that listing in London provides a certain level of good governance, firms with foreign listings in London
generally need only comply with the governance rules of their home country. That is, firms with foreign
listings in London are subject to a “light touch” approach to regulation. Recently, institutional investors
expressed concerns to the FSA about the governance standards of foreign firms listing in the U.K. In
April 2007, the FSA announced a plan to review the rules which apply to foreign listings and to consider
stricter rules for foreign listings on the LSE.13

2.2. Data sources on foreign listings in New York and London
To conduct our study, we construct a dataset that contains information on firms’ listing decisions,
firm characteristics, as well as home country characteristics. Our first step is to construct a list of firms
that have foreign listings in the U.S. or in the U.K., at the end of each year from 1990 through 2005.
Firms can cross-list in the U.S. by means of a Rule 144a private placement, an OTC listing as Bulletin
12

Most firms issue Global Depositary Receipts (GDRs), which cannot be traded by ordinary retail investors.
Recently, the LSE introduced Retail Depositary Receipts (RDRs). Because these can be traded by all investors, the
listing requirements are more stringent and are similar to those for ordinary issues. To date, few firms have chosen
to list RDRs.
13
See “Firms list in UK to avoid tough US standards” Reuters News (February 3, 2006); “FSA to act on foreign IPO
concerns” FT.com, (April 5, 2007); and “Regulator to review London listings for foreign firms” The Guardian
(April 5, 2007).

10

Board (OTCBB) or Pink Sheet issues, or on the AMEX, NASDAQ, or NYSE. We keep track of listings
on U.S. exchanges that are created as direct listings, New York Registered Shares, or as Level II or Level
III (capital raising) ADR programs. Firms can cross-list in the U.K. on the Main Market via depositary
receipts or an ordinary listing. Starting in 1995, firms could also choose to list on AIM.
Information on foreign listings comes from a variety of sources, including the Bank of New York,
Citibank, JP Morgan, the NYSE, NASDAQ, the London Stock Exchange, the OTCBB, end-of-year
editions of the National Quotation Bureau’s Pink Sheets, the Center for Research on Security Prices
(CRSP), firms’ annual reports, SEC Form 20-F filings, and Factiva searches. Information from the
various datasets is manually cross-checked and verified. The data provided by Citibank and CRSP allows
us to keep track of both active and inactive issues for U.S. listings, which mitigates concerns about
survivorship bias. However, a limitation of the data provided by the London Stock Exchange is that the
earliest information on Main Market listings we are able to obtain is from 1997. Further, that list contains
only firms that were listed as of 1997. As such, we are unable to verify that we have the complete list of
U.K. listings prior to that year. Our list in 1997 and later years is complete, however.
In addition to listing dates, we also keep track of changes in firms’ foreign listing status, either
through upgrades, downgrades, or delistings. If a firm upgrades from a Rule 144a private placement or
OTC listing to a U.S. exchange listing, the upgrade is counted as a new U.S. exchange listing and as a
delisting from the Rule 144a or OTC markets. Firms that change their listing location are assigned to a
listing type according to their status as of December 31 of the year, regardless of when the change took
place during the year. Firms’ foreign listings are frequently terminated and we keep track of the dates on
which a firm delists. For firms that delist from a U.S. stock exchange or from an ordinary listing in the
U.K., we also record the reason for delisting. A delisting is classified as “voluntary” if a firm is in
compliance with an exchange’s listing standards and voluntarily takes steps to delist its shares or
depositary receipts. Firms are also delisted when they are acquired and these cases are classified as a
“merger/acquisition.” The final category is “other.” This includes cases where firms are delisted when

11

they fail to meet their exchange’s listing requirements, when firms are bankrupt, in financial distress, or
are undergoing some kind of restructuring or liquidation.

2.3. The time-series of listings: levels and flows
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the total number of cross-listings from 1990 to 2005 in the
U.S. (separately by Rule 144, OTC, and exchange listings) and in the U.K. (separately by AIM, DRs, and
ordinary shares).14 The number of exchange listings in the U.S. peaks in 2000 at 960. The number of
exchange listings increases each year before the peak and falls in all years afterwards except 2004. By
2005, the number of listings had fallen by 94 from its peak, standing at 866. The number of OTC listings
peaks in 2002 at 993. Though the number of OTC listings increases monotonically from 1990 to 2002, it
falls by 98 listings in 2003 and then stays close to that number until 2005. Finally, the number of Rule
144a issues reached its peak of 312 in 2005, but there is little variation in the number of Rule 144a issues
from 1999 to 2005. In the U.K., there has been a steady decline in DR and ordinary listing counts since
1997 from a peak of 491 to only 327 in 2005. AIM listings jumped dramatically in 2004 and 2005 to 242
following a slow, steady increase over the 1995 to 2003 period. So, foreign listing counts have been
steadily decreasing on the major exchanges in New York since 2001 and the Main Market in London
since 1998. The listing counts on the Rule 144a and OTC markets in the U.S. have held steady and those
on AIM in London have been increasing, especially in 2004 and 2005.
Table 2 presents the flows of new listings and delistings that correspond to the listing counts in Table
1. These data are again reported by year for New York and London and by type of listing. The biggest
years on record for new listings on U.S. exchanges were 2000 (164), which coincides with the peak
foreign listing count, as well as 1996 and 1997. The new listings have slowed since 2000. Interestingly,
the pace of delistings rose from a level that averaged 25% of new foreign listings to 50% between 1998
14

The exchange listing counts are almost identical to those reported in the WFE statistics (the Rule 144a and OTC
counts are not reported by WFE). The LSE Main Market counts are very similar to those reported by the Exchange
to WFE, although the differences widen for 1995. As noted earlier, we were unable to obtain annual listing counts
directly from the LSE prior to 1997.

12

and 2000, and, finally, to a level over 100% of new foreign listings after 2001. New foreign listings on the
OTC market peaked in 2001 (205 in total) and in only one year (2003) has the pace of OTC foreign
delistings exceeded that of new listings. Similarly, there have been only two years (2001-2002) in which
foreign delistings from the Rule 144a market have exceeded those of new listings, but the delisting rate
has distinctly risen since 1999. The annual rates of new foreign listings in London on the Main Market
have slowed since 1996 for DRs and since 2000 for ordinary shares. Like the New York exchange
listings, the pace of delistings in London has increased since 1999 to the point where the delisting rate
exceeds (and often more than doubles) the rate of new listings in each year. The AIM market represents a
distinct exception with few delistings relative to the high rate of new listings.
Table 3 breaks out the cumulative count of new listings over the period from 1990 to 2005 by
country. Canadian and U.K firms dominate the new OTC and exchange listings in New York. Together,
they comprise 28% and 10%, respectively. India, Taiwan, Mexico, and South Korea have the greatest
numbers of listings on the Rule 144a market. For ordinary listings on the LSE’s Main Market, Irish firms
are well represented (58 firms), as well as those from Canada, Japan, and the United States.15 As noted by
Salva (2003), firms from developed countries are more likely to have an ordinary listing, while firms from
emerging markets, such as India, Poland, South Korea, and Taiwan, dominate the DR market. Finally,
Australian, Canadian, Irish, and U.S. firms dominate the AIM sample of new listings, constituting
together over 61% of the total.
Most delistings on the exchanges in New York and London over the 1990 to 2005 period are due to
either mergers/acquisitions or for other reasons such as distress, restructuring, or failure to comply with
the exchange’s listing standards. Table 4 presents the annual delisting flows for exchange listings in New
York and for ordinary listings in London separately for voluntary, merger/acquisition, and other reasons.
Overall, voluntary delistings represented only 13% (95 of 726 total delistings) in New York and 33%
15

There are also a substantial number of ordinary listings from tax-haven countries such as Bermuda and the
Cayman Islands. The raw data on foreign listings provided by the LSE contains investment funds and trusts and we
include these in our listing counts. These mainly affect the listing counts from tax-haven countries, such as the
Cayman Islands, where almost all of the foreign listings are funds or trusts.

13

(105 of 317 total delistings) in London.16 If we include delistings by firms with DRs in London, the count
of voluntary delistings in London is even higher. It is noteworthy that the rise in delisting activity since
2000 has been mostly voluntary in nature. But, the salient fact is that the increase in annual delisting
activity in recent years, measured as a fraction of the respective total number of outstanding foreign
listings, has been somewhat greater in London than in New York (around 2% per year in New York and
around 4% per year in London). The fact that voluntary delistings are easier in London than on the U.S.
exchanges may explain the sharp increase in voluntary delistings in London compared to the increase in
voluntary delistings in New York.
What, then, can we learn from this analysis of listing counts and flows about the competitiveness of
New York’s markets relative to London? Foreign listings increased sharply in both markets in the 1990s,
but, after 2000, the numbers fell on the main exchanges both in London and in New York, as well as on
the OTC market in the U.S. The shift resulted from both a decrease in the number of new listings and an
increase in the number of voluntary delistings. In comparing the magnitudes of the new listings and
delistings in both markets, there is no evidence that New York is losing market share of foreign crosslistings to London. The growth and pace of the AIM market in the past decade, however, tilts the market
share toward London. At first glance, the firms that are attracted to AIM appear to be those that are also
attracted to the major exchanges in New York and London, at least in terms of their home markets. But, in
order to judge the success of AIM as evidence of a potential decline in U.S. market competitiveness, we
need to understand whether the typical firm that lists on AIM has similar characteristics to a firm that

16

Classification of voluntary and involuntary delistings can be complex. Our count of 95 voluntary delistings risks
overstating the number of “true” voluntary delistings. Many firms are often close to financial distress so that what
appears to be a firm’s choice may, in fact, simply be a pre-emptive action of an inevitable involuntary delisting by
the exchange. We identify 14 (out of 95) cases, where the delisting is announced as voluntary, but coincides with
financial difficulties, cost-cutting, or restructuring programs. For example, Germany’s Lion Bioscience delisted its
ADRs from NASDAQ on December 22, 2004 at the same time when it forecasted operating losses, announced
management changes, reductions in staff by half, and a major board restructuring. The U.K.’s Mid-States PLC
simultaneously announced in July 1997 lower profits, restructured cash-management activity, and cost-cutting
programs, including a delisting from NASDAQ. Chaplinsky and Ramchand (2007) use a conservative classification
approach and uncover only 48 voluntary delistings from U.S. exchanges over the 1961-2004 period.

14

would have listed on a U.S. exchange in the 1990s. One of the goals of the next section is to answer this
question.

3. The characteristics of foreign listings in New York and London over time
If New York has become less competitive, some firms that would have listed in New York in the
1990s would not do so today. Consequently, we would expect the characteristics of firms that list to be
different in recent years than they were in the 1990s. Previous research has established that larger, more
profitable, and faster growing firms from countries with better-developed financial and legal institutions
and economies are more likely to pursue U.S. listings, in the first place, and to do so on major exchanges
rather than OTC or Rule 144a private placements, as predicted by theory (Reese and Weisbach, 2002;
Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002; Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004). Less is known about the attributes
of firms that pursue U.K. listings (Baker, Nofsinger, and Weaver, 2002; Salva, 2003). In this section, we
investigate whether the characteristics of listing firms have changed over time and how these
characteristics differ between firms that list in London versus those that list in New York. We also divide
our sample into listings that took place before the end of 2001 and listings that were made after that year.
During the first subperiod, listing counts on U.S. exchanges increase and then reach a plateau. In the
second subperiod, delistings outpace new listings both in New York and in London (from Table 1, there
are 960 listed firms on U.S. exchanges in 2000 and 950 in 2001). The choice of subperiod also
corresponds roughly to a pre-SOX and a post-SOX period.
Our data source for firm characteristics such as Tobin’s q, sales growth, total assets, ownership,
leverage, and SIC (Standard Industrial Classification) codes is Thomson Financial’s Worldscope
database. Therefore, we match our sample of foreign listings to Worldscope. Worldscope covers over
24,000 public companies in more than 50 developed and emerging markets, representing more than 96
percent of the market value of the world’s publicly traded companies. Although the Worldscope database
provides the broadest available coverage of international companies, not all firms in our lists are covered

15

by Worldscope and many of the smaller countries listed in Table 3 (e.g., the Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados,
among others) are not covered at all.
Following the literature, we use Tobin’s q as our valuation measure and compute it as follows. For the
numerator, we take the book value of total assets, subtract the book value of equity, and add the market
value of equity. For the denominator, we use the book value of total assets. All variables are in local
currency, although it makes no difference if we use local currency or U.S. dollars since the numerator and
denominator are denominated in the same currency. Sales growth is measured as the two-year geometric
average of annual inflation-adjusted growth in sales. Sales growth is winsorized at the 1st and 99th
percentiles to reduce the impact of outliers. Total assets are measured in millions of U.S. dollars and
leverage is defined as total debt divided by total assets. Ownership is the data item “Closely-held shares.”
Worldscope defines closely-held shares as shares held by insiders, which include senior corporate officers
and directors, and their immediate families, shares held in trusts, shares held by another corporation
(except shares held in a fiduciary capacity by financial institutions), shares held by pension/benefit plans,
and shares held by individuals who hold five percent or more of shares outstanding. In Japan, closely-held
shares represent the holdings of the ten largest shareholders. For firms with more than one class of shares,
closely-held shares for each class are added together. The ownership measure is far from perfect since it
relies on information disclosed by firms and this disclosure is often voluntary and difficult to check.
We also use a number of country-level variables in our analysis. For each country in each year, we
obtain a measure of inflation from Datastream, which is the change in the CPI provided by the IMF. We
adjust sales growth and total assets for inflation. We also use a number of variables to proxy for country
characteristics. We use the anti-director rights variable from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (2006) as a measure of shareholder rights. Another proxy for home country investor protection is
legal origin, from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998). We construct a dummy
variable, “Common”, that equals one for firms from countries with a common law tradition and equals
zero for firms from countries with a civil law tradition. The rule of law index is a measure of enforcement

16

and is obtained from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), although this variable is
not available for China, Hungary, Poland, or Russia. We obtain values for the rule of law for these
countries from Pistor, Raiser, and Gelfer (2000). As other authors before us, we define the variable
“Legal” as the product of anti-director and rule of law. Stock market capitalization divided by GDP
(Gross Domestic Product) and Gross National Product (GNP) per capita is from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators database.
Table 5 reports summary statistics on each of these characteristics for listed firms by type of listing in
New York and London in the listing year and for non-listed firms over the full period. Panels a and c
present results for the whole period (1990 – 2005) and panels b and d present results by subperiod (1990 –
2001 or “Pre-SOX” versus 2002 – 2005 or “Post-SOX” periods). The count of firms and the medians of
these attributes are reported as well as Wilcoxon rank-sum statistics, which test whether two different
samples are from the same distribution across listing types or across subperiods. The tests across different
listing types always compare attributes relative to the sample of U.S. exchange listed foreign firms. Panels
a and b present the statistics for the entire sample of new cross-listings by non-U.S. firms that are in the
Worldscope database whereas, in panels c and d, the statistics are reported for the subset of new crosslistings by non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database with available
data on firm characteristics a given year. To make firms comparable across countries, we exclude
financial firms and require that firms have total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars). We also
tried using a size cutoff of $10 million and find that our results are similar and this is true for all
subsequent tables as well. Firms from tax-havens, such as Bermuda and the Cayman Islands, are excluded
because, though they are foreign-domiciled firms, they typically have their listing in New York or
London rather than a cross-listing and are foreign firms only for tax purposes. U.S. and U.K. firms are
excluded because they are domiciled in the target host markets for foreign listings.
Panel a of Table 5 confirms the fact that, in the listing year, the foreign firms attracted to the
exchanges in New York and London are large (median total assets between $600 and $700 million for

17

U.S. exchange-listed firms and for London ordinaries), fast growing with trailing two-year annualized
sales growth figures in excess of 14%, moderately leveraged (less than 20% of debt to total assets), and
have somewhat concentrated ownership structures.17 There are mostly statistically significant and
economically large differences in size, sales growth, and leverage between U.S. and U.K. exchange-listed
firms and their counterparts on the Rule 144a/OTC markets in New York and AIM listings (median size
of only $11.5 million, sales growth of 10%, and median leverage of 0%). The differences in size between
firms listing on U.S. exchanges and those listing on AIM are striking. Only 11% of the firms listing on
AMEX, 5.5% of firms listing on NASDAQ, and none of the firms listing on the NYSE had total assets
less than the median total assets of firms listing on AIM.
The firms that are attracted to the U.S.’s Rule 144a market and LSE’s DR market are larger firms
than those that cross-list on U.S. exchanges or as ordinaries in the U.K., have notably higher fractions of
closely-held shares, and are also more likely to come from less-developed countries with lower GNP per
capita, lower market capitalization-to-GDP ratios, and lower scores on legal protections of minority
shareholders. Finally, there are statistically significant differences in Tobin’s q valuation ratios not only
between U.S. exchange listings and Rule 144a/OTC firms (median ratios of 1.56 versus 1.35), but also
between AIM firms and London’s Main Market listings (median of 2.01 versus 1.35 for DRs and ordinary
shares). The striking result is that AIM firms have extremely large q ratios in the listing year, compared to
those that choose any other way to cross-list. However, these are small firms concentrated in a few high q
industries. Panel c, which repeats the analysis of panel a with more stringent data requirements, tighter
size screens, and without U.K. and tax-haven-domiciled firms, indicates that the valuation difference
between AIM and Main Market firms disappears as firm size becomes more comparable.18 Finally, in the

17

Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Miller, and Stulz (2007) show that more shares are held by controlling shareholders in
firms that are not cross-listed than in firms that are cross-listed. The data used in their study uses ownership by
controlling shareholders, so it is not directly comparable to the blockholder data we use.
18
No doubt that much of any statistical precision is lost because so many of the AIM firms are bound by the data
and country screens (80 AIM firms in panel a reduce to only 5 AIM firms in panel c). Panel a shows that the median
total assets of AIM firms is only $11.5 million and recall from Table 3 that 39 firms on AIM (18% of the sample)
firms are from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands.

18

listing year, the valuation of London-listed firms is indistinguishable from the valuation of U.S. exchange
listed firms.
Both panels a and c show that non-listed firms are quite different from U.S. exchange-listed firms.
Not surprisingly, the number of non-listed firms (actually, firm-year counts) is extremely large compared
to the total number of newly listed firms. The median total assets of non-listed firms correspond to less
than 20% of the median total assets of U.S. exchange-listed firms. In fact, the median total assets of nonlisted firms are much smaller than the median total assets for all firms with a listing except relative to
AIM firms which are one-tenth of the median total assets of non-listed firms. Non-listed firms have low
sales growth, low Tobin’s q ratios, and high insider ownership compared to U.S. exchange-listed firms or
even compared to other listed firms.
The differences in listing year firm characteristics between the pre-SOX 1990-2001 and post-SOX
2002-2005 periods are neither statistically nor economically large. Panel b shows that there are negligible
differences in total assets (in constant 1990 dollars), leverage, ownership, sales growth, and even Tobin’s
q ratios across the two subperiods. There are exceptions in the U.S. markets: foreign firms listing on the
OTC market and on the major exchanges were smaller, had slightly lower sales growth, and less leverage
in the post-SOX period. There is also some evidence that foreign firms on AIM were drawn from
industries with higher median Tobin’s q ratios and from countries with better economic and financial
development (GNP per capita and market capitalization/GDP ratios) after SOX. However, panel d with its
more stringent data screen shows again that these differences disappear. Of course, one has to be cautious
about interpreting changes across subperiods for AIM as there are so few listings before 2002.
Strikingly, while the characteristics of newly listed firms on U.S. exchanges do not appear to change
much from before to after SOX, the characteristics of non-listed firms change significantly. In particular,
the typical non-listed firm has much smaller size in total assets and its Tobin’s q ratio falls. Though sales
growth increases for non-listed firms, it is still very small compared to the sales growth of listed firms. As
non-listed firms change, it is not surprising that their appetite for listings might change also.

19

Put together, this evidence on firm characteristics across listing types and across pre/post-SOX
periods reveals that (a) the firms that are attracted to the major exchanges in New York and London are
not very different, (b) the firms that are attracted to the Rule 144a/OTC markets in New York and AIM in
London, however, are different from those that pursue exchange listings, and (c) little about these
characteristics changes between the pre- and post-2001 periods, especially in the U.K. The evidence on
the changes in characteristics of non-listed firms shows that the characteristics of these firms have
changed. This evidence suggests that costs and benefits of listings have not changed and points to a
decrease in the number of firms with characteristics that make listing attractive as the explanation for the
decrease in the number of listings. However, simply looking at comparisons of medians is not convincing
evidence. The next step in our analysis is to calibrate the new listing activity over time in Section 2 with
the firm characteristics presented in this section using models of firm listing choices to see if the
determinants of the listing choices are different across listing types and whether they have changed
structurally over time.

4. The determinants of listing choices
If the rising-then-falling pattern of foreign listings on U.S. exchanges is explained by a decrease in
the competitiveness of these exchanges, we would expect that firms make their listing decisions
differently now than they used to, so that a firm with characteristics that made it likely to list in the past
would be less likely to list now. In this section, we first examine the determinants of firms’ decisions to
cross-list in the U.S. or U.K. using a competing-risks hazard model. Specifically, we estimate a model
that simultaneously considers the determinants of listings in both the U.S. and the U.K. This allows us to
test whether the factors that affect these listing choices differ. This first step helps us to understand which
characteristics influence the different types of foreign listing outcomes in the U.S. and U.K. markets
during the overall 1990-2005 period. Next, in order to evaluate the decline in the competitiveness of U.S.

20

markets, we examine whether the propensity of firms with given characteristics to list in the U.S. and
U.K. changed after 2001.

4.1. Competing risks models for New York and London listings
The competing risks model we estimate extends the standard Cox (1972) proportional-hazard model
developed for single event data to multiple event data. Although previous papers have estimated singleevent Cox models to investigate the factors that affect firms’ foreign listing decisions, they do not
distinguish among different types of listings (Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002; Doidge, Karolyi, Lins,
Miller, and Stulz, 2007). Pagano, Roell, and Zechner (2002) model separately the probability of a
European firm cross-listing in another European country or one of the U.S. exchanges or both in a year t,
given that the firm has not yet listed. Other listing choices are not considered and after a firm lists abroad
on one market or another, it is excluded from the model estimation because it is no longer “at risk” of
listing. The key point is that the listing location choices are modeled with separate Cox models. With a
competing-risks model where listing choices include both the U.S. and the U.K., a firm that lists on a U.S.
exchange is no longer “at risk” of listing in the U.S., but it is still “at risk” of listing in the U.K. Similarly,
a firm that lists in the U.K. would continue to be at risk of listing in the U.S. In other words, the listing
location choices are modeled in the same Cox model.
There are several variations of competing risks hazard models and the specific choice depends on the
nature of the data being analyzed (Cleves, 1999; Box-Steffensmeier and Zorn, 2002). The case we
analyze is sometimes referred to as “unordered failure events of different types” and the model we
estimate is referred to as a stratified proportional hazard model. In our application, there are two possible
failure events, cross-listing in the U.S. or listing in the U.K., and the listings can occur in either order. For
each firm j, the model is specified as:

(

)

(

)

h t x jk = h0 k ( t ) exp β′k x jk ,

21

where h0k(t) is the baseline hazard for the kth event, xjk, is a vector of independent variables for the kth
event, and βk is a vector of parameters to be estimated. Therefore, the model allows both the baseline
hazard and the parameter estimates to differ for U.S. and U.K. listings.
To estimate this model, we follow the procedure outlined in Cleves (1999) and Lunn and McNeil
(1995). Lunn and McNeil show that by augmenting the data using a duplication method, Cox models can
be adapted to take account of multiple failure types. In our case, there are two failure types, given by δ
equal to 0 or 1. The first failure type is listing in the U.S. (δ = 0) and the second is listing in the U.K. (δ =
1). Because there are two failure types, each firm-year observation in the dataset should be duplicated
once. For each pair of observations, the first observation is associated with U.S. listings and the second
observation is associated with U.K. listings. Each year, each firm is at risk for both types of listings.
However, if a firm lists in the U.S. (U.K.) it is no longer at risk for a U.S. (U.K.) listing and future
observations associated with U.S. (U.K.) listings are removed from the dataset. However, the firm is still
at risk for a U.K. (U.S.) listing so those observations remain in the dataset. If the firm later lists in the
U.K. (U.S.), then any future observations for that firm would be removed from the dataset.
We use this augmented dataset to estimate a stratified proportional-hazard model, with the
stratification variable being δ (listing type) and the covariates being x for U.S. listings, together with their
interactions, δ′x for U.K. listings. While estimating this model is equivalent to estimating proportionalhazard models separately for each listing type (treating the other listing type as censored data), this
approach allows us to test whether the estimated parameters for each listing type are different.
In this “event time” experiment, we consider firms over the period from 1991 to 2005. The firm-level
and country-level explanatory variables we use are given in Table 5, although we lag all variables by one
year since we are trying to explain why a firm with specific characteristics at the end of one year chooses
to list during the following year. Because variables are lagged by one year, we cannot use new listings in
1990. We also remove from the sample firms that have a U.S. and U.K. listing prior to 1991. We report
the coefficients in exponentiated form. The advantage of exponentiated coefficients is that they can be

22

interpreted as the effect of a unit change in the explanatory variable on the hazard. For example, an
exponentiated coefficient of 1.2 (0.8) implies that a one unit increase (decrease) in the explanatory
variable increases (decreases) the probability of cross-listing by 20 percent. The standard errors are
adjusted for firm-level clustering, so that we assume errors are independent across firms, but not across
time.
In Table 6, we report the results. The first two models include all types of listings in the U.S. and
U.K. and provide a broad comparison of firms that choose to list in each market. The next two models
focus only on exchange listings in the U.S. and ordinary listings in the U.K. We focus on ordinary listings
in the U.K. as they are the most comparable type of listing in London to exchange listings in New York.
This choice should make it more difficult to find differences between New York and London listings,
especially because the majority of firms that list as ordinaries in London are from developed markets.
Models (1) and (3) report results that exclude the ownership variable and models (2) and (4) report results
that include the ownership variable. Requiring data on lagged ownership imposes a tight constraint on the
dataset, which is why we report both sets of results. In model (1), there are 573 new listings by firms in
the U.S. and 39 new listings in the U.K. that have all the required data available and have total assets of at
least $100 million (in 1990 dollars). In model (2), there are 425 new listings by firms in the U.S. and 30
new listings in the U.K. By focusing only on exchange listings in models (3) and (4), the number of
“failure” events is approximately halved.
Overall, we find that large firms with positive sales growth in industries with high Tobin’s q ratios
and from countries with better legal regimes for minority investors are more likely to cross-list in the U.S.
and the U.K. markets. There are some differences in the exponentiated coefficients between the U.S. and
U.K. listings, but none of them are statistically significant (likely a lack of precision due to so few U.K.
listing events). For example, leveraged firms are less likely to pursue a U.S. listing and the larger positive
coefficient on Log(Assets) and Legal for U.S. listings suggests a notably stronger bias for large firms and
those from better legal regimes to list there. In model (2), the coefficient on ownership is significantly

23

below one for U.S. listings and not for U.K. listings, indicating that closely-held foreign firms are less
likely to pursue a U.S. listing.
When we replicate the competing risk estimation for exchange listings in New York and ordinary
share listings in London, the important differences noted above widen and some even become statistically
significant. For example, the positive coefficients on Legal widen further and the negative coefficient on
ownership for U.S. listings in model (4) is significantly different from that for U.K. listings indicating that
it is the major exchanges in New York, rather than the Rule 144a and OTC listings, that represent the
primary deterrent for closely-held firms from poorer legal regimes at home. In fact, U.K. ordinary listings
do not deter such firms at all. This latter result is important as it is consistent with the findings in Doidge,
Karolyi, Lins, Miller, and Stulz (2007) and with the idea that U.S. listing choices tend to be significantly
associated with a governance benefit. That is, if foreign firms with closely-held shares are, in fact,
controlled by a dominant shareholder and if they come from a country where it is easier for the
controlling shareholders to expropriate firm assets at the expense of minority shareholders, they are less
likely to seek a listing on a U.S. exchange since the additional scrutiny of regulatory institutions, like the
SEC, and more rigorous monitoring by various capital market participants makes it harder for them to run
the corporations they control for their own private gain.

4.2. Changing firm characteristics and the propensity to list in New York and London
If New York has become less competitive in attracting foreign listings since 2001, perhaps because of
the passage of SOX in 2002, the actual number of listing firms would have declined relative to what
would have been expected based on information of how firms made listing choices before 2001. The
expected number of listing firms is jointly a function of the propensity to list given certain firm
characteristics and the changing characteristics of the eligible set of firms. We next estimate logistic
regression models separately for U.S. and U.K. listings for the pre-SOX period (1990-2001) and then
apply these estimated models to the pool of firms available in Worldscope in the post-SOX period to

24

estimate the expected fraction of these firms that would have listed had firms made listing decisions postSOX in the same way that they made these decisions pre-SOX.19 Since the models are estimated in the
1990s, variation in the expected fraction of listed firms after 2001 is due to the changing characteristics of
sample firms. We then use the difference between the expected fraction of listed firms and the actual
fraction to measure the change in the propensity to list in these markets. A decline in the competitiveness
of the U.S. market for foreign listings should result in a smaller fraction of actual relative to the expected
number of listings predicted by our model. As before, we focus only on exchange listings in the U.S. and
ordinary listings on the Main Market in the U.K. as these are the primary competing venues that would
have been affected by the changes due to SOX.
Table 7 summarizes annual logit regressions that document the relation between the probability that a
firm is listed and the firm’s sales growth, global industry Tobin’s q, size as Log(Assets), leverage,
ownership, and the country variables Legal, Log(GNP), and the Stock market cap/GDP ratio, associated
with the firm’s domicile. Following Fama and French (2001), rather than one overall regression, we
estimate the logit regressions year-by-year and, in the spirit of Fama and MacBeth (1973), we report the
time-series means of the coefficients. To make inferences about the precision of these means, we use the
time-series standard deviations of the coefficients, which allow for the correlation of the regression
residuals across firms, and adjust for first-order serial correlation. Models (1) to (4) present results for the
U.S. exchange listings and models (5) to (8) do so for U.K. ordinary share listings. The first two models
in each set report average coefficients over the whole sample period (1990-2005) and the latter two
models in each set report average coefficients by two subperiods. The full-period average slopes from the
regressions confirm our inferences about the roles of sales growth, size, and leverage from the competing
risk Cox models in Table 6. U.S. and U.K. exchange listings attract larger firms with positive sales
growth, lower leverage, and less-closely-held ownership structures in industries with high median Tobin’s
q ratios and from countries with stronger legal traditions. As in Table 6, the coefficients on sales growth
19

This approach is similar to the approach used by Fama and French (2001) to evaluate whether the propensity to
pay dividends has declined.

25

are positive for U.S. exchange listings and they are negative (or insignificant) for U.K. ordinary listings.
In these logit regressions the ownership coefficients are significantly negative for U.S. listings, as before,
but it is surprising that they are also negative for the U.K. listings, which we did not see in the competingrisk Cox models.
In comparing the average slopes across the two subperiods, we see that most coefficients have the
same sign and are similar in magnitude. Though none of the coefficients in the London regressions
change signs, two of them in the U.S. exchange listing regression do. First, sales growth has a negative
and statistically significant sign in the 2002-2005 period in contrast to a positive and statistically
significant sign in the 1990-2001 period. Second, the market-capitalization-to-GDP coefficient has a
statistically significant and positive sign in the second subperiod in contrast to a negative and statistically
significant sign in the first subperiod. The negative sign on the sales growth coefficient is puzzling, since
theory suggests that firms with better growth opportunities are more likely to seek an exchange listing.
The average pseudo-R2s are only moderately smaller in the post-SOX period compared to the pre-SOX
period for both U.S. and U.K. listings. Overall, except for the puzzling result on sales growth, these
findings offer little evidence of changes in the characteristics of listing firms from the pre-SOX period to
the post-SOX period.
Section 2 showed that there has been a decline in the number of new listings on the exchanges in New
York and on the Main Market in London in the past several years. If the propensity to list given certain
firm characteristics has not changed as Table 7 indicates, the decline is due to the changing characteristics
of firms. That is, fewer large firms with large asset size, positive sales growth, low leverage, less closelyheld ownership in high Tobin’s q industries are available in the population of firms to seek out U.S. or
U.K. listings. We observed in Table 5 that there was precisely such an evolution in the population of noncross-listed firms. Table 8 shows the expected percent of U.S. and U.K. foreign listings. The expected
percent of firms with a listing is computed by applying the average logit coefficients for 1990 to 2001
(from Table 7) to the values of the explanatory variables for each firm each year between 2002 and 2005.

26

We obtain the predicted probability that a firm has an exchange listing each year, sum the predicted
probabilities over firms each year, and divide by the number of firms in the sample that year to compute
an expected percent. We also report the actual percent of listed firms in those years for comparison. Three
sets of calculations are reported based on three different logit model specifications: (1) with firm-level
attributes only, (2) with the three country-level variables only, and (3) with all explanatory variables.
Strikingly, the actual listing percents are higher than expected for the U.S. exchange listings, while those
for the U.K. listings are lower than expected. For example, in 2002 on the major U.S. exchanges, there
were 343 listings, or 7.24% of 4,738 eligible firms in the Worldscope database (nonfinancial firms with
over $100 million in assets and available data, from non-U.K., non-tax-haven countries) while the logit
models would have predicted between 2.64% and 3.72% U.S. exchange listings. The economic magnitude
of this difference is large: in terms of total firm counts, there are about 166 fewer expected listings than
actual listings. The differences between actual and expected listing propensities for U.K. listings are
smaller than those for U.S. listings; for example, there were 78 ordinary listings on the Main Market in
2005, 1.63% of the 4,708 eligible firms, but more than 2.75% were expected to do so based on the
propensity to list during the 1990-2001 period. Finally, it is interesting to note that the proportion of firms
expected to be listed is very low in 2002 compared to the 1990s, but it increases thereafter. Perhaps not
surprisingly, the economic difficulties of the early 2000s had an impact on the demand for listings – in
particular, they reduced growth opportunities and firms are more likely to list when they have good
growth opportunities.
We investigated further whether our inferences about the U.S. and U.K. expected listing counts in the
post-SOX period are sensitive to the base period chosen to estimate the logit models which predict the
expected percent of listed firms. If we use two recent subperiods, 1995-2001 or 1997-2001, instead of the
full period, 1990-2001, the expected percent of U.S. listed firms does increase in the post-SOX period.
The surplus of U.S. listed firms in 2002-2005 using the full-period logit model transforms into a small
deficit (0.35%) of listed firms in 2005 using 1995-2001 as the base period for estimation and a larger

27

deficit for 2004 (0.98%) and 2005 (1.97%) for the 1997-2001 base period. However, as we use these
more recent periods, the deficit of listed firms in London increases as well. Consequently, using a
different base period does not change the conclusion that SOX did not make London more attractive
relative to the U.S. exchanges for firms wishing to list on a foreign exchange.
It is worth dwelling a bit more on these results. If firms could easily exit from the U.S. exchanges by
delisting and deregistering and if the competitiveness of the U.S. exchanges had declined, we would
observe missing listings. That is, firms predicted to have been listed based on their characteristics would
not have been listed. Table 8 shows no missing listings. In fact, each year, there are more firms listed than
predicted. One might argue that this reflects the difficulty that firms listed on U.S. exchanges face in
removing themselves (technically, by terminating their registration with the SEC) from the obligations
they are subject to from the time they list in a way that makes a delisting worthwhile.20 With this
argument, if firms had been able to deregister more easily, we would observe missing listings. This may
well be true. In this case, our results would predict a steady decline of foreign listings on the U.S.
exchanges. However, none of our evidence is consistent with the claim that London has become more
competitive relative to New York. If London had become more competitive, we would expect that
London would have more foreign listings compared to the number expected by extrapolating from the
behavior of firms in the 1990s. Exactly the opposite is true. We expected to find a deficit in listing counts
for the U.S. exchanges, but instead found it for ordinary listings on the Main Market in London. Put
together, it is difficult to make a case for the decline in the competitiveness of the U.S. markets relative to
the U.K. based on the propensity for foreign listings or changing firm and country characteristics.

20

Delisting from a U.S. exchange eliminates the obligation to meet the exchange’s listing requirements, but it does
not eliminate SEC registration requirements. It is difficult for foreign firms to meet the SEC’s deregistration
requirements, especially so for large firms with broad share ownership in the U.S. In fact, the rules governing
deregistration are more arduous for foreign firms than they are for U.S. firms. See Leuz, Triantis, and Wang (2006)
and Chaplinsky and Ramchand (2007) for further details on the specific requirements for delisting and for
deregistering. On March 21, 2007, the SEC adopted amendments to the deregistration rules which ease the
deregistration process for foreign firms.

28

5. The valuation premium for New York and London listings over time
The governance benefit for a foreign firm listing on a U.S. exchange arises because controlling
shareholders of such firms face more constraints on their ability to extract private benefits at the expense
of public shareholders due to the U.S. investor-protection apparatus. For firms with valuable growth
opportunities, the lower private benefits for controlling shareholders are more than offset by the fact that
firms are now able to raise funds from public investors on better terms to finance these growth
opportunities. As a result, U.S. cross-listed firms should be worth more because (1) they can take
advantage of growth opportunities that they could not have taken advantage of without a listing and (2) a
smaller fraction of the cash flows generated by the firms are appropriated as private benefits by insiders
(Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004; Hail and Leuz, 2006). As firms take advantage of growth
opportunities, we expect their Tobin’s q ratios to fall (see, for instance, Li, Livdan, and Zhang, 2007). So,
the first source of the valuation effect of a listing does not persist. However, the second valuation effect
persists. Consequently, on theoretical grounds, part of the high Tobin’s q ratios of firms at the time they
list is temporary, but part is not.
In this section, we investigate whether and how the relative valuation of listed firms has changed over
time and across listing venues. If the net benefits for shareholders of a listing on a New York exchange
has fallen, we would expect to see a decrease in the listing premium in New York, or at least a decrease in
that premium relative to London. We therefore estimate cross-listing premiums from annual regressions
of Tobin’s q on control variables based on firm characteristics and country-level factors each year from
1990 to 2005. Previous research by Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004) established that there is premium,
but their analysis focuses on U.S. listings in 1997 only. To our knowledge, no study has tested for the
existence of a premium for U.K. foreign listings.21 Because we have panel data, we can use firm fixed-

21

Baker, Nofsinger, and Weaver (2002) uncovered an insignificant negative abnormal share price reaction to foreign
listings in London following a sizeable pre-listing run-up in returns (8.7% over the pre-listing year), but mostly in
conjunction with increases in analyst coverage and media attention for those firms. Salva (2003) found a significant
3.78% abnormal return for foreign listing announcements, but only for DR listings on the Main Market. A recent
2006 study by Oxera, a U.K.-based consultancy, argued that “a listing in London may deliver higher valuations and

29

effects to account for unobservable firm characteristics. We expect that a permanent benefit accrues to
firms cross-listed on U.S. exchanges. We therefore investigate our premise that there is a permanent
premium associated with U.S. exchange listings. Finally, we perform a subperiod analysis of the crosslisting premium comparing the pre-SOX 1990-2001 and post-SOX 2002-2005 periods.

5.1. The cross-listing premium in New York and London over time
Table 9 reports regression results of Tobin’s q on different dummy variables associated with various
types of U.S. and U.K. listings as well as a set of firm characteristics, including sales growth, the median
Tobin’s q of the global industry to which the firm belongs, total sales as size proxy, and country dummy
variables. The regressions are estimated using OLS and the standard errors are clustered on countries –
that is, observations are assumed to be independent across countries, but not within countries.22 Panel a
presents the regression results year-by-year across the 1990-2005 period and panel b provides panel data
results using Fama and MacBeth (1973) methods, pooled OLS with firm-level clustering to compute the
standard errors, and pooled OLS with firm fixed effects. The sample includes, as before, all non-financial,
non-U.S., non-U.K. and non-tax-haven-country firms with available data in Worldscope with assets over
$100 million. The size of this sample ranges from 2,764 firms in 1990 to 7,302 firms in 2005. The
dummy variable associated with a given type of listing requires at least 10 listings with available data for
q ratios as well as the independent variables, so, for example, Rule 144a listings are not considered until
1992, U.K. DR listings until 1996, and U.K. AIM firms until 2005.
Panel a shows that the cross-listing premium for U.S. exchange listings is large, positive, and
statistically significant in each year from 1990 through 2005. The magnitude and precision of the
premium is weaker in the first three years of the sample period, but it averages around 0.24 for the

a lower cost of equity” than comparable listings in other markets, but provide no estimates other than discounts on
IPOs (10-15% abnormal first-day returns), listing fees, and trading cost quotations.
22
An alternative approach would be to estimate a country random-effects model following La Porta, Lopez-deSilanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002). However, Hausman (1978) tests indicate that the assumptions of the model are
not met in all years.

30

remainder of the sample period. Even after controlling for firm and country characteristics, the premium
is economically large: compared to the average Tobin’s q ratios of firms that are not cross-listed, our
estimates imply that firms listed on U.S. exchanges are worth about 17% more. There is no statistically
significant cross-listing premium for U.S. Rule 144a private placements, except marginally so in the very
early years of the program (1992-1993). Interestingly, there is a premium for OTC cross-listings in many
years (12 of 16 years), although the overall magnitude averages around 0.13, which is about half that of
cross-listings on the exchanges. This is consistent with the findings of Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004).
Most surprisingly, there is no discernible premium for U.K. cross-listings in any year of the sample period
for any of the three types of listings (AIM, DR, or ordinary shares). In fact, the ordinary share and DR
listings actually have cross-listing discounts (though insignificant) in 13 of the 16 years. The adjusted
R2’s are higher than those in previous studies likely because of the use of country dummy variables to
account for cross-country variation. The firm-level control variables are also important with reliably
positive coefficients on sales growth and global industry median Tobin’s q. Log(Sales) is a weaker
control with a negative coefficient in the first seven years of the period and positive in more recent years.
The results in Table 9 provide a first opportunity to assess whether the premium for a U.S. exchange
listing has declined since the passage of SOX in 2002. Figure 2 presents another perspective in which we
compare the valuation premium of cross-listed firms to the average q ratios of non-cross-listed firms.
When we use the U.S. exchange coefficients from Table 9 and compute the percentage valuation
difference relative to the average q of firms that are not cross-listed each year, we find that from 19902001, U.S. exchange listed firms are worth an average of 17.5% more than firms that are not listed. From
2002-2005, U.S. exchange listed firms are worth 14.3% more.23 A t-test for the equality of means
(unreported) indicates that the difference between 17.5% and 14.3% is not significant (p-value equals
0.49). If we exclude 1999, arguably an anomalous year in terms of valuations, U.S. listed firms are worth

23

For example, in 1997, the coefficient in Table 9 is 0.22 and the average q of firms that are not cross-listed is 1.30.
Therefore, in 1997, after controlling for firm and country characteristics, firms listed on U.S. exchanges are worth
16.9% more.

31

15.4% more in the 1990-2001 period. This initial test suggests that the U.S. listing premium has not
significantly declined after the passage of SOX.
Firms are more likely to list if they have better growth opportunities. This means that firms with
higher q ratios are more likely to list. The endogeneity of this firm choice leads to a “self-selection”
problem that can, in turn, lead to econometric problems that induce an upward bias in our estimate of the
valuation premium. This is mainly a concern for U.S. exchange listings because these are the only listings
that have a positive and statistically significant premium each year. Previous studies of the valuation of
cross-listed firms (e.g., Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004) have handled this problem by estimating
selection models (Heckman, 1979) which specify a separate selection (cross-listing) decision equation in
addition to the observation (valuation) equation. In unreported tests, we investigated how our inferences
about the valuation premium in panel a of Table 9 change when we employ a selection model. Our model
(like that in Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004) employs country variables like the market-capitalizationto-GDP ratio, log of GNP per capita, and Legal as well as the firm’s log of sales. The premium remains
positive in each of the 16 years of our sample period and statistically significant in all but four years.
The estimates over the entire period from 1990-2005 are presented in panel b. The first set of results
uses the method of Fama and MacBeth (1973). We average the coefficients from the annual regressions
of panel a and perform inference tests on the time-series means and standard deviations. The advantage of
this procedure is that it incorporates unknown cross-correlation structure in residuals.24 The estimates
confirm the reliably positive and significant valuation premiums for U.S. OTC (0.12) and exchange
listings (0.22) seen in panel a, the insignificant coefficients for U.S. Rule 144a private placements and
U.K. DR listings, and a statistically significant discount (-0.05) for U.K. ordinary listings. The pooled
OLS estimation (with standard errors adjusted for clustering on firms) with country and year fixed effects
are almost identical to those of the Fama-MacBeth regressions. Finally, while the firm fixed-effects
regressions (no country fixed effects, but year fixed effects retained) confirm the positive valuation
24

The t-statistics are adjusted for first order serial correlation. If we do not make this adjustment, the t-statistics are
higher in all cases.

32

premiums for U.S. OTC and exchange listings – though much smaller in magnitude at 0.05 and 0.08,
respectively – they now assert a reliably large negative premium for U.K. listings. The advantage of using
firm fixed-effects is that we control for unobserved firm-level heterogeneity (not captured by our control
variables), but the finding for U.K. listings is surprising and raises potential concerns about using fixedeffects.25 We do not include a dummy variable for AIM listings in these regressions because we can only
include the dummy for 2005.
Table 9 confirms that a U.S. cross-listing premium exists every year from 1990 to 2005 for exchange
listed firms. We also have shown that there is a smaller premium for U.S. OTC listings, but this premium
does not exist every year. Finally, there is no premium for U.S. Rule 144a listings or Main Market listings
on the LSE, either DRs or ordinary listings. Moreover, we find no evidence that the premium for U.S.
exchange listing firms has disappeared since SOX or that a premium has emerged in the U.K. The
coefficient on AIM for the one year available (2005) is positive and large in magnitude, but it is not
significant. There are simply too few firms listing on AIM that are not small firms to make much of the
valuation of firms on AIM.

5.2. Is the cross-listing premium permanent or transitory?
We interpret the premium to reflect a permanent benefit that accrues to firms that list on U.S.
exchanges. Recent literature raises concerns about such an interpretation. In an event-time analysis,
Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler (2007) show that Tobin’s q valuation premiums for their
“internationalized” firms disappear beyond the two years following the internationalization event.
However, their internationalization events include other cross-listings besides U.S. exchange crosslistings and hence include cross-listings for which a valuation premium is not predicted by theory.

25

A major concern with firm fixed effects is that, in de-meaning the dependent and independent variables in the
regression, it is forced to measure only firm-specific time-variation in the premium and it ignores all cross-sectional
variation across firms. For our analysis, many firms never cross-list on a U.S. or U.K. market so what little timeseries variation in mean-adjusted Tobin’s q ratios or other control variables that might be identified for the crosslisting firms might be overwhelmed by the absence of it for the non-cross-listing firms.

33

Sarkissian and Schill (2007) examine long-run abnormal returns using standard event-study methods for
1,256 cross-listings in 24 host countries around the world, including the U.S. (323 listings) and U.K. (191
listings). They show how the negative post-listing abnormal returns for foreign listings in the U.S.
markets, first observed by Foerster and Karolyi (2000), eliminate and outweigh the positive valuation
gains achieved in the pre-listing and listing periods to render a net negative valuation impact.26
In Table 10, we re-examine whether the valuation premiums for U.S. exchange listings are transitory.
In order to facilitate comparison, we follow the panel regression methodology of Gozzi, Levine, and
Schmukler as exhibited in their Figure 2 and Table 7. They estimate pooled OLS regressions of Tobin’s q
with country and year fixed effects on a variety of control variables and dummy variables equal to one for
firms in years with “internationalization” events, and separately within three years of such events. Their
internationalization events, of course, are not directly comparable to our analysis of foreign listings in the
U.S. and U.K., as they include international cross-listings in major financial centers (which include the
U.S., U.K., and others like Frankfurt and Hong Kong) as well as global equity capital raising events
through private or public placements. Panel a of Table 10 shows the count of the number of cross-listing
firm observations in each of the three years around the listing events and separately for Rule 144a private
placements, OTC, and exchange listings in the U.S. and for DRs and ordinary listings on the LSE. Given
that our horizon of analysis begins in 1990, there are many firms that listed prior to that date, which is
why we have so many observations in the “> 3 years after listing” category. The sample grows, as
expected, over the course of the six-year event period as more firms cross-list on one of the two markets
in one form or another over the 1990-2005 period. It should also be noted that the regressions include a
benchmark sample of all non-cross-listing firms.
Panel b presents the estimation results. In each Tobin’s q regression, the form of U.S. or U.K. crosslisting event is examined one at a time relative to the benchmark of non-cross-listing firms. There are
several important findings. First, for each type of listing and in both markets, there is a significant
26

One of the earliest studies to uncover the increases and then decreases in valuation ratios around U.S. crosslistings is actually by Sundaram and Logue (1996), which pre-dates the current studies by a decade.

34

increase in the Tobin’s q valuation premiums in the years leading up to the listing and a decrease in the
premiums in the years following the listing. Second, the increase arises for all three types of U.S. listings
and DRs in London, but not for ordinary shares in London. More importantly, however, the magnitude of
the increase in the premium during the pre-listing period is considerably greater for the U.S. exchange
listings than for any other type of foreign listing. The average premium for U.S. exchange-listing firms
three or more years before the listing is positive (0.07), but is small and is statistically insignificant. It
increases to a statistically significant 0.59 in the year before listing. The premium for DR listings in
London also increases to a comparably large 0.65 in the year before listing while those for Rule 144a
private placements (0.23) and OTC listings (0.14) in the U.S. are smaller. There is no detectable premium
for ordinary listings in London any time around the listing event. Third, the premium declines in the years
following the listing event (although as noted earlier, this is expected). This is mostly consistent with the
findings of Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler, as well as indirectly with those of Sarkissian and Schill, except
in the most critical dimension: the cross-listing premium for firms listing on major U.S. exchanges
remains positive and statistically significant even beyond three years following the listing. Further, the Fstatistics indicate that the coefficients for “>3 years after listing” (0.21) and for “3 years after listing”
(0.28) are significantly greater than the coefficients for “>3 years before listing” (0.07) and for “3 years
before listing” (0.11). There is no permanent valuation increase for U.K. DR listings or for U.S. Rule
144a private placements. Firms with U.S. OTC listings have a positive and significant coefficient for
“>than 3 years after listing” (0.09), although this coefficient is significantly lower than the coefficient for
“>3 years before listing” (0.13). In contrast to our results for U.S. exchange listings, Gozzi, Levine, and
Schmukler (Table 7) show that there is a Tobin’s q premium of -0.02 more than three years after
internationalization for all internationalizing firms.
In summary, we find that there is a pre-listing increase and a post-listing decline in valuations for
cross-listing firms, in a way similar to related papers, but, unlike these other studies, we find that the
premium persists permanently beyond three years following the listing on a U.S. exchange. Why are our

35

results so different from those of Sarkissian and Schill and Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler? We can think
of at least two different reasons. First, these studies employ different methodologies. It is difficult to
compare our analysis to the long-run event-study analysis of Sarkissian and Schill. Second, the events
under investigation are different. While the paper by Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler represents the
analysis closest to our work in terms of methodology, they focus on a broad range of
“internationalization” events. Their analysis does break down the valuation analysis into just exchange
listings (which include U.S., U.K. and other markets) and just U.S. listings (including Rule 144a private
placements and OTC listings) in their Table 7, but we have shown that the results are very different for
U.S. exchange listings than for other types of U.S. listings and even for U.K. exchange listings. Our
evidence is consistent with the theory presented in Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004). With this theory, it
is inappropriate to mix cross-listings on exchanges in different countries or to mix U.S. exchange listings
with Rule 144a private placements or OTC listings because the governance constraints imposed by U.S.
exchange listings are not imposed by other forms of listings.

5.3. The cross-listing premium before and after 2001
Has there been a decline in the valuation premium for U.S. exchange listings in the aftermath of the
passage of the SOX Act in 2002? If U.S. capital markets have become less competitive in the market for
foreign listings, even if we have not seen a change in the propensity to list in U.S. or U.K. markets or a
change in the characteristics of the firms choosing to list in one market or the other, the net benefits for
foreign firms from being listed on U.S. exchanges may still have declined. Our valuation analysis up to
this point suggests that the valuation premium for U.S. exchange listed firms is permanent and is
significant in all sample years. We did report, however, that, from 1990-2001, the average valuation
premium was 17.5% compared to 14.3% from 2002-2005. Recent studies by Zingales (2006) and Litvak
(2006) examining Tobin’s q and market-to-book valuation ratios also suggest that the premium may be

36

lower since 2002.27 Zingales shows that the decline in the Tobin’s q valuation premium for cross-listed
firms following the passage of SOX (his subperiods are 1997-2001 for pre-SOX versus 2003-2005 for
post-SOX) is concentrated in firms from countries with better legal protections of minority shareholders
(as measured by the average control premiums paid in large block transactions in various countries – see
Dyck and Zingales, 2004). Similarly, Litvak (2006) shows that the largest declines in valuation premiums
arise for firms with the highest pre-SOX disclosures. That is, the companies cross-listed in U.S. markets
with higher quality corporate governance were the most adversely affected by the passage of SOX.
We investigate whether the cross-listing premium changes after SOX in Table 11. We compute the
valuation premiums for the firms that list on U.S. exchanges as in our panel regression from panel b of
Table 9. We estimate the regressions with OLS and include with country and year dummy variables, as
well as our usual set of firm-level control variables (sales growth, global industry q, log(sales)) – that is,
we investigate whether the premium has declined post-SOX, after controlling for firm and country
characteristics. We add a dummy variable for the passage of SOX for the U.S. exchange listings (“U.S.
Exchange × Post SOX”). This dummy variable equals zero for exchange listings in the period from 1990
to 2001 and one for the post-SOX period from 2002 to 2005. In model (1) we estimate the model with all
non-financial firms with our usual data constraints related to Worldscope and $100 million or more in
total assets, while in model (2) we further exclude U.K. cross-listings on U.S. exchanges. In both
specifications, the coefficient for the U.S. exchange-listed valuation premium is statistically significant
and large (0.25 and 0.23, respectively) as before, and the interactive coefficient on the post-SOX dummy
variable is positive, but statistically insignificant.28 These results suggest that SOX had no effect on the
cross-listing premium for U.S. exchange listings, but it is legitimate to be concerned as to whether our
findings result from an “averaging” effect since we include together firms from countries with better and
27

These two studies are distinct from the returns-based event-study papers of SOX and firm valuations by Berger,
Li, and Wong (2005), Li (2006), Litvak (2007), and Smith (2006). The results vary across the various studies in
terms of the implications of SOX, but this is not surprising given that they employ different event dates surrounding
the passage of SOX, the announcement dates of delistings or other types of events and given that they utilize
different sets of benchmark firms.
28
If we exclude the year dummies, the coefficient for U.S. exchange × Post SOX becomes negative (between -0.02
and -0.04), but is still statistically insignificant (t-statistic is between -0.47 and -1.20).

37

worse legal protections. Models (3) and (4) perform the same regressions as in models (1) and (2), but
include an additional variable, “U.S. exchange × Post SOX × Low legal”, where Low legal is a dummy
variable that equals one for countries with below-median scores on Legal and zero, otherwise. Based on
Zingales (2006) and Litvak (2006), we would expect to see a statistically significant and positive
coefficient on this interactive dummy. We do not. In fact, the coefficient is negative, though statistically
insignificant.29
We have failed to find evidence that is supportive of the hypothesis that the U.S. exchanges are losing
their competitive edge in attracting foreign listings. Not only are we unable to discern any major changes
in the flows of listings to the U.S. and U.K. markets (with a special recognition of the growth of the AIM
market in the U.K.) that would be consistent with a loss of competitiveness, but also the characteristics of
the firms pursuing these listings have changed very modestly and the valuation premiums typically
ascribed to those listings continue. The governance benefits of listing on a U.S. exchange appear as
important as they once were and have not diminished in recent years. In the next section, we pursue one
more line of inquiry related to the governance benefit of U.S. listings beyond just the flow of listing
activity, the characteristics of the cross-listing firms, and their valuations; namely, the capital raising
activity around the listings.

6. Capital raising activity around U.S. and U.K. cross-listings
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) and Reese and Weisbach (2002) argue
that a useful way to test the effectiveness of a legal system and its ability to enforce any financial contract
is to focus on the ease with which a firm can raise external capital. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny show that, in countries where legal protections are weak, it is considerably more difficult for

29

To be fair, we cannot really make direct comparisons with the Zingales (2006) and Litvak (2006) studies. Zingales
uses the Dyck and Zingales (2004) control premiums (which are not available for all our countries) to score
good/poor governance countries instead of our Legal variable. Moreover, rather than using using year-by-year
country-level averages, our approach uses firm-level data and controls for firm and country characteristics. Litvak
focuses on valuations in 2001 and 2002 and uses a matched-firm sample analysis for her benchmarking approach.

38

firms to raise external finance than for firms in countries that protect minority interests well. Coffee
(1999) and Stulz (1999) point out that foreign firms that cross-list effectively borrow some of the legal
protections of the U.S. regulatory environment bond themselves to protect the interests of their minority
stockholders better. This is what we refer to as the governance benefit. Reese and Weisbach test, and
provide evidence in support of, the bonding hypothesis by showing that foreign firms that cross-list on
U.S. exchanges increase the number of equity issues after the listing, that the increase is larger for firms
from countries with weak protections and, most interestingly, that the increase arises for equity issues in
their home market as well as in the U.S. market, the original target market for the listings. In other words,
the desire to protect shareholder rights appears to be such an important reason for why foreign firms
cross-list in the U.S. that their doing so enhances their ability to raise capital not only in the U.S., but at
home and elsewhere. Since we fail to find evidence that U.K. listings have a governance benefit, we
would expect that firms that list on U.S. exchanges raise more equity after listing, but firms that list on the
Main Market in the U.K. do not.
In this section, we extend the experiment of Reese and Weisbach (2002) and measure the extent of
equity issuance activity of firms listing on U.S. exchanges and firms listing on the Main Market in the
U.K. in the years before and after their listing over the period of analysis from 1990 to 2005. We examine
whether they raise equity in the U.S. or U.K. markets, in their home market, or in other markets. To the
best of our knowledge, no study has yet examined the consequences of a foreign listing in the U.K. for
capital raising activity at home or outside the U.K. If the governance gain is exclusively attributable to
U.S. exchange listings, then we would expect no major changes in equity issuance activity for those firms
following their listing in the U.K. markets.
Information about the capital raising activity for our foreign firms comes from a number of data
sources, including Securities Data Corporation (SDC) and the London Stock Exchange. SDC contains the
date of issue, the market (country) in which the security was issued, and the proceeds from each issue. We
compare the issuance dates from SDC with the cross-listing dates drawn from the sources described

39

above in order to determine whether they took place up to three years before or within three years after
the listing (therefore we consider new cross-listings from 1993-2002). We apply the usual screens to
focus our analysis on non-financial, non-U.S., and non-U.K. firms with available data in the Worldscope
database and with total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. For U.K. listings,
the SDC data is supplemented with international issuance data directly from the London Stock Exchange.
These data include the issuance date, the issue type, sector, price, the proceeds of the issue, and the
underwriter name and its country of origin.30 Unfortunately, the LSE data begins only in 1998. To ensure
that we do not exclude any relevant capital raising activity on the Main Market in the U.K., we include
both DRs and ordinary listings in our analysis.
Table 12 presents the results. We report the issuance activity by market location including the number
of capital raising events and the dollar amount both before and after a cross-listing and separately for U.S.
exchange listings and Main Market listings in the U.K. Overall, we identify 61 (12%) of the 530 firms
with U.S. cross-listings with equity issues before the listing and 157 (30%) with issues after the listing.
Among the 119 U.K. cross-listing firms, 7 (6%) have equity issues before the listing and 30 (25%)
afterward. The increase in the number of issues around the listing events is similar in the two cross-listing
markets. However, the dollar magnitudes are not. Total equity raised among the U.S. cross-listing firms
increases from $29 billion to $151 billion over the listing period – a statistically significant difference for
the mean listing firm – while that for the U.K. cross-listing firms increased modestly from $8 billion to
almost $13 billion.
Another important result in this table is that there is a significant increase in the dollar magnitude of
equity issuance around U.S. cross-listings not just in the U.S. markets (which represents a statistically
significant increase from $3 billion to $17 billion), but also in the home markets ($15 billion to $79

30

The authors are grateful to Matthew Leighton in the Market Information and Analysis division of the London
Stock Exchange for his help and for supplying the data. We performed extensive cross-checking of the SDC and
LSE information and always supplemented SDC in favor of the LSE data when in doubt. We also evaluated how
much our Worldscope, sector, and asset-size constraints are binding on the size of the issuance sample of firms and
how much they issue.

40

billion) and other markets ($10 billion to $55 billion). Each of these increases is statistically significant
for the mean firm. This result can be interpreted in a way that is consistent with that of Reese and
Weisbach (2002). Though they only examine post-listing equity issuances, they find that firms from
countries with poor legal protections in the home market raise a higher fraction of capital in their home
markets and in other markets than firms from countries with good legal protections. We find no similar
changes around U.K. exchange-listings. There is an increase in equity issuances in the home market (from
$5 billion to $7 billion), in other markets ($2 billion to $5 billion) and certainly in the target U.K. market
(up to $1 billion), but none of these changes are statistically significant.
One possible problem we face with this analysis is that some firms from around the world cross-list
on both London and New York. If a firm cross-lists in London after having already listed on a U.S.
exchange, the firm may not realize any incremental governance gain as a result or, worse, it may appear
to do so, but it would be falsely associated with a London listing (especially if the two listing events occur
close in calendar time). To address this potential problem, we repeat the analysis, but exclude all firms
with exchange listings in both London and New York. The number of firms is much smaller, especially
for London, but our inferences are very similar to those above.
These results reaffirm the role of a governance gain for foreign firms listing on U.S. exchanges. Firms
that list on U.S. exchanges increase their equity issuance activity following the listing, at home, and in
other markets in ways that firms that pursue listings in the U.K. do not.

7. Conclusions
In this paper, we investigate the evolution of cross-listings in the U.S. and the U.K. over time. We
find that the number of cross-listed firms in the U.S. and on the LSE’s Main Market in London follows a
similar pattern, increasing from 1990 to 1999, with a peak around the turn of the century, and then a
steady decline thereafter. The fact is that listing counts have been falling in London as well as in New
York. This broader phenomenon makes it difficult to explain the decrease in New York alone using an

41

argument that New York is becoming less competitive, perhaps because of SOX and other regulatory
changes. It is true that the number of listings on AIM in London has been growing dramatically since
2001, but most firms that list on AIM are small firms that would have been unlikely candidates to crosslist on the U.S. exchanges.
The argument that the U.S. exchanges have become less competitive only makes sense if some firms
that would have listed in New York in the 1990s would no longer do so. We investigate this proposition
and find no support for it. The characteristics of listing firms have not significantly changed since the
adoption of SOX. There is little evidence that firms have been making listing decisions differently in
recent years from how they made them from 1990 to 2001. If anything has changed in the aftermath of
SOX, it is that the non-listed firms have become smaller and are therefore less likely to list on the U.S.
exchanges or the Main Market in London. The changing composition of firms that are not listed implies
that there were actually more listed firms than one would expect based on the listing decision patterns
from 1990 to 2001.
To ascertain further whether the benefits and costs of listing on the U.S. exchanges have changed
over time, we conduct the most complete analysis of the relative valuation of U.S. listed firms to date. We
use several distinct approaches to measure the cross-listing premium: cross-sectional regressions, FamaMacBeth regressions, pooled regressions with firm fixed-effects, and event-time regressions. With each
approach, we find that there is a listing premium for firms that list on U.S. exchanges but that there is no
listing premium for firms that list in London. The listing premium is also extremely robust: it exists every
year and it is permanent in event time. We find no evidence that the listing premium falls after 2001, even
for listed firms from countries with good investor protection.
All of our evidence is consistent with the theory that there is a distinct governance benefit for firms
that list on the U.S. exchanges. This benefit is not shared by firms that list in the U.S. outside the
exchanges or in London. There is no evidence in our data that this benefit has weakened over time.

42

References
Baker, Kent, John Nofsinger, and Daniel Weaver, 2002, International cross-listing and visibility, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 495-521.
Benos, Evangelos, and Michael Weisbach, 2004, Private benefits and cross-listings in the United States,
Emerging Markets Review 5, 217-240.
Berger, Philip G., Feng Li, and M. H. Franco Wong, 2005, The impact of Sarbanes-Oxley on cross-listed
companies, University of Chicago working paper.
Box-Steffensmeier, Janet, and Christopher Zorn, 2002, Duration models for repeated events, Journal of
Politics 64, 1069-1094.
Chaplinsky, Susan, and Latha Ramchand, 2007, From listing to delisting: foreign firms’ entry and exit
from the U.S., University of Virginia working paper.
Cleves, Mario, 1999, Analysis of multiple failure-time data with Stata, Stata Technical Bulletin 49, 30-39.
Coffee, John C., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
governance and its implications, Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.
Coffee, John C., 2002, Racing towards the top? The impact of cross-listings and stock market competition
on international corporate governance, Columbia Law Review 102, 1757-1831.
Coffee, John C., 2007, Law and the market: the impact of enforcement, Columbia Law and Economics
working paper.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2006, The law and
economics of self-dealing, Harvard University working paper.
Doidge, Craig, 2004, U.S. cross-listings and the private benefits of control: evidence from dual-class
firms, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 519-553.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S.
worth more?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl A. Lins, Darius P. Miller, and René M. Stulz, 2007, Private
benefits of control, ownership, and the cross-listing decision, Ohio State University working
paper.
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Private benefits of control: an international comparison,
Journal of Finance 59, 537-600.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: changing firm characteristics or
declining propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.
Fama, Eugene, and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal of
Political Economy 81, 607-636.

43

Foerster, Stephen R., and G. Andrew Karolyi, 2000, The long-run performance of global equity offerings,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 499-528.
Gozzi, Juan, Ross M. Levine, and Sergio Schmukler, 2007, Internationalization and the evolution of
corporate valuation, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Greene, Edward, Alan Beller, Edward Rosen, Leslie Silverman, Daniel Braverman, and Sebastian
Sperber, 2000, U.S. Regulation of the International Securities and Derivatives Markets, 5th
edition, Aspen Law and Business, New York.
Greifeld, Bob, 2006, It’s time to pull up our SOX, Wall Street Journal, March 6, 2006.
Hail, Luzi, and Christian Leuz, 2006, Cost of capital effects and changes in growth expectations around
U.S. cross-listings, ECGI Finance working paper.
Hausman, Jerry A., 1978. Specification tests in econometrics, Econometrica 46, 1251-1271.
Heckman, James, 1979, Sample selection bias as a specification error, Econometrica 47, 153-161.
Hostak, Peter, Thomas Lys, and Yong Yang, 2006, Is the Sarbanes-Oxley Act scaring away lemons or
oranges? An examination of the impact of Sarbanes-Oxley Act on the attractiveness of US capital
markets to foreign firms, Northwestern University working paper.
Karolyi, G. Andrew, 2006, The world of cross-listing and cross-listings of the world: challenging
conventional wisdom, Review of Finance 10, 99-152.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Legal
determinants of external finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, Law and
finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2002, Investor
protection and corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.
Leuz, Christian, Alexander J. Triantis, and Tracy Wang, 2006, Why do firms go dark? Causes and
consequences of voluntary SEC deregistrations, University of Maryland working paper.
Li, Erica Xuenan, Dmitry Livdan, and Lu Zhang, 2007, Anomalies, University of Rochester working
paper.
Li, Xi, 2006, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and cross-listed foreign private issuers, University of Miami
working paper.
Litvak, Kate, 2006, Sarbanes-Oxley and the cross-listing premium, University of Texas Law School
working paper, Michigan Law Review, forthcoming.
Litvak, Kate, 2007, The effect of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on non-US companies cross-listed in the U.S.,
Journal of Corporate finance forthcoming

44

Lunn, Mary, and Don R. McNeil, 1995, Applying Cox regression to competing risks, Biometrics 51, 524532.
MacNeil, Iain, and Alex Lau, 2001, International corporate regulation: listing rules and overseas
companies, International and Comparative Law Quarterly 50, 787-810.
Marosi, Andras, and Nadia Massoud, 2006, You can enter but you cannot leave, University of Alberta
working paper.
Oxera Consulting, 2006, The cost of capital: an international comparison, Oxera Consulting Ltd and
London Stock Exchange Publishing, Oxford, U.K.
Pagano, Marco, Ailsa Roell, and Josef Zechner, 2002, The geography of equity listing: why do companies
list abroad? Journal of Finance 57, 2651-2594.
Piotroski, Joseph D., and Suraj Srinivasan, 2007, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the flow of international
listings, University of Chicago working paper.
Pistor, Katharina, Martin Raiser, and Stanlislaw Gelfer, 2000, Law and finance in transition economies,
Economics of Transition 8, 325-368.
Reese, William, and Michael Weisbach, 2002, Protection of minority shareholder interests, cross-listings
in the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 65-104.
Salva, Carolina, 2003, Foreign listings, corporate governance, and equity valuations, Journal of
Economics and Business 55, 463-485.
Sarkissian, Sergei, and Michael Schill, 2007, Are there permanent valuation gains to overseas listing?
Evidence from market sequencing and selection, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Smith, Geoffrey, 2006, Why do firms cross-list? A look at the impact of U.S. regulation on cross-listed
firms, Arizona State University working paper.
Stulz, René M., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.
Sundaram, Anant, and Dennis Logue, 1996, Valuation effects of foreign company listings on U.S.
exchanges, Journal of International Business Studies 27, 67-88.
Thain, John, 2004, The price of Sarbanes-Oxley, Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2004.
Witmer, Jonathan, 2006, Why do firms cross-(de)list? An examination of the determinants and effects of
cross-delisting, Queen’s University working paper.
Woo, Christopher, 2006, The effects of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on foreign private issuers, Harvard Law
School thesis.
Zingales, Luigi, 2006, Is the U.S. capital market losing its competitive edge?, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, forthcoming.

45

Figure 1. The distribution of foreign listings in 1998 and 2005.
This figure shows the number of foreign listings in various host markets in 1998 and 2005. The data are from
the World Federation of Stock Exchanges (www.world-exchanges.org). The Federation reports data for major
exchanges, for markets specifically designed for small and medium sized enterprises, and other markets.
Figure 1a: 1998
TSX Group, 49, 2%

London Main Market, 466, 16%

Tokyo SE, 52, 2%
New Zealand SE, 58, 2%
Australian SE, 60, 2%
AMEX, 61, 2%
Brussels SE, 122, 4%

Nasdaq, 441, 15%

Amsterdam SE, 146, 5%

Paris SE, 183, 6%

NYSE, 392, 13%

Swiss SE, 193, 6%
Deutsche Börse, 210, 7%
London Main Market
Paris SE
Tokyo SE
Oslo Børs
Montreal SE
Brussels
Bilbao SE
Sao Paulo SE

Nasdaq
Amsterdam SE
TSX Group
Irish SE
Deutsche Börse (NM)
Mexican SE
Helsinki SE
Istanbul SE

Luxembourg SE, 223, 7%

NYSE
Brussels SE
Bermuda SE
London AIM
Stockholm SE
Borsa Italiana
Amsterdam
Tel Aviv SE

Luxembourg SE
AMEX
Singapore SE
Stockholm SE
Paris SE (SM)
Paris SE (NM)
Helsinki (IL)
Osaka SE

Deutsche Börse
Australian SE
Wiener Börse
Hong Kong SE
Barcelona SE
Lima SE
Chicago
Brussels

Swiss SE
New Zealand SE
JSE South Africa
Copenhagen SE
Madrid SE
Bursa Malaysia
Rio de Janeiro
Irish SE

Figure 1b: 2005
NYSE, 452, 15%
TSX Group, 39, 1%
Australian SE, 71, 2%
AMEX, 100, 3%
Deutsche Börse, 116, 4%

London Main Market, 334, 11%

Swiss SE, 116, 4%
Singapore SE, 122, 4%
Nasdaq, 332, 11%
Mexican SE, 176, 6%

Luxembourg SE, 206, 7%

Euronext, 293, 10%

London AIM, 220, 8%
NYSE

London Main Market

Nasdaq

Euronext

London AIM

Luxembourg SE

Mexican SE

Singapore SE

Swiss SE

Deutsche Börse

AMEX

Australian SE

Singapore Sesdaq

TSX Group

Bermuda SE

New Zealand SE

Lima SE

Tokyo SE

Oslo Børs

JSE South Africa

OMX

Wiener Börse

Deutsche Börse (ES)

Irish SE

Hong Kong SE

Warsaw SE

Borsa Italiana

Tel Aviv SE

Taiwan SE

Bursa Malaysia

Buenos Aires SE

Wiener Börse (SOM)

Sao Paulo SE

Philippine SE

Athens SE

Irish SE

Santiago SE

Osaka SE

Athens SE (SMC)

BME Spanish SE

JSE (VC)

Warsaw SE

Osaka SE

Tokyo SE

46

Figure 2. The U.S. cross-listing premium, 1990 to 2005.
This figure shows average q of non-cross-listed firms each year, as well as the premium for U.S. exchange-listings. The premiums are the estimated coefficients
for U.S. exchange listings from Table 9 and control for firm and country characteristics.
2.20

Tobin's q ratio of non-cross-listed firms plus
premium of U.S. exchange listed firms

2.00

1.80

1.60

1.40

1.20

1.00

0.80
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Non-cross-listed Tobin's q

47

1998

1999

2000

2001

U.S. exchange-listing Tobin's q premium

2002

2003

2004

2005

Table 1. Summary statistics for the total number of cross-listings each year.
This Table shows the total number of firms cross-listed in either the U.S. or the U.K., each year from 1990-2005. The Table includes all cross-listings in the U.S.
and the U.K. in a given year. Information on cross-listings comes from the Bank of New York, Citibank, JP Morgan, the NYSE, NASDAQ, the LSE, the Pink
Sheets, CRSP, firms’ annual reports, 20-Fs, and Factiva searches. Firms can cross-list in the U.S. via Rule 144a, over-the-counter as OTCBB or Pink Sheet
issues, or on the AMEX, NASDAQ, or NYSE. Firms can cross-list in the U.K. via the Alternative Investment Market (AIM), or on the Main Market via
depositary receipts or an ordinary listing.
U.S. cross-listings

U.K. cross-listings

Year

Rule 144a

OTC

Exchange

AIM

Depositary receipts

Ordinary listings

1990

15

139

328

0

3

333

1991

21

180

343

0

3

350

1992

35

226

387

0

3

361

1993

57

281

460

0

3

367

1994

144

380

538

0

9

378

1995

172

449

606

2

27

394

1996

221

510

722

10

52

418

1997

261

570

809

12

76

415

1998

281

632

851

18

98

391

1999

297

730

876

20

111

372

2000

296

764

960

29

122

363

2001

285

938

950

44

117

327

2002

283

993

902

55

115

291

2003

297

895

881

70

110

265

2004

298

901

883

131

108

241

2005

312

909

866

242

111

216

48

Table 2. New cross-listings and delistings: 1990 to 2005.
This Table shows the total number of new cross-listings and delistings, in either the U.S. or the U.K., each year from 1990 to 2005. The Table includes all crosslistings in the U.S. and the U.K. in a given year. Information on cross-listings comes from a variety of sources described in Table 1. Firms can cross-list in the
U.S. via Rule 144a, over-the-counter as OTCBB or Pink Sheet issues, or on the AMEX, NASDAQ, or NYSE. Firms can cross-list in the U.K. via the Alternative
Investment Market (AIM), or on the Main Market via depositary receipts or an ordinary listing. All delistings are included in the counts, regardless of the reason
for delisting. If a firm upgrades from a Rule 144a or OTC listing to a U.S. exchange listing, the upgrade is counted as a new U.S. exchange listing and as a
delisting from the Rule 144a or OTC market.
U.S. cross-listings
Rule 144a

U.K. cross-listings

OTC

Exchange

AIM

Depositary receipts

Ordinary listings

Year

New listings

Delistings

New listings

Delistings

New listings

Delistings

New listings

Delistings

New listings

Delistings

New listings

Delistings

1990

15

6

40

29

32

9

0

0

0

0

29

0

1991

13

6

47

6

31

17

0

0

0

0

17

0

1992

17

1

47

1

54

10

0

0

0

0

11

0

1993

27

3

63

3

90

17

0

0

0

0

8

2

1994

97

6

107

6

103

26

0

0

6

0

11

0

1995

35

6

79

8

94

29

2

0

18

0

17

1

1996

58

7

79

16

142

25

8

0

25

0

26

2

1997

45

4

97

33

129

41

5

3

24

0

12

18

1998

29

8

76

14

95

55

6

0

22

0

10

34

1999

28

11

122

22

91

65

4

2

14

1

15

39

2000

18

17

52

18

164

81

11

2

13

2

22

32

2001

9

20

205

31

70

81

16

1

3

8

10

51

2002

7

9

70

14

46

94

12

1

3

5

3

40

2003

20

6

69

166

38

58

18

3

1

6

5

37

2004

20

18

46

35

62

52

62

1

3

5

6

33

2005

25

11

45

34

58

66

114

2

11

8

4

28

Total

463

139

1244

436

1299

726

258

15

143

35

206

317

49

0

Table 3. New cross-listings by country: 1990 to 2005.
This Table shows the total number of new cross-listings, in either the U.S. or the U.K., by country over the
period from 1990 to 2005. The table includes all cross-listings in the U.S. and the U.K. in a given year.
Information on cross-listings comes from a variety of sources described in Table 1. Firms can cross-list in the
U.S. via Rule 144a, over-the-counter as OTCBB or Pink Sheet issues, or on the AMEX, NASDAQ, or NYSE.
Firms can cross-list in the U.K. via the Alternative Investment Market (AIM), or on the Main Market via
depositary receipts or an ordinary listing.
U.S. cross-listings
Country
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Bermuda
Bolivia
Brazil
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Falkland Islands
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Gibraltar
Greece
Hong Kong
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jersey
Jordan
Kazakhstan

U.K. cross-listings

Rule 144a

OTC

Exchange

AIM

Depositary
receipts

Ordinary
listings

11
7
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
13
0
0
2
4
7
6
3
0
3
2
0
2
10
2
0
5
10
6
1
0
4
2
6
79
3
0
2
13
0
6
0
1
3

8
105
20
0
0
0
0
2
0
6
5
48
0
319
0
2
22
4
0
0
1
1
1
2
3
0
0
4
20
32
0
0
6
118
3
1
4
13
14
4
4
32
0
0
1

18
33
1
4
0
0
0
5
1
43
0
38
13
399
24
25
24
1
0
0
0
5
1
0
0
0
0
8
39
33
1
0
9
34
1
14
4
20
108
16
0
19
1
0
0

0
49
0
0
0
1
1
1
3
25
0
0
12
40
14
0
1
0
0
4
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
1
3
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
37
16
3
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
2
1
3
0
0
0
11
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
4
25
2
0
3
0
0
0
0
2
1

0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
21
0
0
1
7
18
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
4
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
58
7
0
0
17
0
0
0

50

Table 3, continued.
U.S. cross-listings
Country
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mexico
Morocco
Netherlands Antilles
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Trinidad
Tunisia
Turkey
United Emirates
United Kingdom
Ukraine
Uruguay
United States
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

U.K. cross-listings

Rule 144a

OTC

Exchange

AIM

Depositary
receipts

Ordinary
listings

1
3
2
2
0
0
1
0
0
31
1
0
3
0
1
5
1
0
0
3
3
7
12
4
0
1
1
12
2
0
2
10
29
3
1
4
3
56
2
0
1
16
0
17
0
1
0
3
1

0
0
0
2
0
14
0
0
0
49
0
0
16
3
0
9
0
2
2
0
4
6
3
4
0
0
0
56
24
1
0
46
5
5
0
11
12
0
15
1
0
7
0
122
9
0
0
11
0

0
0
0
15
0
0
0
2
0
39
0
1
44
10
0
10
0
3
0
0
4
1
1
4
3
0
0
6
10
0
0
14
15
4
0
13
16
9
0
0
0
1
0
129
0
0
0
3
0

0
0
0
4
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
31
0
0

1
2
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
13
0
0
1
1
7
0
0
2
2
14
0
0
0
0
14
0
0
1
9
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
4
0
1
3
7
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
3
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
0
1

51

Table 4. The type and frequency of delistings: 1990 to 2005.
This Table shows the number of delistings from U.S. stock exchanges (AMEX, NASDAQ, or the NYSE) and from the ordinary listings on the Main Market in
the U.K. over the period from 1990 to 2005. Information on cross-listings comes from a variety of sources described in Table 1. A delisting is classified as
“Voluntary” if a firm is in compliance with an exchange’s listing standards and voluntarily takes steps to delist its shares or depositary receipts. Firms are also
delisted when they are acquired and these cases are classified as “Merger / acquisition”. Finally, firms are delisted for other reasons, most often by the exchanges
when they fail to meet listing standards, when a firm is bankrupt, in financial distress, or undergoes restructuring. The first number for each category is the
number of delistings of that type. The second number is the number of delistings as a % of the total number of listings that year.
U.S. exchange delistings
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Total

Voluntary
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
3
4
0
6
5
19
17
15
21

0.30%
0.29%
0.00%
0.22%
0.19%
0.00%
0.14%
0.37%
0.47%
0.00%
0.63%
0.53%
2.11%
1.93%
1.70%
2.42%
95

U.K. ordinary delistings

Merger/acquisition
2
3
2
7
7
17
14
17
31
32
39
42
24
22
17
33

0.61%
0.87%
0.52%
1.52%
1.30%
2.81%
1.94%
2.10%
3.64%
3.65%
4.06%
4.42%
2.66%
2.50%
1.93%
3.81%
309

Other
6
13
8
9
18
12
10
21
20
32
36
34
51
19
20
13

1.83%
3.79%
2.07%
1.96%
3.35%
1.98%
1.39%
2.60%
2.35%
3.65%
3.75%
3.58%
5.65%
2.16%
2.27%
1.50%
322

52

Voluntary
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
3
5
3
5
12
18
24
18
15

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.27%
0.00%
0.00%
0.21%
0.61%
1.02%
0.62%
1.03%
2.70%
4.43%
6.40%
5.16%
4.59%
105

Merger/acquisition
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
8
22
25
20
26
7
10
7
8

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.27%
0.00%
0.24%
0.00%
1.63%
4.50%
5.18%
4.12%
5.86%
1.72%
2.67%
2.01%
2.45%
135

Other
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
7
7
11
7
13
15
3
8
5

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.21%
1.43%
1.43%
2.28%
1.44%
2.93%
3.69%
0.80%
2.29%
1.53%
77

Table 5. Characteristics of newly cross-listed firms.
This Table compares the characteristics of firms with new cross-listings in a given year and firms that are not cross-listed over the period from 1990 to 2005.
Firms can cross-list in the U.S. via Rule 144a, over-the-counter as OTCBB or Pink Sheet issues, or on the AMEX, NASDAQ, or NYSE. Firms can cross-list in
the U.K. via the Alternative Investment Market (AIM), or on the Main Market via depositary receipts or an ordinary listing. Information on cross-listings comes
from a variety of sources described in Table 1. In panels a and b, the sample includes all new cross-listings by non-U.S. firms that are in the Worldscope database
in a given year. In panels c and d, the sample includes all new cross-listings by non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database and
have total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. Firms from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded. The median value for a
given characteristic is computed for firms with new cross-listings. For firms that are not cross-listed, the median is computed over all firm-year observations. For
the common law dummy, the percentage of firms with new cross-listings from common law countries is reported. Tobin’s q is computed as ((Total Assets –
Book Equity) + Market Value of Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local currency). Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth (winsorized
at 1% and 99% tails), global industry q is the median global industry q, total assets is in $ millions, adjusted for inflation, leverage is defined as total debt divided
by total assets, and ownership is the data item “closely-held shares” from Worldscope. Common law is a dummy variable that equals one if a country’s legal
origin is based on common law. Legal is anti-director × rule of law, from Djankov et al. (2006) and La Porta et al. (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) and stock
market capitalization to GDP are from the World Bank WDI Database. The tests at the bottom of each panel report p-values from Wilcoxon rank-sum tests,
which test the hypothesis that two samples are from populations with the same distribution. In panels a and c, the characteristics of firms with new U.S. exchange
listings are compared to the characteristics of firms with other new cross-listing types and with firms that are not cross-listed. In panels b and d, the
characteristics of new cross-listings and firms that are not cross-listed are compared before and after SOX (the period from 1990 to 2001 vs. 2002 to 2005).
Panel a.

q

Sales growth

Global
industry q

Total assets

Leverage

Ownership

Common
Law

Antidirector

Legal

GNP/
capita

Market
cap
/GDP

Median

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

Percent

Median

Median

U.S. Rule 144a

276

1.35

193

0.12

303

1.19

303

994.54

303

0.23

185

0.43

26

3.0

20.9

4635

0.40

U.S. OTC

858

1.25

636

0.08

937

1.16

937

275.4

935

0.19

616

0.40

68

4.0

40.0

21000

0.99

U.S. Exchange

751

1.56

497

0.15

822

1.27

822

654.6

821

0.19

493

0.38

55

4.0

40.0

20250

0.80

U.K. AIM

80

2.01

32

0.10

84

1.43

84

11.5

83

0.00

63

0.35

96

4.0

40.0

22890

1.04

U.K. DR

89

1.35

54

0.14

92

1.15

92

1290.0

91

0.17

55

0.55

23

3.0

18.7

4210

0.33

93

1.34

76

0.14

105

1.16

105

689.5

105

0.15

88

0.41

57

4.0

31.2

21730

0.67

194061

1.10

174404

0.03

219975

1.12

219843

113.8

218936

0.20

155296

0.50

40

3.5

31.4

20470

0.71

0.00

0.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1990 – 2005

U.K. Ordinary
Not listed

Rule 144a vs. Exchange

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

OTC vs. Exchange

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.43

0.98

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.95

0.00

AIM vs. Exchange

0.02

0.18

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.52

0.00

0.15

0.00

0.00

0.00

DR vs. Exchange

0.00

0.65

0.00

0.00

0.87

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Ordinary vs. Exchange

0.01

0.64

0.00

0.74

0.35

0.71

0.74

0.03

0.00

0.09

0.06

Not listed vs. Exchange

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.04

53

Table 5, continued.
Panel b.

q

Sales growth

Global
industry q

Total assets

Leverage

Ownership

Common
Law

Antidirector

Legal

GNP/
capita

Market
cap
/GDP

Median

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

N

Median

Percent

Median

Median

U.S. Rule 144a

215

1.37

149

0.10

252

1.22

252

999.4

252

0.22

139

0.47

25

3.0

20.9

4430

0.56

U.S. OTC

690

1.23

493

0.08

747

1.16

747

341.7

746

0.20

485

0.40

69

4.0

40.0

20560

0.99

U.S. Exchange

609

1.53

414

0.16

674

1.28

674

729.6

673

0.21

383

0.39

52

4.0

40.0

24560

1.04

U.K. AIM

16

2.32

4

-0.04

16

1.15

16

6.39

16

0.04

16

0.45

94

4.0

40.0

20030

0.81

U.K. DR

81

1.38

47

0.12

84

1.18

84

1290.0

83

0.17

52

0.55

22

3.0

18.7

4260

0.32

1990 – 2001

U.K. Ordinary

85

1.33

69

0.14

96

1.16

96

701.2

96

0.16

80

0.43

54

4.0

31.2

21370

0.67

123581

1.11

107121

0.03

143111

1.13

142999

138.72

142223

0.21

104875

0.50

40.2

3.5

31.4

20110

0.67

U.S. Rule 144a

51

1.32

44

0.20

51

1.08

51

999.4

51

0.29

46

0.40

33

3.0

20.9

13736

0.36

U.S. OTC

168

1.42

143

0.06

190

1.16

190

81.25

189

0.15

131

0.46

65

4.0

40.0

24560

1.04

U.S. Exchange

142

1.77

83

0.11

148

1.25

148

215.4

148

0.08

110

0.34

71

4.0

35.0

20000

0.77

U.K. AIM

64

1.94

28

0.17

68

1.52

68

12.16

67

0.00

47

0.32

97

4.0

40.0

25700

1.20

U.K. DR

8

1.16

7

0.18

8

1.04

8

2463.4

8

0.27

3

0.43

38

4.0

19.1

1990

0.55

U.K. Ordinary

8

2.15

7

0.15

9

1.28

9

689.5

9

0.13

8

0.27

63

4.0

35.7

24560

0.84

70480

1.08

67283

0.04

76864

1.10

76844

79.49

76713

0.19

76713

0.49

59.8

3.5

31.4

24560

0.80

Not listed
2002 – 2005

Not listed

Rule 144a: pre / post SOX

0.51

0.00

0.00

0.74

0.19

0.46

0.23

0.09

0.38

0.82

0.00

OTC: pre / post SOX

0.00

0.05

0.64

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.43

0.00

0.07

0.00

0.06

Exchange: pre / post SOX

0.17

0.02

0.83

0.00

0.00

0.37

0.00

0.27

0.01

0.00

0.00

AIM: pre / post SOX

0.27

0.69

0.00

0.14

0.25

0.33

0.52

0.56

0.31

0.00

0.00

DR: pre / post SOX

0.62

0.29

0.01

0.78

0.66

0.74

0.38

0.12

0.94

0.21

0.37

Ordinary: pre / post SOX

0.22

0.69

0.24

0.87

0.98

0.27

0.73

0.42

0.03

0.26

0.55

Not listed: pre / post SOX

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

54

Table 5, continued.
q

Panel c.

Sales growth

N

Median

N

Median

U.S. Rule 144a

93

U.S. OTC

270

1.35

93

1.25

270

U.S. Exchange

Global
industry q
N

Median

0.14

93

0.08

270

Total assets

Leverage

N

Median

N

Median

1.21

93

1.20

270

1255.7

93

1113.9

270

Ownership

Common
Law

Antidirector

Legal

GNP/
capita

Market
cap
/GDP

N

Median

Percent

Median

Median

Median

Median

0.29

93

0.39

23

3.5

23.1

12070

0.55

0.23

270

0.45

47

4.0

31.4

21530

0.67

1990 – 2005

207

1.44

207

0.13

207

1.24

207

2132.9

207

0.23

207

0.40

32

3.5

31.4

22100

0.67

U.K. AIM

5

1.33

5

0.18

5

1.48

5

146.0

5

0.29

5

0.15

100

4.0

40.0

23610

1.04

U.K. DR

22

1.41

22

0.16

22

1.15

22

1425.3

22

0.29

22

0.51

25

3.5

18.7

7355

0.35

38

1.47

38

0.14

38

1.23

38

2954.3

38

0.23

38

0.45

36

3.5

31.2

24515

0.88

57421

1.13

57421

0.03

57421

1.15

57421

391.3

57421

0.26

57421

0.49

30

3.5

31.4

26960

0.67

0.15

0.74

0.12

0.39

0.00

0.00

0.01

U.K. Ordinary
Not listed

Rule 144a vs. Exchange

0.05

0.95

0.00

0.05

OTC vs. Exchange

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.44

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.21

0.09

0.98

AIM vs. Exchange

0.97

0.97

0.81

0.00

0.77

0.02

0.00

0.09

0.00

0.50

0.09

DR vs. Exchange

0.30

0.83

0.07

0.15

0.50

0.13

0.54

0.79

0.00

0.00

0.00

Ordinary vs. Exchange

0.61

0.88

0.81

0.76

0.76

0.35

0.56

0.40

0.08

0.85

0.51

Not listed vs. Exchange

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.36

55

Table 5, continued.
Panel d.

q

Sales growth

N

Median

N

Median

U.S. Rule 144a

60

U.S. OTC

214

1.35

60

1.23

214

U.S. Exchange

Global
industry q
N

Median

0.10

60

0.09

214

Total assets

Leverage

N

Median

N

Median

1.25

60

1.21

214

1387.9

60

1359.8

214

Ownership

Common
Law

Antidirector

Legal

GNP/
capita

Market
cap
/GDP

N

Median

Percent

Median

Median

Median

Median

0.22

60

0.43

22

3.5

22.41

11355

0.35

0.25

214

0.44

51

4.0

31.6

21530

0.67

1990 – 2001

165

1.44

165

0.13

165

1.25

165

2456.7

165

0.24

165

0.40

28

3.5

31.2

21810

0.67

U.K. AIM

1

1.20

1

0.95

1

0.91

1

111.37

1

0.29

1

0.04

100

4.0

40.0

22100

0.99

U.K. DR

20

1.34

20

0.16

20

1.15

20

1651.9

20

0.25

20

0.52

15

3.5

18.7

9900

0.35

U.K. Ordinary

34

1.43

3

0.11

33

1.25

34

2954.3

34

0.22

34

0.44

33

3.5

31.2

23875

0.88

39636

1.15

39636

0.03

39636

1.18

39636

411.5

39636

0.27

39636

0.50

30

3.5

31.4

27730

0.66

U.S. Rule 144a

33

1.33

33

0.23

33

1.12

33

603.9

33

0.32

33

0.38

24

3.0

25.6

13476

0.99

U.S. OTC

56

1.33

56

0.08

56

1.14

56

736.4

56

0.19

56

0.51

31

3.5

30.0

23750

0.67

U.S. Exchange

42

1.53

42

0.12

42

1.16

42

1376.4

42

0.21

42

0.43

48

4.0

31.5

22660

0.79

U.K. AIM

4

1.62

4

0.00

4

1.59

4

217.58

4

0.24

4

0.16

100

4.0

40.0

24560

1.12

U.K. DR

2

1.59

2

0.45

2

1.08

2

398.5

2

0.33

2

0.39

100

5.0

20.9

620

0.56

U.K. Ordinary

4

2.65

4

0.23

4

1.22

4

3030.9

4

0.29

4

0.51

25

3.75

35.7

28345

0.79

17785

1.10

17785

0.04

17785

1.12

17785

350.9

17785

0.24

17785

0.48

22

3.5

31.4

24330

0.76

Not listed
2002 – 2005

Not listed

Rule 144a: pre / post SOX

0.97

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.10

0.50

1.00

0.78

0.25

0.37

0.00

OTC: pre / post SOX

0.68

0.43

0.01

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.47

0.91

Exchange: pre / post SOX

0.51

0.68

0.50

0.03

0.06

0.72

0.02

0.21

0.68

0.50

0.35

AIM: pre / post SOX

0.48

0.16

0.16

0.48

1.00

0.48

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.18

0.48

DR: pre / post SOX

0.57

0.49

0.30

0.17

0.65

0.36

0.04

0.06

0.41

0.11

0.25

Ordinary: pre / post SOX

0.10

0.32

0.89

0.48

0.49

0.96

0.61

0.88

0.21

0.81

0.83

Not listed: pre / post SOX

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

56

Table 6. Competing risks models of the determinants of the listing decision.
The Cox proportional hazard models estimate the probability of listing in the U.S. or in the U.K. in year t, given that the firm does not yet have a listing of that
type, over the period from 1991 to 2005. The sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database and have total
assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. Firms from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded. Information on cross-listings comes
from a variety of sources described in Table 1. Models (1) and (2) include all types of listings in New York and London, while Models (3) and (4) include only
exchange listings in New York and ordinary listings in London. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), global
industry q is the median global industry q, total assets is in $ millions, adjusted for inflation, leverage is defined as total debt divided by total assets, and
ownership is the data item “closely-held shares” from Worldscope. Legal is anti-director × rule of law, from Djankov et al. (2006) and La Porta et al. (1998). Log
of GNP per capita ($) and stock market capitalization to GDP are from the World Bank WDI Database. All independent variables are lagged by one year. The
hazard ratios for U.S. exchange listings and U.K. ordinary listings are estimated jointly, but are allowed to vary across outcomes and the baseline hazard for each
listing choice is assumed to be different. The model does not estimate a constant. The Table reports hazard ratios (i.e., exp(βx), not βx). The t-statistics test the
null hypothesis that the hazard ratio is equal to one. The t-statistics are adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed assuming observations are
independent across firms, but not across time. The column, “Test” tests whether the hazard ratios for U.S. listings are different from U.K. listings. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
All listing types in the U.S. and U.K.
(1)

Sales growth
Global industry q
Log(Assets)
Leverage

U.S.
hazard
ratios

U.K.
hazard
ratios

1.09
(7.11)***
4.56
(11.5)***
****
1.88
(18.9)***
0.46
-(3.36)***

1.08
(2.46)**
5.57
(4.18)***
1.64
(4.56)***
1.00
(0.00)

Test
0.27
0.23
1.49
0.82

Ownership
Legal
Log (GNP)
Stock market cap / GDP
Number of failures
Number of observations
Log likelihood
χ2
Prob > χ2

U.S. exchange listings and U.K. ordinary listings

(2)

4.23
(11.2)***
0.84
-(3.93) ***
0.73
-(3.34)***

2.57
(2.09) **
0.91
-(0.64)
0.65
-(1.40)

573

39
145,061
-6050.18
760.71
0.0000

1.16
0.21
0.14

(3)

U.S.
hazard
ratios

U.K.
hazard
ratios

1.11
(5.77)***
4.22
(9.14)***
1.91
(16.8)***
0.32
-(4.23)***
0.35
-(4.38)***
4.49
(9.98)***
0.84
-(3.21)***
0.74
-(2.99)***

0.59
-(0.53)
5.63
(3.65)***
1.68
(4.12)***
1.32
(0.27)
0.68
-(0.53)
3.32
(2.35)***
0.92
-(0.46)
0.59
-(1.37)

425

30
118,109
-4367.82
593.13
0.0000

57

Test
0.40
0.36
0.94
1.88

(4)

U.S.
hazard
ratios

U.K.
hazard
ratios

1.11
(7.18)***
7.64
(11.7)***
2.04
(15.0)***
0.38
-(2.90)***

1.09
(2.58)**
6.05
(3.86)***
1.87
(4.87)***
0.94
-(0.05)

5.51
(8.21)***
1.04
(0.59)
0.56
-(2.99)***

2.04
(1.18)
0.93
-(0.36)
1.02
(0.07)

266

24
136,059
-2731.71
615.48
0.0000

Test
0.09
0.20
0.35
0.59

0.76
0.34
0.26
0.30

2.26
0.41
2.96*

U.S.
hazard
ratios

U.K.
hazard
ratios

1.12
(4.85)***
8.65
(11.9)***
2.12
(12.9)***
0.15
-(4.65)***
0.20
-(4.07)***
5.45
(6.64)***
1.04
(0.45)
0.51
-(2.41)**

0.78
-(0.34)
4.63
(2.51)**
1.85
(4.75)***
1.29
-(0.19)
1.12
(0.17)
2.98
(1.68)*
0.85
-(0.74)
0.86
-(0.43)

183

20
110,583
-1849.64
483.49
0.0000

Test
0.25
1.01
0.96
2.40
4.70**
0.77
0.73
1.33

Table 7. Logit regressions of the characteristics of exchange-listed firms.
This Table analyzes the characteristics of firms that cross-list on a U.S. stock exchange (Amex, NASDAQ, or the NYSE) and on the LSE (ordinary listings) over
the period from 1990 to 2005. The sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database and have total assets of at
least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. Firms from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded. Information on cross-listings comes from a
variety of sources described in Table 1. Firms with other types of cross-listings (Rule 144a or OTC in the U.S. and AIM or depositary receipts in the U.K.) are
excluded. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), global industry q is the median global industry q, total
assets is in $ millions, adjusted for inflation, leverage is defined as total debt divided by total assets, and ownership is the data item “closely-held shares” from
Worldscope. Legal is anti-director × rule of law, from Djankov et al. (2006) and La Porta et al. (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) and stock market capitalization
to GDP are from the World Bank WDI Database. Each year from 1990 to 2005, a logit regression is estimated, where the dependent variable equals one if a firm
is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange (models 1-4) or on the LSE via an ordinary listing (models 5-8). The Table reports the average coefficients of the 16 logit
regressions (one for each year over 1990-2005). This Table also analyzes firms’ decisions to cross-list over the period from 1990 to 2001 (pre-SOX) and then
from 2002 to 2005 (post-SOX). The t-statistics, in parentheses, are calculated using the Fama-Macbeth approach from the time series of estimated logit
coefficients, adjusted for serial correlation (one lag). Pseudo-R2 is a goodness-of-fit measure based on the difference between unrestricted and restricted
likelihood functions. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
U.S. exchange listings

Constant
Sales growth
Global industry q
Log(Assets)
Leverage

Log (GNP)
Stock market cap / GDP

Number of observations
Average Pseudo R

2

(5)

(6)

(7)
1990 – 2001

(8)
2002 – 2005

-12.68
-(38.33)***
-0.34
-(2.49)*
2.96
(13.16)***
0.88
(93.76)***
-1.28
-(7.87)***
-2.40
-(21.65)***
0.05
(15.89)***
-0.60
-(48.94)***
0.21
(14.17)***

-15.07
-(26.12)***
-1.11
-(1.99)*
1.50
(4.80)***
1.06
(23.92)***
-2.43
-(6.75)***

0.06
(8.67)***
-0.69
-(6.41)***
0.26
(3.95)***

-11.04
-(19.63)***
-1.18
-(2.09)**
1.68
(4.61)***
1.01
(22.47)***
-2.83
-(7.24)***
-3.68
-(16.66)***
0.04
(7.87)***
-0.82
-(7.72)***
0.14
(1.74)*

-10.16
-(51.17)***
-1.14
-(1.61)
1.66
(3.38)***
1.03
(17.97)***
-3.37
-(12.58)***
-3.86
-(15.17)***
0.05
(10.57)***
-0.93
-(8.55)***
0.14
(1.27)

-13.70
-(121.24)***
-1.29
-(1.74)
1.75
(39.40)***
0.94
(34.83)***
-1.20
-(4.08)***
-3.14
-(60.48)***
0.03
(1.89)
-0.48
-(8.66)***
0.16
(3.34)**

45,176

19,840

78,297

63,159

44,315

18,844

0.2908

0.2753

0.2529

0.2978

0.3092

0.2596

(1)

(2)

(3)
1990 – 2001

(4)
2002 – 2005

-13.70
-(15.37)***
0.52
(2.34)**
2.25
(8.02)***
0.82
(44.16)***
-1.13
-(7.69)***

0.10
(5.46)***
-0.61
-(11.98)***
-0.42
-(2.03)*

-14.04
-(8.08)***
0.47
(2.30)**
2.39
(6.76)***
0.87
(64.80)***
-1.77
-(7.34)***
-2.46
-(17.95)***
0.11
(3.68)***
-0.58
-(4.67)***
-0.48
-(1.63)

-14.50
-(6.25)***
0.74
(4.67)***
2.20
(5.05)***
0.87
(49.30)***
-1.93
-(6.83)***
-2.48
-(13.87)***
0.13
(3.61)***
-0.59
-(3.43)***
-0.70
-(2.06)*

81,161

65,016

0.2290

0.2870

Ownership
Legal

U.K. ordinary listings

58

Table 8. The propensity to cross-list on major exchanges over time.
This Table examines whether the propensity to cross-list on a U.S. stock exchange (Amex, NASDAQ, or the NYSE) and on the LSE (ordinary listings) has
declined since 2001. The sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database and have total assets of at least $100
million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. Firms from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded. Information on cross-listings comes from a variety of
sources described in Table 1. Firms with other types of cross-listings (Rule 144a or OTC in the U.S. and AIM or depositary receipts in the U.K.) are excluded.
Each year from 1990 to 2001, a logit regression is estimated, where the dependent variable equals one if a firm is cross-listed on a U.S. exchange (Panel a) or on
the LSE via an ordinary listing (Panel b). In model (1), the explanatory variables are sales growth, global industry q, log of total assets, leverage, and ownership.
In model (2), the explanatory variables are legal, log of GNP, and stock market capitalization to GDP. Model (3) includes all explanatory variables. “Firms” is
the number of firms in the sample for a given year. “Listed” is the number of firms with a cross-listing in a given year. “Actual %” is the percent of firms with a
cross-listing. “Expected %” is computed by applying the average logit coefficients for 1990 to 2001 (Table 7) to the values of the explanatory variables for each
firm each year between 2002 and 2005, obtaining the predicted probability that a firm has a listing each year, summing the predicted probabilities over firms each
year, dividing by the number of firms, and multiplying by 100.
Panel a. U.S. exchange listings

(1)

(2)

(3)

Expected
%

Expected Actual

Expected
%

Expected Actual

Expected
%

Expected Actual

7.24

3.09

-4.15

3.57

-3.67

2.43

-4.81

322

6.52

3.72

-2.80

3.04

-3.48

2.64

-3.88

5,189

347

6.67

4.90

-1.77

2.77

-3.90

3.33

-3.34

4,974

344

6.92

5.69

-1.23

2.78

-4.14

3.95

-2.96

Year

Firms

Listed

Actual %

1990 – 2001 (average)

3,765

170

4.52

2002

4,738

343

2003

4,939

2004
2005

Panel b. U.K. ordinary listings

(1)

(2)

(3)

Expected
%

Expected Actual

Expected
%

Expected Actual

Expected
%

Expected Actual

2.20

2.01

-0.19

3.09

0.89

1.79

-0.41

91

1.93

2.42

0.49

2.97

1.04

2.14

0.21

4,934

91

1.84

3.02

1.18

2.76

0.92

2.46

0.62

4,708

78

1.66

3.39

1.73

2.78

1.12

2.75

1.09

Year

Firms

Listed

Actual %

1990 – 2001 (average)

3,693

99

2.68

2002

4,494

99

2003

4,708

2004
2005

59

Table 9. Regression analysis of the valuation of cross-listed firms: 1990 to 2005.
Panel a presents the cross-sectional regression estimates of the valuation differential of cross-listing in the U.S. or in the U.K, each year from 1990 to 2005. The
sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database and have total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in
a given year. Firms from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded. Information on cross-listings comes from a variety of sources described in Table 1. The
dependent variable in each regression is Tobin’s q, computed as ((Total Assets – Book Equity) + Market Value of Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local
currency). U.S. Rule 144a, U.S. OTC, U.S. Exchange, U.K. AIM, U.K. DR, and U.K. Ordinary are dummy variables that equal one if a firm has a cross-listing of
that type in a given year. Cross-listing dummies of a given type are excluded if there are less than 10 listings in a year. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year
sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), global industry q is the median global industry q, and sales is in $ millions, adjusted for inflation. All regressions
include country dummies (not reported). The t-statistics, in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on countries – they are computed assuming observations are
independent across countries, but not within countries. t-statistics greater than 1.65, 1.96, and 2.55 are significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel b presents results from panel data regressions. The regressions are estimated three ways: 1) Fama-Macbeth, 2) pooled OLS with the standard errors
corrected for clustering on firms, and 3) with firm-fixed effects. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel a.
Constant
U.S. Rule 144a
U.S. OTC
U.S. Exchange
U.K. AIM
U.K. DR
U.K. Ordinary
Sales growth
Industry Q
Log (Sales)

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2.14

1.62

0.60

0.35

0.26

-0.12

0.11

-0.01

-0.42

-0.43

-0.55

-0.71

-0.36

-0.22

-0.18

-0.02

(5.09)

(4.72)

(2.41)

(1.16)

(0.81)

-(0.34)

(0.28)

-(0.04)

-(2.29)

-(2.16)

-(1.36)

-(3.70)

-(1.51)

-(1.74)

-(1.00)

-(0.19)

.

.

0.24

0.22

0.09

0.15

0.10

0.04

0.01

0.07

-0.03

0.00

-0.01

0.00

-0.04

-0.02

.

.

(1.84)

(1.78)

(1.22)

(1.46)

(0.95)

(0.37)

(0.13)

(0.47)

-(0.29)

-(0.05)

-(0.19)

(0.07)

-(0.57)

-(0.20)

0.14

0.06

0.09

0.14

0.15

0.17

0.18

0.17

0.14

0.18

0.18

0.08

0.04

0.09

0.09

0.12

(1.47)

(1.12)

(1.29)

(2.08)

(3.02)

(4.13)

(3.26)

(4.06)

(3.16)

(5.01)

(3.10)

(2.27)

(1.12)

(3.07)

(2.18)

(2.63)

0.10

0.17

0.13

0.24

0.22

0.23

0.25

0.22

0.25

0.53

0.29

0.14

0.13

0.25

0.17

0.16

(1.88)

(2.29)

(1.90)

(3.32)

(5.25)

(5.08)

(5.02)

(4.81)

(5.08)

(5.51)

(2.96)

(2.51)

(2.76)

(6.15)

(3.50)

(3.75)

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

0.27

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

(1.04)

.

.

.

.

.

.

-0.15

0.08

0.07

0.18

0.00

0.09

-0.03

-0.05

-0.04

-0.14
-(2.45)

.

.

.

.

.

.

-(1.48)

(0.39)

(0.57)

(0.59)

(0.03)

(0.87)

-(0.40)

-(0.79)

-(0.58)

0.14

0.05

-0.05

-0.03

-0.13

-0.12

-0.19

-0.14

-0.05

-0.01

-0.06

-0.01

0.01

-0.08

-0.06

-0.09

(1.50)

(0.49)

-(0.66)

-(0.49)

-(1.74)

-(1.28)

-(1.67)

-(1.72)

-(0.73)

-(0.07)

-(0.70)

-(0.08)

(0.12)

-(1.27)

-(0.89)

-(0.92)

0.10

0.11

0.26

0.62

0.39

0.29

0.47

0.54

0.52

0.79

0.52

0.39

0.32

0.35

0.50

0.35

(1.88)

(2.67)

(2.72)

(3.73)

(2.66)

(2.32)

(3.14)

(4.87)

(5.25)

(4.20)

(4.88)

(3.44)

(5.52)

(4.58)

(3.61)

(4.38)

0.30

0.54

0.70

0.98

1.08

1.09

0.99

0.92

1.02

1.01

1.09

1.08

0.89

0.78

0.83

0.84

(2.44)

(8.96)

(5.62)

(5.07)

(6.92)

(4.73)

(4.88)

(5.20)

(5.45)

(8.36)

(7.73)

(15.24)

(11.34)

(8.89)

(13.59)

(18.07)

-0.09

-0.05

-0.01

-0.03

-0.03

-0.01

-0.01

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.03

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.02

-(2.28)

-(2.06)

-(1.10)

-(2.44)

-(2.58)

-(1.38)

-(1.35)

(0.78)

(1.28)

(0.63)

(1.10)

(2.79)

(1.73)

(1.96)

(1.50)

(1.59)

Observations

2764

3066

3418

3807

4186

4619

4811

5062

5403

5497

6029

6067

6572

6891

7292

7302

Adjusted R2

0.3397

0.2733

0.1755

0.2324

0.2076

0.1954

0.1739

0.2329

0.2665

0.2959

0.1676

0.1921

0.2233

0.2484

0.2077

0.2115

60

Table 9, continued.
Panel b.
Constant
U.S. Rule 144a

Fama-Macbeth
0.13

-0.29

0.73

(3.31)***

(11.65)***

0.06

0.04

-0.02

(0.79)

-(0.64)

0.12

0.05

U.K. Ordinary
Sales growth

0.25

***

(7.54)

(2.86)***
0.08

***

(4.22)***

-0.03

-0.21

(0.03)

-(0.37)

-(3.15)***

-0.05

-0.09

-0.26

-(2.12)*

-(1.97)**

-(6.68)***

0.41

0.46

0.31

***

(22.58)

0.88
(12.73)

Log(Sales)

(4.10)

***

0.00

(7.66)
Global industry q

***

0.22
(7.72)

U.K. DR

*

0.12
(8.83)

U.S. Exchange

Firm fixed effects

(0.52)
(1.89)
U.S. OTC

Pooled OLS

***

1.02
***

0.94

(23.60)

-0.00

***

0.01

-(0.17)

(2.04)

(33.44)***
(57.35)***
-0.05

**

-(10.78)***

Country dummies

yes

yes

no

Year dummies

no

yes

yes

82,786

82,786

82,786

.

.

10,946

0.2277

0.1645

0.1016

Number of observations
Number of groups
2

R

61

Table 10. Valuation changes around cross-listings: 1990 to 2005.
This Table presents regression estimates of valuation changes around cross-listings in the U.S. or in the
U.K. that took place between 1990 to 2005 The sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S., non-U.K.
firms that are in the Worldscope database and have total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in
a given year or in the year of listing. Firms from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded.
Information on cross-listings comes from a variety of sources described in Table 1. For each type of crosslisting (in the U.S., Rule 144a, OTC, or Exchange; in the U.K., Depositary receipt, or Ordinary listing), an
“event time” dummy variable is created, where year 0 is the cross-listing year for a given firm. The dummy
variable, “> 3 years before listing” equals one for years prior to year -3 and is zero in all other years; “3
years before listing” equals one in year -3; “2 years before listing” equals one in year -2, etc. Panel a shows
the counts for each dummy variable by type of cross-listing. Panel b shows the regression results. The
dependent variable in each regression is Tobin’s q, computed as ((Total Assets – Book Equity) + Market
Value of Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local currency). Sales growth is inflation adjusted twoyear sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), global industry q is the median global industry q, and
sales is in $ millions, inflation adjusted. Each regression includes country and year dummies (not reported).
The t-statistics, in parentheses are adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed assuming
observations are independent across firms, but not across time for each firm. F-test 1 tests the hypothesis
that the coefficient on the dummy for “3 years after listings” is equal to the coefficient on the dummy for “3
years before listing”. F-test 2 tests the hypothesis that the coefficient on the dummy for “>3 years after
listings is equal to the coefficient on the dummy for “>3 years before listing”. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel a.

U.S. cross-listings

U.K. cross-listings

Rule 144a

OTC

Exchange

Depositary
receipts

Ordinary
listings

> 3 years before listing

147

634

577

23

39

3 years before listing

64

195

156

13

16

2 years before listing

82

236

196

14

21

1 year before listing

119

277

238

18

26

Listing year

158

325

311

36

43

1 year after listing

189

352

389

43

56

2 years after listing

209

344

421

59

59

3 years after listing

216

349

429

64

63

1,197

1,932

2,979

289

1,584

> 3 years after listing

62

Table 10, continued.
Panel b.

U.S. cross-listings

Constant

Rule 144a

OTC

Exchange

Depositary
receipts

Ordinary
listings

-0.37

-0.38

-0.28

-0.37

-0.38

-(4.18)
> 3 years before listing

***

0.04
0.12
0.22
(2.72)

1 year before listing
Listing year
1 year after listing

> 3 years after listing

0.10

F-test 2
2

Adjusted R

0.02
0.09

0.45
1.05

(3.05)

***

(23.59)

0.57

0.04

(2.07)

**

(3.55)
(5.67)
(5.75)
(5.52)
(5.14)
(5.63)
(5.93)

***

***

(3.05)

***

***

***

***

***

0.01
(1.57)

(1.95)*
0.07

(1.68)

*

(0.56)

0.21

0.13

(1.39)

(1.05)

0.05

0.06

(0.37)

(0.55)

0.04

-0.03

(0.48)

-(0.36)

-0.07

-0.01

-(1.02)

-(0.17)

0.45

0.42

(22.41)

***

1.05
***

(0.31)
0.41

***

0.29

***

(23.59)

(2.54)

(0.18)
0.16

**

0.65

***

(17.54)

(2.54)

**

0.54

1.03
***

0.02
(4.01)

0.13

0.43

***

1.08
***

(0.98)

0.21

***

0.25
***

(1.43)

0.28

-0.04

(4.29)

F-test 1

(1.48)

(2.61)

(1.11)

0.26

(0.65)

0.02

Number of observations

(2.02)

0.23

0.33
**

-(0.58)

(23.92)
Log(Sales)

(2.52)

-(4.30)***

0.38

0.46
**

0.05
*

-0.03

(22.27)
Global industry q

(2.49)

-(4.20)

***

0.07

0.59
**

0.09

***

-(0.93)
Sales growth

**

0.13

***

(1.65)
3 years after listing

(2.27)

-(3.23)

***

0.30

0.14

***

0.21
(3.26)

2 years after listing

***

0.28
(4.20)

(2.71)

**

0.14

0.23
(3.04)

(2.10)

**

0.17

(1.28)
2 years before listing

-(4.28)

***

0.13

(0.35)
3 years before listing

U.K. cross-listings

(23.90)

1.06
***

0.02
(4.33)

(13.10)***

***

(23.92)***
0.02
(4.45)***

82854

83,003

82,945

82,810

82,824

2.22

5.15**

4.20**

4.41**

0.08

2.63

1.01

0.1598

0.1574

*

0.54

0.27

3.59

0.1599

0.1510

0.1681

63

Table 11. The cross-listing valuation premium before and after Sarbanes-Oxley.
This Table presents results from panel data regressions that estimate the valuation differential of cross-listing
in the U.S. before and after Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX). The period before SOX is 1990 to 2001 and the period
after SOX is 2002 to 2005. In model (1), the sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S. firms that are in the
Worldscope database and have total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. Firms
from Bermuda and the Cayman Islands are excluded. In model (2), U.K. firms are also excluded. Information
on cross-listings comes from a variety of sources described in Table 1. The dependent variable in each
regression is Tobin’s q, computed as ((Total Assets – Book Equity) + Market Value of Equity) / Total Assets
(all variables are in local currency). U.S. Rule 144a, U.S. OTC, and U.S. Exchange are dummy variables that
equal one if a firm has a cross-listing of that type in a given year. Post SOX equals 1 during 2002 to 2005.
Models (3) and (4) repeat the same regressions as in (1) and (2), except they add the variable, “U.S. exchange
× Post SOX × Low legal”, where Low legal is a dummy variable that equals one for firms from countries with
below-median scores on legal and zero otherwise. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth
(winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), global industry q is the median global industry q, and sales is in $ millions.
The regressions are estimated by pooled OLS and the t-statistics are adjusted for clustering on firms – they
are computed assuming observations are independent across firms, but not across time for each firm. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
(1)
Constant
U.S. Rule 144a
U.S. OTC

-0.27

-0.31

-0.27

-(3.11)***

-(3.68)***

-(3.03)***

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.03

(0.70)

(0.67)

(0.67)

(0.64)

0.09

0.12

0.10

0.12

***

0.25

(3.94)

***

0.23

***

(5.75)

0.23

***

(5.75)***

0.04

0.04

0.07

(0.48)

(1.20)

(1.08)

(1.78)*

0.46

0.46
***

1.04
***

0.01
(2.29)

(22.72)

***

1.02

(25.54)
Log(Sales)

(6.50)

(3.93)***

0.02

(23.89)
Global industry q

(3.58)

***

0.25

***

U.S. Exchange × Post SOX × Low legal
Sales growth

(4)

-0.32

(6.50)
U.S. Exchange × Post SOX

(3)

-(3.76)***

(3.50)
U.S. Exchange

(2)

(23.56)

-0.10
-(1.59)

0.46

0.46

(23.90)

***

1.04
***

0.01
**

-0.10
-(1.52)

(1.69)

1.02

(25.53)

***

0.01
*

(2.29)

(22.73)***
(23.54)***
0.01

**

(1.70)*

Country dummies

yes

yes

yes

yes

Year dummies

yes

yes

yes

yes

Number of observations

90,249

82,786

90,249

82,786

2

0.1720

0.1644

0.1721

0.1645

Adjusted R

64

Table 12. Capital raising activity before and after cross-listing.
This Table reports capital-raising activity from 1993-2002 by firms that cross-listed on U.S. exchanges or on the Main Market in the U.K. (as DRs or ordinary
listings) within three years before and after the cross-listing date. It reports the number of cross-listing firms that raise capital by means of public and private
issues, the aggregate quantity (in U.S. dollar millions) as well as the component activity (with percentage of total) taking place in the U.S. markets, the U.K.
markets, the home market in which the firm is domiciled, and other markets. The “Before” (“After”) period presents all capital raising in the three year period
before (after) the cross-listing. The “after” period also includes capital raised during the cross-listing event itself. The sample includes all non-financial, non-U.S.,
non-U.K. firms that are in the Worldscope database with total assets of at least $100 million (in 1990 dollars) in a given year. Firms from Bermuda and the
Cayman Islands are excluded. Capital raising data is obtained from SDC and is supplemented with data from the LSE. t-statistics are computed to test the
differences in before/after means. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
U.S. exchange listings
Before
Total # of firms
# of firms raising equity
% of all cross-listed firms

After

U.K. ordinary listings
t-statistic

530

119

119

61

157

7

30

11.51%

29.62%

5.88%

25.21%

8,217.4

12,844.2

-0.11

4,938.4

6,695.2

-0.24

60.10%

52.13%

1,441.9

981.6

17.55%

7.64%

-1.59

0

700.7

0.00%

5.46%

2.71***

1,837.1

4,466.7

22.36%

34.78%

151,082.3

2.91

Total Raised at Home

14,841.3

79,173.1

2.02**

% of total raised

51.41%

52.40%

3,150

17,076.9

% of total raised

10.91%

11.30%

Total Raised in UK

1,055.8

176.9

% of total raised
% of total raised

3.66%

0.12%

9,821.5

54,655.4

34.02%

36.18%

2.64

65

t-statistic

***

28,868.6

Total Raised in Other Markets

After

530

Total Equity Raised

Total Raised in US

Before

***

-0.80
1.64*
0.47

