                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MARKETS AND HOUSING FINANCE

                                    Veronica Cacdac Warnock
                                       Francis E. Warnock

                                       Working Paper 13081
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13081


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




This paper was written while the authors were research fellows at the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research; we thank the HKIMR for its generous hospitality. For helpful comments and suggestions
we are grateful to Stijn Claessens, Leo Goodstadt, and Jacob Gyntelberg and seminar participants
at the HKMA. We also thank Caralee McLiesh for guidance on the World Bank's Doing Business
data, and Kenneth Chow and Daniel Pike for able research assistance. The views in this paper are those
of the authors and do not represent the HKIMR or HKMA in any way. The views expressed herein
also do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Veronica Cacdac Warnock and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Markets and Housing Finance
Veronica Cacdac Warnock and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 13081
May 2007
JEL No. G10,G18,G28,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the extent to which markets enable the provision of housing finance across a wide range
of countries. Housing is a major purchase requiring long-term financing, and the factors that are associated
with well functioning housing finance systems are those that enable the provision of long-term finance.
Across all countries, controlling for country size, we find that countries with stronger legal rights for
borrowers and lenders (through collateral and bankruptcy laws), deeper credit information systems,
and a more stable macroeconomic environment have deeper housing finance systems. These same
factors also help explain the variation in housing finance across emerging market economies. Across
developed countries, which tend to have low macroeconomic volatility and relatively extensive credit
information systems, variation in the strength of legal rights helps explain the extent of housing finance.
We also examine another potential factor--the existence of sizeable government securities markets--that
might enable the development of emerging markets' housing finance systems, but we find no evidence
supporting that.

Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Urban and Environmental Planning
School of Architecture
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400122
Charlottesville VA 22904-4122
vwarnock@virginia.edu

Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
1. Introduction

         Housing is for many households around the world both the largest expense and the most

important asset. For all households it is an important determinant of quality of life. For the

majority in developed countries, and for some in emerging market economies, housing is

adequate. But a significant proportion of the world’s population does not have access to

adequate and affordable housing. According to UN-Habitat (2005), roughly one billion people,

or one-third of the world’s urban population, live in slums. And a well-functioning housing

market influences not only shelter concerns. At a basic level, a country’s housing sector can help

to improve public health (by reducing the likelihood of outbreaks of disease) and stimulate

economic growth (through its own job creation, but also as workplaces for home-based

entrepreneurs). The best housing sectors should enable the adequate provision of shelter across

all segments of the population.

         In this paper we focus on one important pillar of a well-functioning housing market, the

extent that markets enable the provision of housing finance. While there are many aspects to the

housing market (discussed below), it can be argued that the provision of housing finance is a

binding constraint that must be addressed before the market can sustainably provide adequate

housing. Even in the best of environments, housing is a major purchase—average home prices

typically ranging from 4 times annual income in developed countries to 8 times annual income in

emerging economies (Ball, 2003)—that is affordable only when payments can be spread out over

time. Absent a well-functioning housing finance system, for many the market-based provision of

formal housing will be neither adequate nor affordable.1 Other housing or housing finance




1
  In addition to the availability of housing finance, other factors that impact housing affordability include home
prices and household incomes.
                                                                                                                     1
solutions are possible—such as subsidies and the outright provision of public housing—but these

can be unsustainable (Quigley, 2000).2

         While housing finance is a vital component of a well-functioning housing system, to date

there has not been a systematic analysis of the depth of housing finance across a broad set of

countries.3 In fact, as far as we know, no formal cross-country study of the size of the housing

finance market exists. Existing international housing finance studies tend to be descriptive and

highly informative, but lack any formal empirical analysis and often focus on one or more

country case studies. The seminal work is Boleat (1985), which includes numerous country case

studies. Diamond and Lea (1992) evaluate the housing finance systems of five countries.

Chiquier, Hassler, and Lea (2004) include case studies of eight emerging market economies.

Low, Sebag-Montefiore, and Dübel (2003), the Mercer Oliver Wyman study, focus on eight

countries in Europe. Hegedüs and Struyk (2005) present case studies on seven transition

economies and Germany and tabulate housing finance statistics. Chiuri and Jappelli (2003)

analyze 14 developed countries (with an emphasis on loan-to-value ratios). Allen, Chui, and

Maddaloni (2004) include a short section on mortgage markets in 17 developed countries.

Renaud (2005) includes a presentation of data on 45 countries, the broadest set of countries

heretofore available. All of these studies are important, but none formally studies why some

countries have larger mortgage markets than others and none includes formal empirical analysis.4

         We begin to fill this void by analyzing the determinants of the extent of housing finance

in a sample of 61 countries that includes both developed countries and a wide range of emerging

2
  In general, an argument for the government as a direct provider of housing has been that the free market is unable
to provide housing for the lower income households.
3
  Data limitations preclude a broad comparative study of other measures (such as reach) of the efficacy of the
housing finance systems.
4
   Other studies include OECD (2002) on transition economies and BIS (2006a) on 14 developed countries and two
emerging markets. In addition, Ghosh (2006) includes a description of mortgage finance in East Asia, Watanabe
(1998) includes eight case studies of Asian housing finance systems, and the September 2005 special issue of
Journal of Housing Economics includes a number of case studies (see Sanders (2005) and references therein).
                                                                                                                       2
economies. Across all countries, controlling for country size, we find that countries with

stronger legal rights for borrowers and lenders (through collateral and bankruptcy laws), deeper

credit information systems, and a more stable macroeconomic environment have deeper housing

finance systems. These same factors also help explain the variation in housing finance across

emerging market economies. Across developed countries, which tend to have low

macroeconomic volatility and relatively extensive credit information systems, we find that

variation in the strength of legal rights helps explain the extent of housing finance.

        We note at the outset two things that we do not address in this paper. First, housing

finance, while vital, is but one of many aspects of the overall housing market. The availability of

housing is governed by supply and demand factors. According to World Bank (1993), across

countries, housing supply tends to be idiosyncratic, primarily because of the housing sector’s

regulatory environment (especially land use policies and building regulations), but also due to

the structure of the construction sector (including the material inputs into the construction

process). In contrast, housing demand within and across countries is relatively predictable as it

varies with income level. For a given income level, the availability of mortgage finance (and the

prevailing interest rates) plays an important role. Mortgage finance is a critical factor in

generating housing demand, yet in many countries it is severely limited. In the context of the

overall housing market—in which factors that influence supply and demand interact to affect

housing outcomes—we focus on mortgage finance as an important, binding constraint on the

demand side.5,6

        Second, our emphasis on market solutions means that our work is not immediately

relevant to those in an economy’s lowest income levels. Historically, for those who do not have

5
  The complexity of the housing market system dictates that each of the other aspects of housing supply and housing
demand is worthy of a complete and separate study.
6
  Certainly, housing finance also impacts the supply side through its impact on builders and developers.
                                                                                                                  3
the requisite financial resources, it has been the government’s role to provide housing—be it

rental property or for owner occupation. While we do not dispute that there is an important role

for government housing to serve the poorest sectors of the population, there are limitations such

as fiscal pressures and, in many countries, the burden of long-term liabilities. Moreover, in

many places government-provided housing is inadequate, potentially leading to other problems.

As there is a view that the role of government has switched from that of a provider to more of a

market enabler, to the extent that our study—by focusing on the basic fundamental factors

necessary to enable housing finance—helps lay the groundwork for financial sector innovation

and development, it will be relevant for even the poorest sectors. We also note that our study is

of collateralized housing loans, so the work of housing microfinance institutions (HMFIs) is

necessarily excluded. HMFIs have been providing non-collateralized loans to increase the home

purchase possibilities for low income households.7 Our emerging market results should apply to

housing micro loans (HMLs)—that is, better credit information systems should improve the

depth of the HML market—with the caveat that currently credit information systems are less

informative for the lowest income segments. Finally, we recognize that ownership is not the

answer for all. But it is often preferred to renting regardless of income level in part because of

the asset properties of a home, and even affordable rental units require financing for their initial

construction.

        We strive in this paper to focus on basic underlying factors that can be addressed by

policy and government programs to improve the reach of national housing finance systems. To

make our analysis more concrete, we note one simple example. As we will show in Section 3,

the Philippines lags behind many of its Asian peers in the provision of housing finance, while


7
 See HGSD Center for Urban Development Studies (2000) for case studies, Ferguson (2004) for an overview,
Daphnis and Ferguson (2004) for a collection of studies, and FinMark (2006) for an application in South Africa.
                                                                                                                  4
Malaysia has the preeminent housing finance system in the region. Our regression results

indicate that legislation currently under consideration in the Philippine Congress—the Credit

Information System Act (which would create a central credit information bureau in a country that

currently has very limited consumer credit information) and the Corporate Recovery Act (which

would revamp outdated bankruptcy laws)—could potentially lay the groundwork for closing

much of the gap in housing finance between the Philippines and Malaysia.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we lay out a framework that

highlights the underlying factors that enable (or impede) the development of housing finance

systems. Section 3 presents our main empirical results on the determinants of the size of housing

finance systems across 61 countries. Section 4 concludes.



2. The Housing Finance System

       We can view the housing finance sector in terms of supply and demand. Demand for

housing finance is in a sense a derived demand that flows from the demand for housing, which in

turn depends importantly on the rate of household formation and income levels. In addition,

with housing costs typically being a multiple of annual income, housing is made affordable by

spreading payments over time, so adequate housing finance must be longer term in nature.

       On the supply side, one way to think about the provision of housing finance is to split it

into two components: (i) the provision of housing finance by a lender who has ample funds at

hand, and (ii) the mobilization of funds within an economy so that lending institutions have

access to funds.

       For lenders with adequate funds to choose to allocate some portion to long-term housing

finance, a number of preconditions should be in place:


                                                                                                    5
•   Information on the Borrower. To adequately price a loan, a lender must have information on

    the creditworthiness of prospective borrowers that enables the determination of the

    probability of default. The information could be produced by a standardized and accurate

    source of credit history—such as public credit registries or private credit bureaus. Best is if

    the source has a wide coverage of the population, and the most informative source would

    include negative as well as positive transactions. Absent standardized information of credit

    histories, standard banking relationships, in which a bank spends considerable resources

    acquiring information on potential borrowers, would work but would limit (at least

    geographically, if not in other ways) the loan-creation capabilities of the lenders and of the

    housing finance system as a whole.

•   Ability to Value the Property. There should be an ability to determine the market value of the

    property. This is a natural outcome of a well-functioning housing market in which detailed

    information on housing transactions is maintained in a systematic way. For example, if data

    on the sales price and relevant features of the home (location, size, age, etc.) are maintained

    in a mandatory property registry, appraisers can more accurately value prospective homes for

    the lenders and borrowers.8

•   Ability to Secure Collateral. The lender should to be able to secure collateral against the loan

    in case of default. The house itself is an obvious candidate for that collateral, providing that

    in the case of default the lender can seize the property. To seize the property requires that

    there is something resembling clear title and that the legal system allows the lender to seize

    collateral.




8
 The property registry and appraisal system will also enhance the efficiency of the overall housing market, as
consumers will have better information to judge the relative value of various properties.
                                                                                                                 6
•   Macroeconomic Stability. The macroeconomic environment should be stable. If inflation is

    volatile, the lender would incur substantial interest rate risk if it lends at a fixed rate. In an

    unstable environment, lenders will typically pass on this risk to the borrowers—who are less

    likely to fully understand it—by only offering floating rate loans. Substantial interest rate

    risk, no matter who bears it, will retard the development of the housing finance system, as

    either lenders will go out of business (e.g., U.S. savings and loans in the 1980s) or borrowers

    will be unable to repay their loans (or both).



         If the conditions for long-term lending are in place, lenders must have ample access to

funds in order to lend.

•   Sources of Funds. In the primary market, deposit-taking institutions, such as banks, can fund

    mortgages through deposits. However, because deposits are short term, if this is the only

    source of funds housing loans will tend to be short term or at variable rates.9 Short-term

    loans, given that housing is expensive, are unattractive to potential borrowers. Potential

    borrowers might find variable rate loans attractive, but will likely not be able to gauge the

    substantial interest rate risk they are bearing (BIS 2006a). In addition, a reliance on deposits

    implies that funding sources are limited geographically, which increases risk. An important

    additional source of funds for the housing finance system is the secondary market, which

    buys the loans from the primary market and finds many ways to mobilize funds.10 One set of

    participants in the secondary market is mortgage securitizers, who bundle and repackage

    mortgages (or parts of mortgages) to create new securities, and investors in these mortgage

9
  More generally, a well developed housing finance system will typically have a diversity of lenders in the primary
market (such as nondepository mortgage specialists, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), microfinance
institutions (MFIs), and contractual savings systems) and greater specialization within the origination process. See
Follain and Zorn (2000) on the unbundling of the mortgage finance business.
10
   The development of Fannie Mae, for example, in the U.S. stemmed from illiquid or draining resources.
                                                                                                                       7
     securities. The securitizers can be public (such as Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or Ginnie Mae)

     or private (such as GE Capital); the investors can be domestic or foreign institutions or

     individuals; and, in general, the secondary market for mortgages can be an important part of

     a country’s broader capital markets.

•    Additional Sources of Liquidity. Whatever the usual sources of funds, it is important to have

     a backstop, such as a governmental liquidity window, in case of temporary liquidity

     crunches.



         In summary, a basic infrastructure that can enable a well-functioning housing finance

system includes factors that promote long-term lending (the ability to value property and to seize

it in the case of default, information on the creditworthiness of potential borrowers,

macroeconomic stability) and factors that promote the mobilization of funds (be it through

savings and deposits, capital markets, a governmental liquidity window, or secondary markets).11



3. Scope of Housing Finance Systems

Potential Measures

         The efficacy of housing finance systems can be measured along many dimensions. One

measure would be the portion of households that has access to housing finance products.12 An

important determinant of access so defined is the range of financing products that is available.

Such products can range from interest-only loans, option ARMs, and negative amortization loans


11
  These factors can also be recast in terms of risk mitigation (Van Order, 2005).
12
   Typically the lowest income households in any country are served (if at all) by government subsidies. In many
developing countries, a large portion of the population might have income levels that are too low to afford any type
of formal housing. While other problems in the housing system might dominate, housing finance can help or
worsen the situation. (See page 5 of Hoek-Smit and Diamond, 2003, for more on this). This is not to say that
housing finance cannot extend to the bottom of the pyramid. It can, but requires innovative products; see Melzer
(2006) for a discussion specific to South Africa.
                                                                                                                       8
that are currently offered in some developed countries to the Mexican conglomerate CEMEX’s

products Patrimonio Hoy (enabling incremental additions to housing) or Construmex (which taps

remittances).13

         Table 1, which presents partial information on features of typical mortgages in a range of

countries, shows that across countries mortgages vary in their typical length, loan-to-value ratios,

and whether they tend to be at fixed or adjustable rates. Very few emerging economies—

Malaysia, Thailand and some transition economies in Eastern Europe—have typical maturities of

30 years. Another, non-overlapping subset of emerging economies tends to have fixed-rate

mortgages. Thus, no emerging market appears to have widespread availability of long-term

fixed rate mortgages. In developed countries, many have mortgages with terms of 25 years or

greater, and roughly half have predominantly fixed rate products.14

         A somewhat blunter measure of depth is the sheer size of the housing finance market. All

else equal, larger housing finance markets likely reach a greater proportion of the population.

Size is not a perfect indicator of efficacy, though, as it is also influenced by price dynamics and

tax considerations. For example, a housing bubble requires, all else equal, a larger housing

finance market and tax treatments in countries such as Netherlands, Switzerland, and the U.S.

tend to result in a larger stock of mortgage debt. But size has one important advantage: We can

construct it for a wide range of countries.




13
   See BIS (2006a) for a description of recent innovations in housing finance products in industrial countries. On
CEMEX’s products, see “CEMEX: Innovation in Housing for the Poor” in Prahalad (2004) or www.cemex.com.
14
   The data in Table 1 are not complete or reliable enough to be included in our empirical analysis. We note that in
any economy it is not clear a priori whether the prevalence of fixed or variable rate mortgages owes to lender or
borrower preferences.
                                                                                                                       9
Cross-Country Data on the Size of the Housing Finance System

        In this section we present data on the size of housing finance markets across a wide range

of countries. There is no single source for these data, so we pool together data from different

sources. As there is yet to be a standardized methodology for collecting data on housing finance,

we cannot vouch for the quality of the data. Moreover, the data are not always collected at the

same time, so we will focus on two measures: the annual average from 2001 to 2005 of any data

we have for a particular country and the maximum value over that time period. In all cases, to

compare across countries we scale the size of the housing finance sector by nominal GDP.

        We gather data from a wide range of sources. Stephens (2003) and Low et al. (2003)

 provide information on Western European countries. IMF (2004) has data on Australia,

 Canada, Japan, and the United States. Zhu (2006) and Ong (2005) contain 2005 data for a

 handful of emerging Asian countries. BIS (2006a) has data for selected countries for 1994 and

 2004. Renaud (2005) contains data on many emerging economies, as does World Bank (2005).

 IMF (2006) provides 2005 data for 30 countries.15

        Bringing together all of these sources, and using them (and others) to cross-check

 wherever possible, we are able to compile data on mortgage debt outstanding for 62 countries

 for at least one year during the 2001 to 2005 period. Because we have data for selected years

 that vary by country, we construct two measures. The first, MD/GDP (avg), is the average

 mortgage debt-to-GDP ratio for the 2001-2005 period. The second, MD/GDP (max), is the

 maximum mortgage debt-to-GDP ratio for the 2001-2005 period. Throughout, because our




15
  The IMF (2006) data underlie its Figures 2.1 and 2.7. We thank Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti for providing us with
the underlying data.
                                                                                                               10
 empirical results do not hinge on which measure we use, we will refer to only MD/GDP (max)

 in our discussion.16

        Table 2 and Figures 1 and 2 provide information on the size of housing finance systems

 (as a share of GDP) for 62 countries. Emerging market economies generally have far smaller

 housing finance systems than developed countries. Among the 38 emerging economies in our

 sample, housing finance averages 10 percent of GDP, with the largest housing finance systems

 being between 20 and 30 percent of GDP (Malaysia, Taiwan, Korea, South Africa, Estonia, and

 Israel).17 In contrast, housing finance in the 24 developed countries in our sample averages 55

 percent of GDP, with almost all systems exceeding 40 percent.

        Figure 2 highlights the considerable variation of housing finance across countries, even

 those within the same region. Why is Latvia’s market 14 percent of GDP but Romania’s only

 1.8 percent? Why is the Philippines’ market 12 percent but Malaysia’s 31.5 percent? Even

 among developed countries there is great variation. In the next section we attempt to

 disentangle the root causes for the variation in the size of housing finance systems across

 countries.



Main Explanatory Variables

        We aim to explain why some countries have larger housing finance systems than others.

The framework discussed in Section 2 guides the empirical analysis in this section. Two




16
  Across countries, the correlation between the two measures is 0.995.
17
  South Africa is an example where depth does not translate into access. While it has a deep mortgage market by
emerging market standards, roughly one-quarter of its households do not have access to housing finance (Melzer,
2006).
                                                                                                                  11
important explanatory variables, Legal Rights and Credit Info, come from the Getting Credit

section of the World Bank’s Doing Business reports.18

         We noted above that for a mortgage lender to be comfortable lending long-term, it needs

to be able to secure collateral against the loan in case of default, and this ability hinges on being

able to seize the collateral (the property) in the case of default. To capture this ability we utilize

Legal Rights, an index of the strength of legal rights. Legal Rights is composed of ten categories,

seven of which pertain to collateral law and three pertain to bankruptcy law:

     •   general rather than specific description of assets is permitted in collateral agreements;

     •   general rather than specific description of debt is permitted in collateral agreements;

     •   any legal or natural person may grant or take security in the property;

     •   a unified registry operates that includes charges over movable property;

     •   secured creditors have priority outside of bankruptcy;

     •   secured creditors, rather than other parties such as government or workers, are paid first

         out of the proceeds from liquidating a bankrupt firm;

     •   secured creditors are able to seize their collateral when a debtor enters reorganization,

         with no “automatic stay” or “asset freeze” imposed by the court;

     •   management does not stay during reorganization, and an administrator is responsible for

         managing the business during reorganization;

     •   parties may agree on enforcement procedures by contract; and

     •   creditors may both seize and sell collateral out of court without restriction.



18
  See www.doingbusiness.org/MethodologySurveys/GettingCredit.aspx for a complete description of the Getting
Business portion of the Doing Business database. For both Legal Rights and Credit Info, we utilize annual averages
through 2005. Data on the underlying components of each measure are available only for the current year (2006), so
we utilize the aggregate measures. Similar variables, but in the form of zero-one dummy variables, are used in
Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2006).
                                                                                                                12
A score of 1 is assigned if each feature is present in the country, so that the Legal Rights index

ranges from 0 to 10 with higher scores indicating that collateral and bankruptcy laws are better

designed to expand access to credit.

       The framework in Section 2 also highlighted the importance of lenders’ access to

standardized and informative sources of credit information on potential borrowers. For this our

main variable is Credit Info, an index of the depth of credit information, which ranges from 0 to

6, with higher values indicating the availability of more credit information. One point is added

for each of the following six features of the credit information system:

   •   both positive (for example, amount of loan and on-time repayment pattern) and negative

       (for instance, number and amount of defaults, late payments, bankruptcies) credit

       information is distributed;

   •   data on both firms and individuals are distributed;

   •   data from retailers, trade creditors or utilities as well as financial institutions are

       distributed;

   •   more than 2 years of historical data are distributed;

   •   data on loans above 1% of income per capita are distributed; and

   •   by law, borrowers have the right to access their data.



       Finally, we noted that in volatile macroeconomic environments substantial interest rate

risk can impede lending; we proxy for this volatility with Inflation Vol, the standard deviation of

quarterly CPI inflation rates (collected from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics data

base) over the period 1995 to 2004. As a control, we include Country Size, the log of the 2001-




                                                                                                     13
2003 average of gross national income (in current U.S. dollars), as reported in Djankov et al.

(2006).19



Main Empirical Results

        Table 3 shows summary statistics for the whole sample as well as the emerging and

developed markets groupings. Developed countries score, on average, better than emerging

economies in the outcomes (size of the housing finance system) and along most (but not all)

dimensions of the underlying factors. In particular, emerging economies lag (on average) in

legal rights, credit information, and macroeconomic stability. Looking at the range of the

underlying factors, the range of legal rights seen in emerging economies roughly mirrors those in

developed countries. The depth of credit information in developed countries is almost uniformly

high (the lowest score is 4 out of 6), whereas in emerging economies there is wide dispersion in

the quality of credit information.

        Table 4 shows the main regression results. In the full sample, even after controlling for

country size (which is highly significant), countries with stronger legal rights, better provision of

credit information, and a less volatile macroeconomic environment have larger housing finance

systems. In the emerging economies and developed countries samples, Country Size is no longer

significant; within the sets of emerging economies and developed countries, larger countries do

not (all else equal) have larger housing finance systems. Legal Rights is highly significant for

developed countries, but less so for emerging economies, where it is marginally significant in

some specifications and insignificant in others. In contrast, macroeconomic stability and the


19
  We supplemented this source with data on Luxembourg and Estonia from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators. We follow Djankov et al. (2006) in using as a control variable country size, which can be argued to be
exogenous, rather than per capita income, which is influenced by financial sector development (Levine 1997;
Levine, Loayza, and Beck 2000).
                                                                                                                 14
strength of credit information systems matter in emerging economies but not in developed

countries.20,21

         To bring the empirical results to life, we next highlight some of the differences across

countries. In general, emerging economies lag far behind developed countries in the provision of

housing finance. The full sample results in Table 4 suggest that this is explained by a number of

reasons. First, emerging economies tend to be smaller, poorer, and have more volatile inflation.

Small and poor might be difficult to change rapidly, but many emerging economies have taken

steps to limit the macroeconomic volatility that stems from economic policy (e.g., by

implementing a policy of inflation targeting). On the legal rights index, emerging economies

lag, on average, by two full points, although some have legal rights as strong as the best

developed countries. On the depth of credit information, the emerging market average is below

the minimum level found in developed countries. The point estimates in column (1) of Table 4

suggests that bringing their legal rights and credit information systems up to the developed

country average would enable almost a 20 percentage point (of GDP) increase in the size of

emerging economies’ housing finance systems. This would close the gap between housing

finance in developed and emerging economies by almost half.

         Turning to particular countries, the Philippines, with housing finance totaling about 12

percent of GDP, is on par with many Latin American countries and about at the emerging

economy average, but it lags behind many of its Asian peers. Comparing it to Malaysia—with


20
   We also constructed variables based on two other Doing Business information variables, Public Registry and
Credit Bureau (the percentage of individuals or firms listed in a public credit registry or private credit bureau) with
current information on repayment history, unpaid debts, or credit outstanding. Neither are informative, nor do they
change our results in any way.
21
   Another potential scaling factor is overall private credit in the economy, as presented in Djankov, McLiesh, and
Shleifer (2006). Scaling housing finance by private credit would not change our main results. Countries with
stronger legal rights and deeper credit information systems have larger housing finance systems (as a share of
overall private credit), with information being relatively more important within the set of emerging market countries
and legal rights explaining differences among developed countries.
                                                                                                                    15
housing finance at 32 percent of GDP—shows why.22 The Philippines scores a 3 on both legal

rights and credit information (it basically has no credit bureau to speak of), compared to an 8 and

a 6 for Malaysia. If the Philippines moved to Malaysian standards on legal rights and credit

information, the point estimates in column (5) of Table 4 suggest that it could add almost 14

percentage points (of GDP) to its housing finance sector. To put this another way, two bills

currently under review by the Philippine Congress—the Credit Information System Act

(providing for the creation of a central credit information bureau) and the Corporate Recovery

Act (to modernize the obsolete corporate rehabilitation law)—could begin the process of moving

the Philippines up to Malaysian standards.23



Further Analysis of Emerging Markets

        In this subsection we further examine the determinants of the depth of emerging markets’

housing finance systems. There are many potential factors, but data limitations preclude most

from inclusion in our study. For example, a potential driver of mortgage finance development is

the enabling force of government-supported housing finance agencies; see, for example, Chan,

Davies, and Gyntelberg (2006). However, we have not been able to gather data on the existence

of such agencies across a substantial portion of the 38 emerging market countries in our sample.

        Another potentially important enabling factor is the existence of well-developed

government securities markets. To test this we construct a variable, Govt Mkt, from many

sources.24 In all cases Govt Mkt is the average (computed over, where available, 1996-2001) ratio


22
   There is also a great disparity in housing outcomes between the two countries. For example, in the Philippines 44
percent of the urban population live in slums, whereas in Malaysia the corresponding figure is only 2 percent (UN-
Habitat, 2005).
23
   For more on the issues impeding financial market development (particularly corporate bond market development)
in the Philippines, see Espenilla (2006).
24
   The main source is data underlying BIS Quarterly Review Table 16A on outstanding domestic debt. We thank
Thomas Jans of BIS for providing the portion of Table 16A coinciding with government (as opposed to private)
                                                                                                                  16
of government securities outstanding to GDP. Table 5 shows, however, that the size of emerging

markets’ government securities markets is not related to the depth of the housing finance

system.25 The insignificance of government securities markets could owe to high correlation with

other explanatory variables. For example, country size and creditor friendly macroeconomic

policies that produce lower inflation volatility is strongly associated with the size of government

securities markets (Burger and Warnock, 2006; Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler,

forthcoming; Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai, 2006). However, removing country size and

inflation volatility does not impact the result. We also constructed, but do not report, regressions

that were designed to ascertain whether the countries with the smallest government securities

markets tended to have smaller housing finance systems.26 Our results show that they do not.

Overall, it seems clear that government securities markets do not provide an additional impetus

to the development of the housing finance system above and beyond what is already provided by

deep credit information systems, strong legal rights, and low inflation (which owe in part to

creditor friendly macroeconomic policies).



4. Conclusion

         In this paper we provided a picture of the extent of housing finance in 61 countries and

presented a framework for analyzing housing finance systems. Our empirical analysis showed

that across all countries, those with stronger legal rights for borrowers and lenders (through

collateral and bankruptcy laws), deeper credit information systems, and a more stable

issuance. We increase the coverage by using IMF Country Reports 04/31, 03/194, 03/258, 02/179, 03/134, 04/173,
03/112, 03/163, 01/116, and 03/109. For 6 countries (Bulgaria, Estonia, Iran, Kazakstan, Saudi Arabia, and Tunisia)
we were not able to find evidence of a government bond market and so assume zero; our results are not significantly
affected if we omit those 6 countries.
25
   For completeness, Table 5 also reports results for the full and developed country samples.
26
   Specifically, we created three dummies that capture whether a country’s government bond market was small,
medium, or large (i.e., in the first, second, or third tercile) and included them in our models from Table 5 (omitting
the constant). Statistically, one cannot reject that the coefficients on the three dummies are identical.
                                                                                                                   17
macroeconomic environment have deeper housing finance systems. These same factors also

help explain the variation in housing finance across emerging economies. Across developed

countries, which tend to have low macroeconomic volatility and relatively extensive credit

information systems, variation in the strength of legal rights helps explain the extent of housing

finance.

       Our results will not surprise experts in housing finance. For example, a decade ago

Gallardo (1998, page 216) wrote: “Rationalizing the legal framework; improving loan

information, underlying, and asset quality; and redefining the role of government in the primary

market will be crucial to improving the management of risk and transaction costs in the housing

finance market and priming that market to become an integral part of the capital markets.” Our

study shows that across a wide range of countries, the basic underlying factors that any housing

finance expert would list as necessary preconditions for a well-developed housing finance system

do indeed help to explain variations in development levels.

       In many emerging market economies, the time is ripe for further development of the

capital markets that will foster the provision of housing finance. On the supply side, bond

market development is proceeding, and the conditions for its further development are well

understood. Domestic institutions with long-dated liabilities naturally have demand for long-

dated assets. Increased supply of and demand for long-dated assets can spur the emergence of

derivatives that enable investors to offload risk to those interested in bearing it, further increasing

the supply of capital. Our work suggests that if, alongside these potentially positive

developments in the availability of long-term finance, countries also take the steps necessary to

foster housing finance (strengthening legal rights and deepening credit information systems), a

meaningful expansion in the provision of housing finance is quite possible.


                                                                                                    18
       It should be noted that while the unit of study in this paper is the country, we fully

recognize that there can be considerable variation in housing finance systems within countries.

For example, of the twelve million households in South Africa, roughly three million do not

currently qualify for any sort of traditional mortgage product (FinMark 2006, Melzer 2006).

Even within the well-developed U.S. housing finance system, great disparities in access persist.

Our broad, cross-country study can hint at, but not directly address, reasons for these within-

country variations.




                                                                                                  19
                                                 References


Allen, Franklin; Chui, Michael K.F; and Maddaloni, Angela, 2004. Financial Systems in the USA, Europe
    and Asia. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20 (4): 490-508.

Ball, Michael, 2003. Improving Housing Market. RICS Leading Edge Series (May).

BIS, 2006a. Housing finance in the global financial market. CGFS Papers No 26.

BIS, 2006b. Asian Bond Markets: Issues and Prospects. BIS Papers No 30.

Boleat, M., 1985. National Housing Systems: A Comparative Study. Croom Helm, London.

Brounen, D., P. Neuteboom, and A. van Dijkhuizen, 2006. House Prices and Affordability: A First and
   Second Look Across Countries.

Buckley, R. and Van Order, R. 2005. Housing Finance in Transition Countries: Finding Bills on the
   Street. in Hegedüs and Struyk Housing Finance: New and Old Models in Central Europe, Russia, and
   Kazahkstan.

Burger, J., and F. Warnock, 2006. Local Currency Bond Markets. IMF Staff Papers 53: 115-132.

Calhoun, C., 2005. Housing Finance Assessment for Thailand. World Bank mimeo.

Chan, E., M. Davies, and J. Gyntelberg, 2006. The Role of Government-Supported Housing Finance
   Agencies in Asia. BIS Quarterly Review (December): 71-83.

Chiquier, Loïc; Hassler, Olivier; and Lea, Michael, 2004. Mortgage Securities in Emerging Markets.
   World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3370.

Chiuri, M, and T Jappelli, 2003. Financial market imperfections and home ownership: a comparative
   study. European Economic Review 47: 857-75.

Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel, and S. Schmukler, forthcoming. Government Bonds in Domestic and
    Foreign Currency: The Role of Macroeconomic and Institutional Factors. Review of International
    Economics.

Diamond, Douglas and Michael Lea, 1992. Housing Finance in Developed Countries: An International
   Comparison of Efficiency. Journal of Housing Research 3(1).

Daphnis, F., and B. Ferguson, 2004. Housing Microfinance: A Guide to Practice. Kumarian Press (USA).

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2006. Private Credit in 129 Countries. Journal
   of Financial Economics. Forthcoming.

Eichengreen, B., and P. Luengnaruemitchai, 2006. Why Doesn’t Asia Have Bigger Bond Markets? in
    Asian Bond Markets: Issues and Prospects (BIS Papers No 30).

Espenilla, N., 2006. The Corporate Bond Market in the Philippines. in Developing Corporate Bond
   Markets in Asia (BIS Paper No 26).
                                                                                                      20
Ferguson, B., 2004. Housing Finance Options for Low and Medium Income Families: Analysis of the
    Latin American Experience. Housing Finance International 18(3).

FinMark, 2006. 2006 Annual Report. Available at www.finmarktrust.org.za/.

Follain, J., and P. Zorn, 2000. The Unbundling of Residential Mortgage Finance. Journal of Housing
    Research 1(1): 63-89.

Gallardo, J., 1998. Rationalizing Housing Finance and Developing Capital Markets in the Philippines. in
    Watanabe, M. (ed.) New Directions in Asian Housing Finance: Linking Capital Markets and Housing
    Finance. International Finance Corporation.

Ghosh, Swati. 2006. East Asia Finance: The Road to Robust Markets. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Green, R., and S. Wachter, 2005. The American Mortgage in Historical and International Context.

Hardt, Judith, 2002. Recent Developments in European Mortgage Markets. in OECD, Housing Finance in
   Transition Economies.

Hegedüs, József and Struyk, Raymond J., 2005. Housing Finance: New and Old Models in Central
   Europe, Russia, and Kazahkstan. Local Government and Public Service Reform Initiative, Open
   Society Institute (Budapest).

HGSD Center for Urban Development Studies, 2000. Housing Microfinance Initiatives: Synthesis and
  Regional Summary: Asia, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan Africa with Selected Case Studies.
  Harvard Graduate School of Design.

Hoek-Smit, M., 2005. The housing finance sector in Indonesia. Wharton and World Bank mimeo.

Hoek-Smit, M., and D. Diamond, 2003. The Design and Implementation of Subsidies for Housing
   Finance. mimeo prepared a the World Bank Seminar on Housing Finance.

IMF, 2004. Three Current Policy Issues. World Economic Outlook (September, Chapter 2).

IMF, 2006. Household Credit Growth in Emerging Market Countries. Global Financial Stability Report
   (September, Chapter 2).

Levine, R., 1997. Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda. Journal of
   Economic Literature 35: 668-726.

Levine, R., N. Loayza, and T. Beck, 2000.Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and Causes.
   Journal of Monetary Economics 46: 31-77.

Low, Simon; Sebag-Montefiore, Matthew; and Dübel, Achim, 2003. Study on the Financial Integration
   of European Mortgage Markets. Study Prepared for the Annual European Mortgage Conference in
   November 2003. (UK and Belgium: Mercer Oliver Wyman and European Mortgage Federation).

Malpezzi, S, 2001, "Tales from the Real Side: Lessons of Urban Research for Housing Finance in
   Developing and Transition Economies." in Wachter, S.M. and Penne, R.L., ed. Housing Policy in the
   New Millennium Conference Proceedings (forthcoming in Cityscape).
                                                                                                      21
Melzer, I., 2006. How low can you go? Charting the housing finance access frontier: a review of recent
   demand and supply data. FinMark Trust.

National Association of Realtors, 2000a. Argentina Country Profile.

National Association of Realtors, 2000b. Chile Country Profile.

OECD, 2002. Housing Finance in Transition Economies.

Ong, S., 2005. Mortgage markets in Asia. Paper for presentation at the European Real Estate Society
   Conference 2005 (Dublin Ireland).

Prahalad, C., 2004. The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty Through Profits.
    Wharton School Publishing (USA).

Quigley, J., 2000. A Decent Home: Housing Policy in Perspective. Brookings Papers on Urban Affairs
   1(1): 53-99.

Renaud, B., 2005. Mortgage Finance in Emerging Markets: Constraints and Feasible Development Paths.
   Mimeo.

Sanders, A., 2005. Barriers to homeownership and housing quality: The impact of the international
   mortgage market. Journal of Housing Economics 14: 147-152.

Scanlon, K., and C. Whitehead, 2004. International Trends in Housing Tenure and Mortgage Finance.
   Council of Mortgage Lenders.

Sheppard, S., 2007. Survey of Housing Finance Conditions in a Global Sample of Urban Areas. Williams
   College and World Bank.

Stephens, Mark, 2002. International Models of Housing Finance: Housing Systems in the Western and
    Transition Economies. in Yasui, T. (ed.), Housing Finance in Transition Economies, Paris (OECD).

Stephens, Mark, 2003. Globalisation and Housing Finance Systems in Advanced and Transition
    Economies. Urban Studies 40(5-6): 1011-26.

Tiwari and Moriizumi, 2003. Efficiency in Housing Finance: A Comparative Study of Mortgage
   Instruments in Japan.

United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 2005. Financing Urban Shelter: Global
   Report on Human Settlements 2005. USA:Earthscan.

Van Order, R. 2005.Risk Management and Mortgage Portfolios: Some Applications for Emerging
   Markets. In Hegedüs and Struyk, Housing Finance: New and Old Models in Central Europe, Russia,
   and Kazahkstan.

Watanabe, Masakaze, ed. 1998. New Directions in Asian Housing Finance: Linking Capital Markets and
   Housing Finance. International Finance Corporation.

World Bank. 1993. Housing: Enabling Markets to Work . Washington DC: World Bank.
                                                                                                         22
World Bank, 2005. Housing Finance in Emerging Economies, Technical Briefing to the Board.

Zhu, H., 2006. The structure of housing finance markets and house prices in Asia. BIS Quarterly Review
(December): 55-69.




                                                                                                    23
Table 1. Characteristics of Mortgage Products

                            Typical length of contract,   Estimated Average LTV    Max LTV        Mostly Fixed or
                                      years                         (%)              (%)            Variable?
Emerging Market Economies
 Africa
      Algeria                       Max 30                                            90
      Ghana                        Max 20-25                                          80
      Morrocco                      Max 25                                          70-100
      South Africa                  10-20
      Tunisia
 Eastern Europe
      Bulgaria
      Croatia                     up to 20 or 30                                                   Fixed/Variable
      Czech Republic               Less than 20                   30-50               100          Fixed (Mixed)
      Estonia                                                                                         Variable
      Hungary                          5-35                                            70         Variable (Mixed)
      Kazakhstan                       3-20                                            70             Variable
      Latvia
      Poland                          5-32.5                                          100             Variable
      Romania                         10-20                                                           Variable
      Russia                          10-15                                                        Fixed/Variable
      Slovakia
      Slovenia                          10                         50                                 Variable
 Emerging Asia
      Bangladesh                   less than 15                   50-70
      China                   10-15 typical; max 30                                    80             Variable
      India                          max 20                                            85              Mixed
      Indonesia               8, 10, or 15 (max 20)               75-80                90             Variable
      Korea                     typical 3; max 20                  56                  70             Variable
      Malaysia                       Max 30                                            80             Variable
      Pakistan
      Philippines                  Max 20-30                      70-80
      Taiwan
      Thailand                typical 10-20; max 30               70-80              90-100           Variable
 Latin America
      Argentina                  12-20 (max 20)                   80-90
      Bolivia
      Brazil                         Max 20                                         75-100            Variable
      Chile                           8-20                                            75
      Colombia                       Max 30                                           70
      Costa Rica
      Ecuador
      Guatamala
      Honduras                 20 typical; 30 max                                      70             Variable
      Mexico                         10-15                        80-90           100 (payroll)
      Panama
      Paraguay
      Peru
      Uruguay                        Max 25                                           70
      Venezuela                      Max 20                                          70-75
 Middle East
      Iran                           Max 18                                          70-80
      Israel
      Jordan                         max 20                       80-90
      Saudi Arabia
      Turkey                            10                                           75-80




                                                                                                                 24
Table 1. Characteristics of Mortgage Products (continued)

                       Typical length of contract,     Estimated                         Mostly Fixed or
                                                                       Max LTV
                                 years                Average LTV                          Variable?
Developed Countries
 Europe
   Austria                         25                    60                                  Fixed
   Belgium                         20                   80-85              100               Fixed
   Denmark                         30                   max 80              80               Fixed
   Finland                  15-20 (variable)            75-80                               Variable
   France                        15-20                   78                100               Fixed?
   Germany             20-30 w. initial fix of 5-10      67                 80               Fixed?
   Greece                          15                    55                                 Variable
   Ireland                         20                    80               100+              Variable
   Italy                          5-20                   55                80           Variable (Mixed)
   Luxembourg                    20-25                   80                                 Variable
   Netherlands                     30                    87                125               Fixed
   Norway
   Portugal                      25-30                    83                90              Variable
   Spain                         15-20                    70               100              Variable
   Sweden                     30-45 years                80-95                              Variable
   Switzerland                   15-20                                     80
   UK                             25                      69               110              Variable
 North America
   Canada                          25                     60         75 or 95 (w/ins)    Fixed/Variable
   US                              30                     76                                 Fixed
 Pacific
   Australia                      25                     60-70           90-100             Variable
   Hong Kong                      15                                       70
   Japan                         20-30                   70-80                           Fixed (Mixed)
   New Zealand
   Singapore                     30-35                                     80               Variable

Sources: Scanlon and Whitehead (2004), Calhoun (2005), Hoek-Smit (2005), Zhu (2006), Low et al. (2003), Ong
(2006), Hegedüs and Struyk (2005), BIS (2006a), Brounen, Neuteboom, and van Dijkhuizen (2006), Green and
Wachter (2005), Tiwari and Moriizumi (2003), National Association of Realtors (2000a, 2000b), IMF (2006), and
Sheppard (2007).




                                                                                                            25
Table 2. The Depth of Housing Finance
                                   MD/GDP MD/GDP                                                 MD/GDP        MD/GDP
                                      (avg) (max)                                                   (avg)        (max)
Emerging Market Economies                    10.2            Developed Countries                                  54.8
    Africa                                   15.7               North America                                     67.7
        DZA Algeria                     1.3   1.5                     CAN Canada                      42.9        43.0
        GHA Ghana                       0.5   0.5                     USA US                          67.4        69.4
        MAR Morrocco                    7.0   7.0               Pacific                                           40.2
        ZAF     South Africa           22.0  26.1                     AUS Australia                   61.9        71.0
        TUN Tunisia                     6.0   6.0                     HKG Hong Kong                   41.5        44.0
    Eastern Europe                            3.9                     JPN Japan                       35.7        36.4
        BGR Bulgaria                    4.7   4.7                     NZL New Zealand                 78.2        78.2
        HRV Croatia                    10.0  10.0                     SGP Singapore                   60.2        61.3
        CZE     Czech Rep.              4.6   5.5               Europe                                            48.3
        EST     Estonia                22.0  22.0                     AUT Austria                     26.1        26.1
        HUN Hungary                     8.6  11.0                     BEL Belgium                     27.7        28.3
        LVA Latvia                     12.1  14.0                     DNK Denmark                     79.0        87.9
        POL     Poland                  4.4   5.2                     FIN  Finland                    32.4        35.7
        ROM Romania                     1.8   1.8                     FRA France                      24.1        29.0
        RUS     Russia                  0.5   0.6                     DEU Germany                     47.4        54.0
        SVK Slovakia                    4.9   5.9                     GRC Greece                      14.8        17.6
        SVN Slovenia                    3.5   3.5                     IRL  Ireland                    45.4        59.2
    Emerging Asia                            14.3                     ITA Italy                       13.1        15.0
        BGD Bangladesh                  2.5   2.5                     LUX Luxembourg                  32.3        33.5
        CHN China                      10.0  12.0                     NLD Netherlands                 82.7       100.0
        IND     India                   4.9   5.8                     NOR Norway                      45.0        45.0
        IDN     Indonesia               2.1   2.1                     PRT Portugal                    48.9        50.7
        KOR Korea                      20.8  25.0                     ESP Spain                       36.3        40.2
        MYS Malaysia                   28.3  31.5                     SWE Sweden                      50.2        50.3
        PAK Pakistan                    0.7   0.7                     CHE Switzerland                130.0       130.0
        PHL     Philippines             6.8  12.0                     GBR UK                          61.5        64.0
        TWN Taiwan                     26.0  26.0
        THA Thailand                   15.5  16.0
    Latin America                             6.8
        ARG Argentina                   1.7   1.7
        BOL Bolivia                     9.5   9.5
        BRA Brazil                      2.6   5.0
        CHL Chile                      14.8  16.0
        COL Colombia                   10.0  12.0
        MEX Mexico                      9.8  11.0
        PER     Peru                    2.2   2.5
        VEN Venezuela                   0.7   0.7
    Middle East                               5.6
        IRN     Iran                    2.8   3.0
        ISR     Israel                 22.0  22.0
        SAU Saudi Arabia                1.0   1.0
        TUR Turkey                      2.5   2.5

Notes. The table presents data on mortgage debt outstanding expressed as a share of nominal GDP. All data are for the 2001 to
2005 period, but not all years are available for all countries. MD/GDP (avg) and MD/GDP (max) are the average and maximum
mortgage debt-to-GDP ratios (expressed as a percentage) for the 2001-2005 period. See text for sources.


                                                                                                                            26
Table 3. Summary Statistics

                                   N         Mean       Stdev       Min         Max
All Countries
MD/GDP (avg)                           61      23.5        26.8        0.3         130
MD/GDP (max)                           61      25.5        28.4        0.5        130
Legal Rights                           61       5.2         2.2          2          10
Credit Info                            61       3.9         1.8          0           6
Inflation Vol                          61      15.4        52.6         .5         391
Country Size                           61      25.6         1.5       22.6        29.9
Developed Markets
MD/GDP (avg)                           23      50.2        26.1         13         130
MD/GDP (max)                           23      53.8        27.3        15          130
Legal Rights                           23       6.5         2.1          3          10
Credit Info                            23       4.9         1.0          3           6
Inflation Vol                          23       1.3         1.2        0.5        29.9
Country Size                           23      26.6         1.3       24.7        29.9
Emerging Market
Economies
MD/GDP (avg)                           38       7.4         7.4        0.3          28
MD/GDP (max)                           38       8.4         8.1        0.5        31.5
Legal Rights                           38       4.5         1.9          2           9
Credit Info                            38       3.3         1.9          0           6
Inflation Vol                          38      24.0        65.5        1.3         391
Country Size                           38      24.9         1.3       22.6        27.7

MD/GDP (avg) and MD/GDP (max) are the average and maximum mortgage debt-to-GDP ratios (expressed as a
percentage) for the 2001-2005 period. Inflation Vol is the standard deviation of quarterly CPI inflation rates over the
period 1995 to 2004. Country Size is the log of the 2001-2003 average of gross national income (in current U.S.
dollars), as reported in Djankov et al. (2006) (with EST added from WDI). The rest of the variables are from the
World Bank’s Doing Business reports. Legal Rights is the 2004-2005 average of the index of the strength of legal
rights; each year it ranges from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating that collateral and bankruptcy laws are better
designed to expand access to credit. Credit Info is the 2003-2005 average of the index of the depth of credit
information; each year it ranges from 0 to 6, with higher values indicating the availability of more credit
information, from either a public registry or a private bureau. In this and all subsequent tables, the maximum
sample size is 61; Luxembourg is dropped because it is not in the Doing Business data.




                                                                                                                    27
Table 4. Main Regression Results

The dependent variables are MD/GDP (max), the maximum mortgage debt-to-GDP ratio for the 2001-2005 period,
in the first two columns of each panel, and MD/GDP (avg), the average mortgage debt-to-GDP ratio for the 2001-
2005 period, in the last two columns of each panel; each is expressed as a percentage. Legal Rights is the 2004-2005
average of the index of the strength of legal rights; each year it ranges from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating
that collateral and bankruptcy laws are better designed to expand access to credit. Credit Info is the 2003-2005
average of the index of the depth of credit information; each year it ranges from 0 to 6, with higher values indicating
the availability of more credit information, from either a public registry or a private bureau. Inflation Vol is the
standard deviation of quarterly CPI inflation rates over the period 1995 to 2004. Country Size is the log of the 2001-
2003 average of gross national income (in current U.S. dollars). Constants are included but not reported. The
absolute values of t-statistics computed using robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively, is denoted by a, b, and c.

                      All Countries                 Emerging Market                Developed Countries
                                                      Economies
                     (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

Legal Rights         6.70a           6.30a            1.80b           1.62b            7.78a           7.11a
                    (6.12)          (6.16)           (2.36)          (2.26)           (4.42)          (4.60)

Credit Info          2.87a           2.72a            1.95a           1.79a            -2.39           -1.96
                    (2.81)          (2.76)           (3.32)          (3.28)           (0.54)          (0.47)

Inflation Vol       -0.05b          -0.04b           -0.02b          -0.02b            -6.32           -5.36
                    (2.28)          (2.15)           (2.27)          (2.10)           (1.15)          (0.96)

Country Size         4.96a           4.61a            0.47            0.17            -2.41            -2.07
                    (3.82)          (3.70)           (0.46)          (0.17)           (0.60)          (0.63)


N                    61              61               38              38               23              23
Adj. R2             0.460           0.451            0.319           0.316            0.146           0.114




                                                                                                                    28
Table 5. Additional Regression Results

The dependent variables are MD/GDP (max), the maximum mortgage debt-to-GDP ratio for the 2001-2005 period,
in the first two columns of each panel, and MD/GDP (avg), the average mortgage debt-to-GDP ratio for the 2001-
2005 period, in the last two columns of each panel; each is expressed as a percentage. Legal Rights is the 2004-2005
average of the index of the strength of legal rights; each year it ranges from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating
that collateral and bankruptcy laws are better designed to expand access to credit. Credit Info is the 2003-2005
average of the index of the depth of credit information; each year it ranges from 0 to 6, with higher values indicating
the availability of more credit information, from either a public registry or a private bureau. Inflation Vol is the
standard deviation of quarterly CPI inflation rates over the period 1995 to 2004. Country Size is the log of the 2001-
2003 average of gross national income (in current U.S. dollars). Govt Mkt is the 1996-2001 average of the size of
government securities markets (expressed as a share of GDP). Constants are included but not reported. The
absolute values of t-statistics computed using robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively, is denoted by a, b, and c.

                      All Countries                 Emerging Market                Developed Countries
                                                      Economies
                     (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

Legal Rights         6.65a           6.25a            1.74b           1.60b            6.09c           5.30c
                    (6.24)          (6.24)           (2.27)          (2.22)           (1.94)          (1.82)

Credit Info          2.47b           2.37b            1.88a           1.77a            -1.64           -1.16
                    (2.30)          (2.26)           (3.04)          (3.00)           (0.29)          (0.21)

Inflation Vol       -0.04c          -0.03c           -0.16c          -0.02c            -6.19           -5.22
                    (1.99)          (1.86)           (1.81)          (1.80)           (1.07)          (0.89)

Country Size         4.14a           3.90a            0.40            0.14            -1.70            -1.30
                    (2.93)          (2.83)           (0.38)          (0.14)           (0.68)          (0.31)

Govt Mkt             0.16            0.14             0.05            0.02            -0.24           -0.26
                    (1.36)          (1.29)           (0.50)          (0.18)           (0.80)          (0.84)

N                    61              61               38              38               23              23
Adj. R2             0.464           0.452            0.304           0.296            0.132           0.108




                                                                                                                    29
Figure 1. The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Regional Aggregates

                                              The Depth of Mortgage Markets
                                       (regional GDP-weighted averages, as a percent of GDP)


 100


  90


  80


  70


  60


  50


  40


  30


  20


  10


   0
       Eastern Europe   Middle East   Latin America   Emerging Asia      Africa          Pacific   Europe   North America




                                                                                                                            30
Figure 2. The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Individual Countries

                                       The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Africa and Middle East                                                                The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Eastern Europe
                                                              (as a percent of GDP)                                                                                       (as a percent of GDP)


 100                                                                                                                         100


 90                                                                                                                          90


 80                                                                                                                          80


 70                                                                                                                          70


 60                                                                                                                          60


 50                                                                                                                          50


 40                                                                                                                          40


 30                                                                                                                          30


 20                                                                                                                          20


 10                                                                                                                          10


  0                                                                                                                           0
            GHA               SAU                DZA     TUR             IRN          TUN     MAR         ISR         ZAF          RUS    ROM         SVN        BGR      POL        CZE          SVK   HRV   HUN         LVA    EST




                                             The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Emerging Asia*                                                                  The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Latin America
                                                              (as a percent of GDP)                                                                                       (as a percent of GDP)


 100                                                                                                                         100


 90                                                                                                                          90


 80                                                                                                                          80


 70                                                                                                                          70


 60                                                                                                                          60


 50                                                                                                                          50


 40                                                                                                                          40


 30                                                                                                                          30


 20                                                                                                                          20


 10                                                                                                                          10


  0                                                                                                                           0
          PAK           IDN         BGD           IND   CHN        PHL         THA     KOR   TWN    MYS         HKG    SGP          VEN         ARG             PER         BRA              BOL        MEX         COL         CHL
       *Also includes Hong Kong and Singapore.
                                    The Depth of Mortgage Markets: Europe                                                       The Depth of Mortgage Markets: North America and Pacific
                                                  (as a percent of GDP)                                                                             (as a percent of GDP)
                                                                                                              130
100                                                                                                                 100


90                                                                                                                  90


80                                                                                                                  80


70                                                                                                                  70


60                                                                                                                  60


50                                                                                                                  50


40                                                                                                                  40


30                                                                                                                  30


20                                                                                                                  20


10                                                                                                                  10


 0                                                                                                                   0
      ITA   GRC   AUT   BEL   FRA     LUX   FIN      ESP    NOR     SWE   PRT   DEU   IRL   GBR   DNK   NLD   CHE         JPN   CAN           HKG             SGP           USA            AUS   NZL




                                                                                                                                                                                                       32
