NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBAL CURRENCY HEDGING
John Y. Campbell
Karine Serfaty-de Medeiros
Luis M. Viceira
Working Paper 13088
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13088

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

Viceira acknowledges the financial support of the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School.
We are grateful to Roderick Molenaar, Sam Thompson, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, and seminar participants
at Brandeis University, Boston University, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Harvard
University for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by John Y. Campbell, Karine Serfaty-de Medeiros, and Luis M. Viceira. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Global Currency Hedging
John Y. Campbell, Karine Serfaty-de Medeiros, and Luis M. Viceira
NBER Working Paper No. 13088
May 2007, Revised January 2009
JEL No. F3,F31,G11,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
Over the period 1975 to 2005, the US dollar (particularly in relation to the Canadian dollar) and the
euro and Swiss franc (particularly in the second half of the period) have moved against world equity
markets. Thus these currencies should be attractive to risk-minimizing global equity investors despite
their low average returns. The risk-minimizing currency strategy for a global bond investor is close
to a full currency hedge, with a modest long position in the US dollar. There is little evidence that
risk-minimizing investors should adjust their currency positions in response to movements in interest
differentials.

John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Karine Serfaty-de Medeiros
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
kdemed@fas.harvard.edu

Luis M. Viceira
George E. Bates Professor
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 367
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lviceira@hbs.edu

What role should foreign currency play in a diversi…ed investment portfolio? In
practice, many investors appear reluctant to hold foreign currency directly, perhaps
because they see currency as an investment with high volatility and low average return. At the same time, many investors hold indirect positions in foreign currency
when they buy foreign equities or bonds without hedging the currency exposure implied by the foreign asset holding. Such investors receive the foreign-currency excess
return on their foreign assets, plus the return on foreign currency.
In this paper we consider an investor with an exogenous portfolio of equities or
bonds and ask how the investor can use foreign currency to manage the risk of the
portfolio. We assume that the investor’s domestic money market is riskless in real
terms, and use mean-variance analysis to …nd the foreign currency positions that
minimize the risk of the total portfolio. We consider seven major developed-market
currencies, the dollar, euro, Japanese yen, Swiss franc, pound sterling, Canadian
dollar and Australian dollar, over the period 1975 to 2005. Any of these can be the
investor’s domestic currency or can be available as a foreign currency. We assume a
one-quarter investment horizon, but obtain similar results for horizons ranging from
one month to one year.
Although our framework is standard, and has been applied to US holdings of for-

1

eign currencies by Glen and Jorion (1993), our implementation and empirical results
are novel in several respects.

Following Glen and Jorion, we start by considering

an equity investor who chooses …xed currency weights to minimize the unconditional
variance of her portfolio. Such an investor wishes to hold currencies that are negatively correlated with equities. Our …rst novel result is that our seven currencies fall
along a spectrum. At one extreme, the Australian dollar and the Canadian dollar are
positively correlated with local-currency returns on equity markets around the world,
including their own domestic markets. At the other extreme, the euro and the Swiss
franc are negatively correlated with world stock returns and their own domestic stock
returns. The Japanese yen, the British pound, and the US dollar fall in the middle,
with the yen and the pound more similar to the Australian and Canadian dollars,
and the US dollar more similar to the euro and the Swiss franc.
When we consider currencies in pairs, we …nd that risk-minimizing equity investors
should short those currencies that are more positively correlated with equity returns
and should hold long positions in those currencies that are more negatively correlated
with returns. When we consider all seven currencies as a group, we …nd that optimal
currency positions tend to be long the US dollar, the Swiss franc, and the euro, and
short the other currencies. A long position in the US-Canadian exchange rate is a
particularly e¤ective hedge against equity risk.
2

We obtain a second novel result when we consider the risk-minimization problem
of global bond investors rather than global equity investors.

We …nd that most

currency returns are almost uncorrelated with bond returns and thus risk-minimizing
bond investors should avoid holding currencies; that is, they should fully currencyhedge their international bond positions. This is consistent with common practice
of institutional investors, although global bond mutual funds are available with or
without currency hedging.

The US dollar is an exception to the general pattern

in that it tends to appreciate when bond prices fall, that is when interest rates rise,
around the world. This generates a modest demand for US dollars by risk-minimizing
bond investors.
In capital market equilibrium, one might expect that average currency returns
would re‡ect the risk characteristics of currencies. Speci…cally, if reserve currencies
are attractive to risk-minimizing global equity investors, these currencies might o¤er
lower returns in equilibrium. We analyze the historical average returns on currency
pairs and obtain a third novel result, that high-beta pairs have delivered higher average returns. However the historical reward for taking equity beta risk in currencies
has been quite modest, and much smaller than the historical average excess return
on a global stock index.

3

Another way to …nd a risk-return relation in foreign currencies is to condition
upon currency characteristics that are known to predict currency returns, and to
ask whether these characteristics predict currency risks.

Following an extensive

literature on the predictive power of interest di¤erentials for currency returns, we
use deviations of interest di¤erentials from their time-series averages as conditioning
variables, imposing that they have the same e¤ects on currency covariances regardless
of the particular currency pair under consideration. Our fourth novel result is that
increases in interest rates have only modest e¤ects on currency-equity covariances.
Over the full sample period, and particularly the …rst half of the sample, increases in
interest di¤erentials are, if anything, associated with decreases in these covariances.
This implies that risk-minimizing equity investors should tilt their portfolios towards
currencies that have temporarily high interest rates, amplifying the speculative “carry
trade”demands for such currencies rather than o¤setting them.
The organization of the paper is as follows.

Section I sets the stage by brie‡y

reviewing the related literature. Section II describes our data and conducts preliminary statistical analysis of stock, bond, and currency returns. Section III lays out the
analytical framework we use for our empirical analysis and presents unconditionally
optimal currency hedges for equity portfolios, while Section IV reports the analogous
results for bond portfolios. Section V discusses the relation between unconditional
4

risks of currencies and their unconditional average returns.

Section VI introduces

the possibility of conditional hedging, varying currency positions in response to interest di¤erentials. Section VII quanti…es the risk reductions that are achievable with
an unconditional or conditional currency hedging strategy, and discusses the e¤ects
of currency hedging on the Sharpe ratios of equity and bond portfolios.
VIII concludes.

Section

The Internet Appendix presents analytical details and additional

empirical results.1
I. Literature Review
The academic …nance literature has explored a number of reasons why investors
might want to hold foreign currency.

These can be divided into risk management

demands, resulting from covariances of foreign currency with the state variables that
determine investors’marginal utility, and speculative demands, resulting from positive
expected excess returns on foreign currency over domestic safe assets.2
One type of risk management demand arises if there is no domestic asset that is
riskless in real terms, for example because only nominal bills are available and there is
uncertainty about the rate of in‡ation. In this case, the minimum-variance portfolio
may contain foreign currency (Adler and Dumas 1983). This e¤ect can be substantial
in countries with extremely volatile in‡ation, such as some emerging markets, but is
5

quite small in developed countries over short time intervals.

Campbell, Viceira,

and White (2003) show that it can be more important for investors with long time
horizons, because nominal bills subject investors to ‡uctuations in real interest rates,
while nominal bonds subject them to in‡ation uncertainty which is relatively more
important at longer horizons.

If domestic in‡ation-indexed bonds are available,

however, they are riskless in real terms if held to maturity and thus drive out foreign
currency from the minimum-variance portfolio.
Another type of risk management demand for foreign currency arises if an investor holds other assets for speculative reasons, and foreign currency is correlated
with those assets. For example, an investor may wish to hold a globally diversi…ed
equity portfolio. If the foreign-currency excess return on foreign equities is negatively
correlated with the return on the foreign currency (as would be the case, for example,
if stocks are real assets and the shocks to foreign currency are primarily related to
foreign in‡ation), then an investor holding foreign equities can reduce portfolio risk by
holding a long position in foreign currency. This type of risk management currency
demand is the subject of this paper.
Many international investors think not about the foreign currency positions they
would like to hold, but about the currency hedging strategy they should follow.3

6

An unhedged position in international equity, for example, corresponds to a long
position in foreign currency equal to the equity holding, while a fully hedged position
corresponds to a net zero position in foreign currency. When currencies and equities
are uncorrelated, risk management demands for foreign currencies are zero, implying
that in the absence of speculative demands, full hedging is optimal (Solnik 1974).
Empirically, Perold and Schulman (1988) …nd that US investors can reduce volatility
by fully hedging the currency exposure implicit in internationally diversi…ed equity
and bond portfolios.
We derive optimal hedging strategies for global equity and bond investors. Like
Glen and Jorion (1993), we …nd that optimal currency hedging substantially reduces
risk for equity investors. The bene…ts of optimal hedging are large even in countries
like Canada where full hedging is actually riskier than no hedging at all. We report
results for quarterly returns, but these results are robust to variation in the investment
horizon between one month and one year. Froot (1993) studies the dollar and the
pound over a longer sample period and …nds that risk-minimizing foreign currency
positions increase with the investment horizon, implying that long-horizon equity
investors should not hedge their currency risk. We do not …nd this horizon e¤ect in
our post-1975 dataset.

7

Speculative currency demands require that investors perceive positive expected
excess returns on foreign currencies. A unique feature of currencies is that investors in
every country can simultaneously perceive positive expected excess returns on foreign
currencies over their own domestic currencies. That is, a US investor can perceive
a positive expected excess return on euros over dollars, while a European investor
can at the same time perceive a positive expected excess return on dollars over euros.
This possibility arises from Jensen’s inequality and is known as the Siegel paradox
(Siegel 1972). It can explain symmetric speculative demand for foreign currency by
investors based in all countries.
In practice, however, the speculative currency demand generated by this e¤ect is
quite modest. If currency movements are lognormally distributed and the expected
excess log return on foreign currency over domestic currency is zero (a condition that
can be satis…ed for all currency pairs simultaneously), then the expected excess simple
return on foreign currency is one-half the variance of the foreign currency return.
With a foreign currency standard deviation of about 10% per year, the expected
excess foreign currency return is 50 basis points and the corresponding Sharpe ratio
is only 0.05. A Sharpe ratio this small generates little demand from investors with
typical levels of risk aversion.

8

A more important source of speculative currency demand arises from expected
excess returns on particular currencies, as opposed to all currencies simultaneously.
Although unconditional average excess returns on currencies are close to zero, there
is evidence that conditional expected excess returns on currencies undergo short-term
‡uctuations which constitute the basis for active currency strategies. Most obviously,
the literature on the forward premium puzzle (Hansen and Hodrick 1980, Fama 1984,
Hodrick 1987, Engel 1996) shows that currencies with high short-term interest rates
deliver high returns on average. The currency carry trade, which exploits this phenomenon by holding high-rate currencies and shorting low-rate currencies, was extremely pro…table in and beyond our sample period until 2008 (Burnside et al. 2007,
Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen 2008).
It is natural to ask whether the carry trade has risk characteristics that o¤set its
pro…tability. Farhi and Gabaix (2008) argue that high-rate currencies are exposed to
the risk of rare economic disasters, while Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) …nd that highrate currencies, in a sample that includes emerging-market currencies, have higher
sensitivity to US consumption growth. We use sensitivity to world stock returns as
a measure of risk, and …nd that developed-market currencies with high unconditional
average interest rates do have somewhat higher betas with the world stock market,
but that there is no tendency for a currency whose interest rate is temporarily high to
9

have a temporarily higher beta. Over our full sample period and in the …rst half of
the sample, currency betas even have a weak tendency to decline when interest rates
increase. Thus risk considerations might deter equity investors from implementing
an unconditional form of the carry trade, but a conditional form of the trade, that
invests in currencies with temporarily high interest rates, should be attractive even
to risk-averse equity investors.
II. Data and Summary Statistics
Our empirical analysis uses stock return data from Morgan Stanley Capital International, and data on exchange rates, short-term interest rates, and long-term bond
yields from the International Financial Statistics database published by the International Monetary Fund.4 We calculate log bond returns from yields on long-term
bonds using the approximation suggested in Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997).5
These data series are available at a monthly frequency, and we report results for several di¤erent investment horizons in the appendix, but our basic analysis assumes a
one-quarter horizon and therefore runs monthly regressions of overlapping quarterly
excess returns. We report results for seven developed economies: Australia, Canada,
Euroland, Japan, Switzerland, the UK and the US. The sample period starts in
1975:7, the earliest date for which we have data available for all variables and for all

10

seven markets, and ends in 2005:12.
We de…ne “Euroland” as a value-weighted stock basket that includes Germany,
France, Italy, and the Netherlands. These are the countries in the euro zone for
which we have the longest record of stock total returns, interest rates, and exchange
rates. For simplicity, we will refer to the Euroland stock portfolio as a “country”
stock portfolio when describing our empirical results, even though this is not literally
correct. With regard to currencies, prior to 1999 we refer to a basket of currencies
from those countries, with weights given by their relative stock market capitalization,
as the “euro”.
Of course, our de…nition of Euroland implies some look-ahead bias, since in 1975
it would not have been obvious whether a European monetary union would occur,
and which countries from the region would have been part of that union. However,
one can reasonably argue that these countries would have been candidates, and that
from the perspective of today’s investors, it probably makes sense to consider these
markets as a single market. We have also conducted our analysis including only
Germany in Euroland, and using the deutschemark to proxy for the euro before 1999;
this procedure gives very similar results.
Table I reports the full-sample annualized mean and standard deviation of short11

term nominal interest rates, log stock and bond returns in excess of their local shortterm interest rates, changes in log exchange rates with respect to the US dollar, and
log currency excess returns with respect to the dollar.

The means of log excess

returns (geometric averages) are adjusted for Jensen’s Inequality by adding one half
their variance to convert them into mean simple excess returns (arithmetic averages).
Annualized average nominal short-term interest rates di¤er across countries. They
are lowest for Switzerland and Japan, and highest for Australia, Canada, and the UK.6
Short-term rates exhibit very low annualized volatility, under 2% for all countries.
Average changes in exchange rates with respect to the US dollar over this period
are negative for the Australian dollar, close to zero for the Canadian dollar, the
British pound, and the euro, and positive for the Swiss franc and the yen, re‡ecting
an appreciation of these currencies with respect to the US dollar over this period.
Exchange rate volatility relative to the dollar is in the range 10-13% for all currencies
except the Canadian dollar, which moves closely with the US dollar giving a bilateral
volatility of only 5.4%.
Excess returns to currencies are small on average and exhibit annual volatility
similar to that of exchange rates, a result of the stability of short-term interest rates.
Using the usual formula for the mean of a serially uncorrelated random variable, it is
12

easy to verify that unconditional mean excess returns on currencies are insigni…cantly
di¤erent from zero.
Table II reports full-sample quarterly correlations of foreign-currency excess returns (Panel A), and fully currency-hedged excess returns on stocks (Panel B) and
bonds (Panel C). For simplicity, we report in Panel A the average correlation of
each currency pair across all possible base currencies in our set, giving results for
individual base currencies in the appendix. Panel A shows that all currency returns
are positively cross-correlated. Currency correlations are large— almost all correlation coe¢ cients are above 30%— but they are far from perfect, implying that there is
signi…cant cross-sectional variation in the dynamics of exchange rates.
Four correlations stand out as unusually large. The Canadian dollar exhibits a
very high correlation with the US dollar (89%) and also with the Australian dollar
(70%). The high correlation of the Canadian dollar with both the US dollar and
the Australian dollar re‡ects the dual role of the Canadian economy as a resourcedependent economy that is simultaneously highly integrated with the US. Similarly,
the euro is highly correlated with the Swiss franc (89%) and to a lesser extent the
British pound (68%), re‡ecting the integration of European economies. Importantly,
these correlations are high not only on average, but also individually, regardless of

13

the base currency used to measure them.
The correlation coe¢ cients between stock market returns shown in Panel B are all
between 40% and 70%, with two important exceptions. The Canadian stock market
is highly correlated with the US stock market (75%), and the Swiss stock market is
highly correlated with the Euroland stock market (80%). The Canadian stock market
also exhibits a relatively large correlation of 66% with the Australian stock market.
These correlations demonstrate again the dual role of the Canadian economy and the
integration of the Swiss economy with the European economy.
While signi…cant, the stock market correlations are still small enough to suggest
the presence of substantial bene…ts of international diversi…cation in this sample period. Not surprisingly, the Japanese stock market exhibits the lowest cross-sectional
correlation with all other markets. This is a re‡ection of the prolonged period of low
or negative stock market returns in Japan during the 1990’s, at a time when most
other markets delivered large positive returns.
Long-term bond market correlations are generally somewhat smaller than stock
market correlations. Panel C in Table III shows that, with some important exceptions,
these correlations are all in the range of 30-60%. The exceptions are the Euroland
bond market, which is highly correlated with both the Swiss bond market (65%)
14

and the US bond market (62%), and the Canadian bond market, which is highly
correlated with the US bond market (79%). Overall, these results imply that there
are meaningful bene…ts to international diversi…cation in bond market investing.
III. Unconditional Currency Risk Management for Equity Investors
A. Estimating Unconditional Currency Demands
Our empirical analysis is based on the estimation of risk-minimizing currency demands for a set of stock and bond portfolios and currencies. We begin by establishing
some notation. We use Rc;t+1 to denote the gross return in currency c from holding
country c assets from the beginning to the end of period t + 1, and ! c;t to denote
the weight of those assets at time t in the investor’s portfolio. Sc;t+1 denotes the spot
exchange rate in units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency c at the end
of period t + 1, and Ic;t denotes the nominal short-term nominal interest rate on bills
denominated in currency c.
By convention, we index the domestic country by c = 1 or d and the n foreign
countries by c = 2; :::; n + 1. Of course, the domestic exchange rate is constant over
time and equal to 1: S1;t+1 = 1 for all t: For convenience, throughout this section we
set the domestic country to be the US, and hence refer to the domestic investor as a
US investor, and to the domestic currency as the dollar. We also use small caps to
15

denote log (or continuously compounded) returns, exchange rates, and interest rates.
That is, rc;t+1 = log(Rc;t+1 ), sc;t+1 = log(Sc;t+1 ), and ic;t = log(1 + Ic;t )
An investor holding an arbitrary portfolio of domestic and foreign assets can alter
the currency exposure of her portfolio by overlaying a zero investment portfolio of
domestic and foreign bills or, equivalently, by entering into an appropriate number
of forward currency contracts. This is intuitive. Since the investor is already fully
invested in other assets, she can alter the currency exposure implied by those assets
only by borrowing— or equivalently, by shorting bonds— in some currencies, and using
the proceeds to buy bonds denominated in other currencies.
For convenience we work with net currency exposures relative to full currency
hedging, which we denote by

c;t ,

instead of currency hedging demands. Of course,

there is direct correspondence between them:

c;t

= 0 corresponds to a fully hedged

currency position, in which the investor does not hold any exposure to currency c.
A positive value of

c;t

means that the investor holds exposure to currency c, or

equivalently that the investor does not fully hedge the currency exposure implicit
in her stock position in country c. When

c;t

= ! c;t , the portfolio is completely

unhedged.
The internet appendix shows that with arbitrary currency exposure, the log port16

folio excess return over the domestic interest rate is approximately equal to
h
rp;t+1

i1;t = 10 ! t (rt+1

where ! t is the (n + 1

it ) +

0
t

st+1 + it

1
2

h
t;

(1)

n + 1) diagonal matrix of portfolio weights, rt+1 is the vector

of log nominal asset returns in local currencies,
exposures,

idt +

t

is the vector of net currency

st+1 is the vector of the changes in log spot exchange rates, it is the

vector of log short-term nominal interest rates, idt = log (1 + I1;t ) 1, and 1 is a vector
of ones. All the vectors have dimension (n + 1

1).

Equation (1) provides an intuitive decomposition of the portfolio excess return.
The …rst term represents the excess return on a fully hedged portfolio which has no
exposure to currency risk. The second term involves only the vector of excess returns
on currencies,
t.

st+1 + it

idt , and thus represents pure currency exposure, given by

The third term is a Jensen’s Inequality correction given in the appendix.
Since

t

represents the weights in a zero investment portfolio of domestic and

foreign bills, we must have that
1;t

0
t1

= 0, or that the domestic currency exposure

is automatically determined once we determine the vector of foreign currency

demands, which we denote by e t =

2;t ; :::;

n+1;t

0

:

We show in the appendix that the vector e t that minimizes the one-period con17

ditional global variance of the log excess return on the hedged portfolio is equal to
e

RM;t

=

Vart fst+1 + eit

eid
t

1

h

Covt 10 ! t (rt+1

it ) ; fst+1 + eit

eid
t

i

;
(2)

where we have added the subscript RM to emphasize that equation (2) describes risk
management currency demands. In the rest of the paper we will refer to this risk
management component of currency demand simply as optimal currency demand or
currency exposure.
Equation (2) writes e RM;t as a vector of multiple regression coe¢ cients of portfolio

stock returns on currency returns. If stock returns and exchange rates are uncorre-

lated, the risk management currency demand is zero. In this case holding currency
exposure adds volatility to the investor’s portfolio and, unless this volatility is compensated, the investor is better o¤ holding no currency exposure at all or, equivalently,
fully hedging her portfolio. If stock returns and exchange rates are positively correlated, the foreign currency tends to depreciate when the stock market falls. Thus
the investor can reduce portfolio return volatility by over-hedging, that is, by shorting foreign currency in excess of what would be required to fully hedge the currency
exposure implicit in her stock portfolio. Conversely, a negative correlation between
stock returns and exchange rates implies that the foreign currency appreciates when

18

the stock market falls. Then the investor can reduce portfolio return volatility by
under-hedging, that is, by holding foreign currency.
A useful property of the optimal currency demands in (2), proven in the appendix,
is that for a given stock portfolio, they are invariant to changes in the base currency,
provided that a riskless real asset is available in each base currency and that the set of
available currencies (which always includes an investor’s own domestic currency) does
not change. If we restrict the set of available currencies to a pair, for example the
US dollar and the euro, this means that residents of both the US and Germany will
have the same optimal demands for dollars and euros corresponding to a given equity
portfolio.

Residents of a third country, however, have another domestic currency

available to them and so they will not necessarily have the same demands for dollars
and euros even if they hold the same equity portfolio.

If we allow a larger set of

available currencies, then residents of all the countries in the set will have the same
vector of optimal currency demands for a given equity portfolio.
In this section and the next we present estimation results which are based on an
unconditional version of equation (2). The unconditional version of our model follows
immediately from the conditional version by simply assuming constant risk premia
and constant second moments of returns. We relax this assumption in section VI,

19

which examines conditional hedging policies where the covariances of portfolio returns
with currency excess returns vary over time as a function of interest rate di¤erentials.
Equation (2) with constant second moments implies that we can compute optimal currency exposures by regressing portfolio excess returns 10 ! t (rt+1
constant and the vector of currency excess returns fst+1

it ) onto a

eid + eit , and switching the
t

sign of the slopes. In our empirical analysis we consider several practically relevant

cases. First, we consider an investor who is fully invested in a domestic stock portfolio
and optimally decides how much exposure to a single currency c to hold in order to
minimize total portfolio return volatility. The optimal currency demand is the negative of the slope coe¢ cient in a regression of the domestic excess stock return onto a
constant and the excess return on currency c.
Second, we consider an investor who is fully invested in a domestic stock portfolio,
but who uses the whole range of available currencies to minimize total portfolio return
volatility. In that case the vector of optimal currency demands is given by the negative
of the slopes of a multiple regression of the excess stock return on the domestic market
onto a constant and the vector of currency excess returns.
Third, we consider a case where the investor holds an equally weighted global
equity portfolio, using the whole vector of available currencies to minimize total port20

folio return volatility. Finally, in the appendix we also consider value weighted and
home biased global equity portfolios.
B. Single-Country Stock Portfolios
We start our empirical analysis by examining the case of an investor who is fully
invested in a single-country equity portfolio and is considering whether exposure to
other currencies would help reduce the volatility of her quarterly portfolio return.
Table III reports optimal currency exposures for the case in which the investor is
considering one currency at time (Panel A), and that in which she is considering multiple currencies simultaneously (Panel B). In both panels, the reference stock market
is reported at the left of each row, while the currency under consideration is reported
at the top of each column. In all tables we report Newey-West heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent standard errors in parentheses below each optimal currency
exposure. Following standard convention, we mark with one, two, or three stars coe¢ cients for which we reject the null of zero at a 10%, 5%, and 1% signi…cance level,
respectively.
Panel A in Table III considers an investor who is deciding how much to hedge of
the currency exposure implicit in an investment in a speci…c national stock market, in
isolation from other investments and currencies this investor might hold. To facilitate
21

interpretation, it is useful to discuss an example in detail. The …rst non-empty cell in
the …rst column of the table, which corresponds to the Australian stock market and
the euro, has a value of 0.39. This means that a risk-minimizing Euroland investor
who is fully invested in the Australian stock market and has access to the Australian
dollar and the euro should buy a portfolio of euro-denominated bills worth 1.39 euros
per euro invested in the Australian stock market, …nancing this long position with a
short position in Australian bills— i.e., by borrowing Australian dollars. That is, the
investor should over-hedge the Australian dollar exposure implicit in her Australian
stock market investment, and hold a net long 39% exposure to the euro.
Panel A of Table III shows that optimal demands for foreign currency are large,
positive and statistically signi…cant for two stock markets (rows of the table), those
of Australia and Canada. Investors in the Australian and Canadian stock markets
are keen to hold foreign currency, regardless of the particular currency under consideration, because the Australian and Canadian dollars tend to depreciate against all
currencies when their stock markets fall; thus any foreign currency serves as a hedge
against ‡uctuations in these stock markets. The long positions in euros, Swiss francs,
or US dollars are particularly large and statistically signi…cant.
At the opposite extreme, it is optimal for investors in the Swiss stock market to

22

hold economically and statistically large short positions in all currencies, implying
that the Swiss franc tends to appreciate against all currencies when the Swiss stock
market falls. Results are similar for the Euroland stock market, except that this
market is hedged by a long position in the Swiss franc. The Japanese and UK stock
markets generate large positive demands for the Swiss franc and the euro, and negative
or small positive demands for all other currencies. The British stock market generates
signi…cant negative demands for the Australian dollar and the Canadian dollar.
The last row of this panel describes individual optimal currency demands for a
portfolio fully invested in US stocks. Most of these demands are economically small
and statistically insigni…cant, but there are two important exceptions to this pattern.
The …rst exception is a modest positive demand for the Swiss franc, which tends to
appreciate when the US stock market falls. The euro generates a similar demand,
though it is statistically signi…cant only at the 10% signi…cance level. The second
exception is a large negative demand for the Canadian dollar, re‡ecting the fact that
the Canadian dollar tends to depreciate when the US stock market falls.
Panel B of Table III reports optimal currency demands for single-country stock
portfolios considering all currencies simultaneously. That is, each row of Panel B
reports the unconditional version of (2) when rt+1 is unidimensional and equal to the

23

stock market shown on the leftmost column. Note that the the numbers in each row
must add up to zero, since the domestic currency exposure must o¤set the vector of
foreign currency demands.
When single-country stock market investors consider investing in all currencies
simultaneously, they almost always choose positive exposures to the US dollar, the
euro and the Swiss franc, and negative exposures to the Australian dollar, Canadian
dollar, British pound, and Japanese yen. Relative to panel A, the optimal currency
demands are generally larger and statistically more signi…cant for the US dollar, and
less statistically signi…cant for the euro and the Swiss franc. This re‡ects two features
of the multiple-currency analysis.

First, a position that is long the US dollar and

short the Canadian dollar is a highly e¤ective hedge against stock market declines.
Thus allowing investors to use both North American currencies increases the risk
management demand for the US dollar. Second, the euro and Swiss franc are both
good hedges but they are highly correlated; thus the demand for each currency is less
precisely estimated when investors are allowed to take positions in both currencies.
In this sense the euro and the Swiss franc are substitutes for one another.
C. Global Equity Portfolios
Thus far we have considered only investors who are fully invested in a single
24

country stock market, and use currencies to hedge the risk of that stock market.
In this section we consider risk-minimizing investors with internationally diversi…ed
stock portfolios.
We focus our analysis on investors who are equally invested in the seven stock
markets included in our analysis: Euroland, Australia, Canada, Japan, Switzerland,
the UK, and the US. We have already noted that, in the multiple-currency case, optimal currency demands generated by a given global portfolio are the same regardless of
the currency base. Accordingly, we only need to report one set of currency demands,
which add up to zero as in panel B of Table III.
Panel A of Table IV considers the case in which investors have access to all seven
currencies from the countries included in the equally-weighted stock portfolio. Panel B
considers a case in which investors do not have close currency substitutes available for
investment. Speci…cally, Panel B excludes Canada and Switzerland from the analysis
because the Canadian stock market is highly correlated with the US stock market,
and the Canadian dollar is also highly correlated with the US dollar; similarly, there
is a very high positive correlation between the Swiss stock market and the Euroland
market, and between the Swiss franc and the euro. Comparison of the results in
panel A and panel B clari…es the roles of the Canadian dollar and the US dollar, and

25

the euro and the Swiss franc, in investors’portfolios. Both panels report estimates of
optimal currency demands based …rst on our full sample, and then on two subperiods,
1975 to 1989 (Subperiod I) and 1990 to 2004 (Subperiod II). We discuss subperiod
results in part D of this section.
The optimal currency portfolio in Panel A has a large, statistically signi…cant
exposure of 40% to the US dollar, and an even larger negative exposure of -61% to
the Canadian dollar. These two positions are not independent of each other: Panel B
shows that, once we exclude the Canadian dollar from the menu of currencies available
to the investor, the optimal exposure to the US dollar becomes small and statistically
insigni…cant. Just as in the previous analysis of single-country stock portfolios, a
position that is long the US dollar and short the Canadian dollar helps investors
hedge against global stock market movements. The 3-month annualized return on
this position, driven by the movements of the bilateral US/Canadian exchange rate, is
plotted in Figure 1 together with the 3-month annualized excess return on the equally
weighted, fully currency-hedged global equity index.

The …gure clearly shows the

tendency of the US dollar to appreciate relative to the Canadian dollar in periods of
stock market weakness.
The optimal currency portfolio in Panel A also has positive exposures to the euro

26

and the Swiss franc. These exposures are not economically very large individually,
and statistically signi…cant only at a 10% level. This lack of individual economic and
statistical signi…cance is because the euro and the Swiss franc are close substitutes.
Panel B shows that when the Swiss franc is excluded from the menu of currencies, the
demand for the other currency in the pair, the euro, increases dramatically to 56%
and is statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. Figure 2 plots the 3-month annualized
return of the euro against an equally weighted basket of other currencies, together
with the currency-hedged excess global equity return.
In addition to the optimal negative exposure to the Canadian dollar already discussed, the optimal exposures to the Australian dollar, the Japanese yen, and the
British pound are also negative.

These short positions are small and statistically

insigni…cant for the pound, but larger and statistically signi…cant for the yen. The
Australian dollar short position is small if the Canadian dollar is included in the set of
currencies, but becomes larger and statistically signi…cant in panel B when the Canadian dollar is excluded. These two currencies, which are unusually highly correlated
with one another, are substitutes in investors’currency portfolios.
Once again, it is useful to review the exact meaning of the numbers we report.
The numbers shown in Table IV are optimal currency exposures. If it is optimal for

27

all investors to fully hedge the currency exposure implicit in their stock portfolios or,
equivalently, to hold no currency exposure, the optimal currency demands shown in
Table IV should be equal to zero everywhere. To obtain optimal currency hedging demands from optimal currency exposures, we need only compute the di¤erence between
portfolio weights— which in this case are 14.3% for each country stock market— and
the optimal currency exposure corresponding to that country.
The results in Panel A imply that, say, a risk-minimizing Euroland investor holding
our equally-weighted seven-country equity portfolio would invest 99 euro cents in
currencies for each euro invested in the stock portfolio. These 99 euro cents would be
invested in US Treasury bills worth 40 euro cents, Euroland (say, German) bills worth
32 euro cents, and Swiss bills worth 27 euro cents. These purchases would be …nanced
with proceeds from borrowing Australian dollars (11 euro cents per euro invested in
the stock portfolio), Canadian dollars (61 cents), yen (17 cents) and British pounds
(10 cents). Note that the similarity of the 99 euro cents invested in long and short
currency positions to the 100 euro cents invested in equities is merely an arbitrary
feature of this particular example, not a general property of the optimal hedging
strategy.
We can easily restate these results in terms of hedging demands. The Euroland

28

investor would underhedge her exposure to the US dollar and the Swiss franc, and
overhedge her exposure to the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the yen and the
British pound. More precisely, this Euroland investor would not only leave unhedged
the 14 euro cent exposures to the US dollar and the Swiss franc implied by each euro
of the stock portfolio, she would also enter into forward contracts to buy US dollars
worth 26 euro cents and Swiss francs worth 13 euro cents. She would simultaneously
enter into forward contracts to sell Australian dollars, Canadian dollars, yen and
British pounds worth, respectively, 25, 75, 31, and 24 euro cents per euro invested in
the stock portfolio.
We show in the appendix that the results of Table IV are robust to reasonable
variations in speci…cation. Varying the investment horizon between 1 and 3 months
has little impact on the results, although at horizons of 6 or 12 months a long position
in the Swiss franc drives out both the bilateral US/Canadian position and the euro in
the optimal currency portfolio, and a short position in the Japanese yen becomes large
and statistically signi…cant. Results for a value-weighted global equity portfolio are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those for the equally-weighted portfolio.
This derives from the fact that, with the exception of the US stock market, no single
stock market dominates the market capitalization of the overall portfolio.7 Results
remain similar when we consider a “home-biased” portfolio that is 75% invested in
29

the domestic stock market and 25% invested in a value-weighted world portfolio that
excludes this market.
In summary, the risk-minimizing strategy for a global equity investor involves long
exposure to the US dollar and the euro (or a combination of the euro and the Swiss
franc), a large short position in the Canadian dollar, and smaller short positions in all
other major currencies. That is, investors in global equities want to underhedge their
exposure to the dollar, the euro, and the Swiss franc, and overhedge their exposure to
the other currencies. This strategy minimizes the volatility of overall portfolio returns,
because the euro, Swiss franc, and US dollar tend to appreciate when international
stock markets decline.
D. Stability Across Subperiods
The sample period for which we have estimated optimal currency exposures includes an early period of global high in‡ation and interest rates, with exceptional
performance of the Japanese stock market relative to other stock markets, followed
by another subperiod of global lower in‡ation and interest rates, with extremely poor
performance of the Japanese stock market. The second subperiod also saw the reuni…cation of Germany and the creation of the euro as a common European currency.
It is reasonable to examine if the results we have shown for the full sample hold
30

across these two markedly di¤erent subperiods, so we divide our sample period into
the periods 1975 to 1989 and 1990 to 2005.
The bottom two rows in each panel of Table IV report subsample results for an
investor holding an equally-weighted global stock portfolio, and using the vector of
available currencies to manage risk. The results are generally familiar, with long
positions for the US dollar, Swiss franc, and euro, and short positions for other
currencies. It is striking, however, that US dollar positions tend to fall between the
…rst subperiod and the second, while the sum of euro and Swiss franc positions (in
Panel A) or the euro position (in Panel B) strongly increase. The time-series plot
in Figure 2 also shows that the euro began to move more consistently against world
stock markets in the second subsample.
In summary, an important change occurred between the periods 1975 to 1989 and
1990 to 2005: The Swiss franc and the euro became much more competitive with the
US dollar as desirable currencies for risk-minimizing global equity investors.

This

change is not an artefact of our use of a composite currency to proxy for the euro in
the period before the creation of a common European currency, because we obtain
similar results when we use the deutschemark as our euro proxy. Rather, it is likely
to re‡ect the fact that the euro has found growing acceptance as a reserve currency

31

for international investors.
IV. Unconditional Currency Risk Management for Bond Investors
We now consider the risk-minimizing currency exposures implied by an equallyweighted global bond portfolio. Table V, whose structure is identical to Table IV,
reports optimal currency exposures at a one-quarter horizon in the multiple currency
case for our full sample period and for the subperiods 1975 to 1989 and 1990 to 2005.
Risk-minimizing currency demands for internationally diversi…ed bond market investors are generally very small and not statistically signi…cant. The US dollar is
an exception. The optimal demand for the US dollar is positive and statistically
signi…cant, regardless of whether the dollar is the only currency available for investment, or just one of many. But these dollar exposures are economically small. They
are largest in the …rst subperiod, and almost zero in the second subperiod.

Here

again we see evidence of a decline over time in the attractiveness of the US dollar for
risk-minimizing global investors.
We have also considered single-country bond portfolios. This is relevant to many
investors, since “home bond bias”is even more prevalent among investors than “home
equity bias”, and in most countries relatively few mutual funds o¤er international
bonds. The results are shown in the appendix. We …nd modest positive demands
32

for the US dollar, consistent with the results in Table V. We also …nd that an investor
holding UK bonds will hold all foreign currencies, re‡ecting the fact that the British
pound tends to depreciate when the British bond market declines.
Overall, our results imply that international bond investors should fully hedge the
currency exposure implicit in their bond portfolios, with possibly a small long bias
towards the US dollar. Interestingly, full currency hedging is more common among
international bond mutual funds than among international equity funds, and is also
frequently practiced by US institutions investing in international bonds.
V. Unconditional Currency Risk and Return
In section III we showed that currencies systematically di¤er in their comovements
with global stock markets. Excess returns on reserve currencies— the US dollar, the
euro, and the Swiss franc— covary negatively with global stock market returns, while
excess returns on other currencies— particularly those of commodity-dependent Australia and Canada— covary positively. These correlations generate positive risk management demands for reserve currencies, and negative risk management demands for
other currencies.
However, in equilibrium investors must be willing to hold all currencies (Black
1990). This suggests that average excess returns on currencies might adjust to gen33

erate speculative currency demands that o¤set the risk management demands we
have identi…ed.

In global capital market equilibrium, investors may be willing to

receive lower compensation for holding US dollar, euro, and Swiss franc denominated
bills because of the hedging properties of these currencies, while they may demand
higher compensation for holding bills denominated in other currencies. In fact, we
saw in Table I that the US and Switzerland have had the lowest currency returns in
our sample, and together with Euroland have had the lowest interest rates with the
exception of Japan. If this is a systematic phenomenon, it suggests that a country
bene…ts from having a reserve currency not only because international demand for its
monetary base generates seigniorage revenue, but also because international demand
for its Treasury bills reduces the interest cost of …nancing the government debt.8
We now explore the equilibrium consequences of risk management demand for
currencies by looking at the relation between currencies’average excess returns and
their betas with a global stock index. We consider all possible non-redundant pairs
(or exchange rates) in our cross section of currencies, and treat each one as a longshort portfolio of bills. For example, the excess return on the Canadian dollar with
respect to the US dollar is the return on a portfolio long Canadian bills and short US
Treasury bills.

34

For each of these portfolios, we compute the average log currency excess return
and its beta with respect to the currency-hedged excess return on a value-weighted
global stock portfolio, and we plot all these mean returns and betas together in a
single …gure.9 To simplify our plot, we choose the ordering of the pairs so that their
betas are all positive.
Figure 3 shows the mean-beta diagram based on our full sample. This …gure
plots full-sample annualized average excess currency returns on the vertical axis, and
currency betas in the horizontal axis. The points marked with triangles refer to
long-short currency portfolios with euro-denominated bills on the short side of the
portfolio. The square corresponds to the portfolio long Canadian dollars and short
US dollars, and the circles correspond to all other non-redundant currency pairs.
The …gure also plots a regression line of currency excess returns on currency betas,
with the intercept restricted to equal zero. We can interpret this line as the security
market line generated from a global CAPM using currencies as assets.

The slope

of this line is 3.2%, and the R2 is reasonably large at 48%; adding a free intercept
has little e¤ect on these estimates. The slope of the security market line re‡ects the
equilibrium world market premium implied by currency returns. At 3.2% per annum,
this premium is smaller than the ex-post average excess return on world stock markets

35

over this period, which Table I shows is about 7%. However, this estimate is close to
the ex-ante equity risk premium that others have estimated from US equity returns
over a longer period in which the ex-post equity premium has also been very large
(Fama and French, 2002).
The point in the …gure that lies furthest to the right corresponds to the portfolio
long Canadian dollars and short US dollars. We have shown that a position long US
dollars and short Canadian dollars is a particularly e¤ective hedge against ‡uctuations
in global equity markets. Conversely, a portfolio long Canadian dollars and short US
dollars is particularly risky, because it is highly positively correlated with global stock
markets. Figure 3 shows that this is the portfolio with the largest full-sample beta,
above 0.6. It provides investors with an average positive return of about 1.2% per
annum (see Table I) which, though positive, is located below the …tted security market
line and is well below the average return on other portfolios with lower betas.
We have shown that portfolios which are long euro-denominated bills also help
investors attenuate ‡uctuations in global stock portfolios, because the euro tends to
covary negatively with global equity returns. Conversely, portfolios which are short
euros and long other currencies are positively correlated with global equities. These
are the points corresponding to the euro pairs shown in Figure 6. As expected, these

36

portfolios all exhibit positive betas. While their average excess returns exhibit a
positive relation with betas, they tend to lie below the …tted security market line.
Overall, we do see di¤erences in average realized currency returns that correlate
with currency risks.

However, these average return di¤erences are quite modest,

particularly in the case of the US dollar and the euro.

Also, it is important to

keep in mind that sample average currency returns are noisy estimates of true mean
currency returns. None of the currencies in our sample have excess returns relative
to the US dollar that are signi…cantly di¤erent from zero at the 5% signi…cance level.
Figure 4 repeats the exercise shown in Figure 3, except that it treats all currency
pairs in each of the subperiods we considered in section III.D (1975 to 1989 and 1990
to 2005) as separate assets. Consistent with the results of section III.D, portfolios
which are short the euro tend to be signi…cantly riskier in the second subsample,
re‡ecting the increasing tendency of the euro to move as a reserve currency.

Also

consistent with our earlier results, the portfolio which is long the Canadian dollar
and short the US dollar is somewhat less risky in the second subperiod. In general,
currency pairs show a much wider dispersion in betas in the second subperiod. The
security market lines have modest positive slopes in both subperiods, but of course
the precision of mean currency return estimates is even lower in the subperiods than

37

in the full sample.
VI. Conditional Currency Risk Management
In previous sections of this paper we have estimated unconditional risk management demands for currencies, and have found that reserve currencies tend to have
positive risk management demands and low average returns.
Along with these cross-sectional patterns, there could also be systematic variation
in currency risks over time.

It is well known that interest di¤erentials predict ex-

cess returns on currencies, even controlling for cross-currency di¤erences in average
returns.

Contrary to the predictions of the uncovered interest parity hypothesis,

currencies whose short-term interest rates are higher than normal tend to appreciate
relative to currencies whose short-term interest rates are lower than normal. This
behavior contributes to the pro…ts of the currency carry trade, which takes long
positions in high-interest-rate currencies and short positions in low-interest-rate currencies.

Some of these pro…ts come from long-run di¤erences in average currency

returns and interest rates, of the sort summarized in Table I, but carry trade pro…ts
also result from time-variation in currency returns along with interest di¤erentials.
It is natural to ask if this conditional component of the carry trade is attractive to
risk-minimizing investors, or if such investors should avoid currencies with temporarily
38

high interest di¤erentials. To explore this question, we consider a conditional model
for risk management currency demand which depends linearly on interest di¤erentials:

where it
e =(
0

e

RM;t

= e0

it

idt + e 1

e =(
1

1;2 ; :::;

it

idt

idt

it

(3)

idt is the unconditional expectation of the vector of interest di¤erentials,

0;2 ; :::;

0
0;n+1 ) ,

uct operator. Thus e RM;0

0
1;n+1 ) ,

and is the element-by-element prod-

idt represents the vector of average risk management

it

demands, and e RM;1 the vector of sensitivities of those demands to movements in
interest di¤erentials over time.

Using (2), we can estimate currency risk management demands (3) by estimating
the simple regression
0

1 ! t (rt+1

it ) =

0

n+1
X

c=2
n+1
X

0;c (

1;c (

idt + ic;t ) ic;t

st+1

st+1

idt + ic;t ) ic;t

i1;t
i1;t

ic;t

i1;t

+ "t+1 ;(4)

c=2

where the left hand side variable is the excess return on a fully hedged portfolio. We
are primarily interested in estimating the vector of slopes e 1 = (

1;2 ; :::;

0
1;n+1 )

and

testing whether they are zero. Note that when they are zero, the regression model
(4) recovers exactly the unconditional risk management demands that we estimated
in sections III and IV.
39

We estimate two sets of conditional risk management currency demands, and report the results in Table VI. First, we consider the case where only one single foreign
currency is available for investment, in addition to the domestic or base currency;
second, we consider the case where all currencies are available for investment simultaneously. Table VI reports results for both a global equity portfolio and a global
bond portfolio.
To increase the power of our tests, we estimate (4) imposing the constraint that
all slopes are equal, i.e., that e 1 =
the slope

1

1 1.

Table VI reports the constrained estimate of

for each base currency, its Newey-West standard error, and the p-value

of the null hypothesis that this slope is the same across all currencies. We omit from
the table the estimated average risk management demands e RM;0 it

idt , because

they are very similar both economically and statistically to the unconditional risk
management demands reported in sections III and IV. It is important to note here
that the coe¢ cients

0;c

and

1;c

in model (3) are not invariant to the base currency

of the investor, even in the multiple currency case.10 Accordingly, we report results
for each possible base currency in the rows of the table.
The left panel of Table VI shows results for the equally-weighted global equity
portfolio. In the single-foreign-currency case, we …nd almost no evidence that risk

40

management currency demands vary with interest di¤erentials. The estimated slopes
are all positive, but they are close to zero and imprecisely estimated. In the multipleforeign-currency case we …nd positive and statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients whenever
the base currency is a reserve currency— the euro, the Swiss franc, or the US dollar.
The slopes are insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero for other base currencies.11
These results imply that the currency carry trade is attractive not only to currency
speculators, but also to risk-minimizing equity investors, provided that their base
currency is a reserve currency and that they can also hold …xed positions in foreign
currencies that are unrelated to interest di¤erentials. The time-series pattern shown
in Table VI, that increases in a currency’s interest rate improve its risk characteristics,
contradicts the cross-sectional pattern illustrated in Figures 6 and 7, that normally
high-rate currencies have poor risk characteristics.
Although this is a striking result, it is important not to exaggerate its signi…cance.
It applies only when the base currency is a reserve currency, and even in these cases the
e¤ect is modest. The reserve-currency slope coe¢ cients reported in Table VI are in
the range 4 to 6, which imply standard deviations of foreign currency weights of about
4-6%, given that the standard deviations of interest di¤erentials are about 1%.12 Such
standard deviations are quite small relative to the average risk management currency

41

demands reported in Table IV. Also, the appendix shows that within subsamples,
the reserve-currency slope coe¢ cients are positive and signi…cant only in the second
of our two subsamples, and only for euroland and Switzerland.
The right panel of Table VI looks at the risk-management properties of the carry
trade from the point of view of a global bond market investor.

None of the slope

coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant except for an Australian bond investor trading
in multiple currencies, who …nds that increasing interest rates make foreign currencies
riskier.
To better relate the time-series evidence to our earlier cross-sectional …ndings, we
have also estimated our unconditional risk management currency demands adding
an additional synthetic currency to the base set of currencies. Following Lustig and
Verdelhan (2007), this synthetic currency is a zero-investment portfolio of currencies
which at the start of every month in our sample period goes long an equally weighted
portfolio of the three currencies with the largest nominal short-term interest rates,
and short an equally weighted portfolio with the currencies with the smallest nominal
short-term interest rates. Thus its returns mimic one of the most popular implementations of the currency carry trade.
In the appendix, we report that the equally-weighted global equity portfolio gener42

ates a positive and statistically signi…cant risk management demand for the synthetic
currency when all other currencies are available for investment, but a negative and
signi…cant risk management demand when only the synthetic currency is available.
When risk-minimizing equity investors can hold …xed long positions in reserve currencies and short positions in commodity-dependent currencies, they are willing to
hold an additional position in the synthetic carry-trade portfolio, but this portfolio
is unattractive in isolation because on average it tends to short reserve currencies
and hold commodity-dependent currencies. This …nding reproduces the contrast between the cross-sectional pattern illustrated in Figure 6 and the time-series evidence
reported in Table VI.13
Table VI uses nominal interest di¤erentials, the usual basis for the carry trade,
as conditioning information. It is also possible to condition on lagged ex post real
interest di¤erentials. When we do this, in the appendix, we …nd only one case where
a risk-minimizing investor would want to condition currency demand on real interest
di¤erentials, and this case (a UK equity investor with access to multiple currencies)
again has the demand for each currency increasing in its interest di¤erential.
In conclusion, we …nd relatively weak evidence that interest di¤erentials provide
important conditioning information for currency risk management. When we allow

43

risk-minimizing positions in our seven currencies to move with interest di¤erentials,
we …nd statistically signi…cant time-variation only when the base currency is the euro,
Swiss franc, or US dollar. This time-variation is quite small relative to the unconditional average currency demands we estimated earlier. Interestingly, it increases the
demand for currencies with temporarily high interest rates, amplifying the speculative
demand rather than o¤setting it. We obtain similar results when we add a synthetic
carry-trade currency to our unconditional analysis.
VII. Risk Reduction from Currency Hedging
We have argued that …xed positions in foreign currencies, possibly with some
additional time-variation in currency positions in response to changing interest differentials, can reduce portfolio risks for global equity and bond investors. But how
large are the feasible risk reductions?
Table VII reports the portfolio standard deviations that investors can achieve
by combining their global stock and bond portfolios with risk-minimizing currency
exposures.

For each base currency, we report the annualized standard deviations

of quarterly returns given several alternative currency hedging strategies. The …rst
three columns report volatilities for unhedged, half hedged, and fully hedged portfolios. Half hedging is a compromise strategy that is popular with some institutional
44

investors. Next we report the volatilities of various types of optimally hedged portfolios. The baseline case adopts …xed, unconditionally optimal currency positions,
as in sections III and IV. We compare this with constrained conditional hedging in
the manner of Table VI. The volatilities are independent of the base currency for
the cases with full or unconditionally optimal hedging, but not for the cases with no
hedging, half hedging, or constrained conditionally optimal hedging. The right hand
part of the table reports F-statistics and p-values to test the statistical signi…cance of
the risk reductions achieved by unconditionally optimal currency hedging in relation
to full hedging and zero hedging, and by constrained conditional hedging in relation
to unconditionally optimal hedging.
Full sample results, in Table VII, show that the bene…t of full currency hedging
depends sensitively on an investor’s base currency.

It is particularly large for Eu-

roland and Swiss investors, because these investors have a risk-reducing base currency
so they gain by hedging back to that currency and out of foreign currencies.

The

volatility reduction from full currency hedging is particularly small for Australian
and Canadian investors, because the home currency for these investors is risky in the
sense that it is positively correlated with their equity positions. In fact, full currency
hedging actually increases risk for a Canadian investor.

45

Optimal hedging, of course, reduces risk for all investors, including Australians
and Canadians. The important point is that the bene…t of optimal hedging is substantial, both economically and statistically.

The big gain comes from adopting

an unconditionally optimal currency hedging strategy with …xed currency positions.
Relative to full hedging, this strategy reduces the standard deviation of an equallyweighted global equity portfolio by 135 basis points. This di¤erence is statistically
highly signi…cant, with p-values that are well below 1%.
There is only a small additional reduction from conditional currency hedging that
responds to time-varying interest di¤erentials. The largest additional risk reductions
come for Swiss investors (11 basis points, signi…cant at the 2% level) and Euroland and
US investors (6 basis points each, signi…cant at around the 6% level). Unconditional
hedging with a synthetic carry-trade currency delivers a comparably modest risk
reduction of 8 basis points relative to unconditionally optimal currency hedging.
The gains from currency hedging are also substantial for global bond investors,
but in this case almost all the gains can be achieved by full currency hedging. Table
VII shows that relative to full hedging, unconditionally optimal currency hedging
reduces the standard deviation of an equally-weighted global bond portfolio by only
19 basis points. This di¤erence is statistically signi…cant at almost the 1% level. As in

46

the equity case, the additional bene…ts of conditional currency hedging are extremely
small.
In the appendix we report subperiod results. The main di¤erence between the
…rst and the second subperiod is that the bene…t of unconditionally optimal hedging
for equity investors, relative to a simple policy of full hedging, increases from 62
basis points in the …rst subperiod to 267 basis points in the second.

The bene…t

of unconditionally optimal hedging for bond investors is much smaller and relatively
stable across subperiods, and the additional bene…ts of conditional hedging are always
modest for both equity and bond investors.
The optimal currency hedging policies that we have estimated allow global equity
and bond investors to achieve economically and statistically signi…cant reductions
in portfolio return volatility. A question of practical importance is whether these
volatility reductions come at the cost of lower expected return per unit of portfolio
risk. To examine this question we have computed the realized Sharpe ratios of global
equity and bond portfolios under the same currency hedging policies considered in
Table VII. The results are reported and discussed in detail in the appendix.
Overall, the Sharpe ratios on currency strategies depend sensitively on the average returns realized on di¤erent base currencies. On average across base currencies,
47

Sharpe ratios are higher for fully and unconditionally optimally hedged portfolios
than for unhedged portfolios, and higher again for conditionally optimally hedged
portfolios.

The increases in Sharpe ratios are particularly large for US, Euroland,

and Swiss equity investors implementing constrained conditional hedging strategies.
These are the base currencies for which we found the strongest e¤ect of interest differentials on equity investors’currency hedging demands in Table VI. These results
should be interpreted with caution because they are calculated using sample average
currency returns, which are noisy estimates of true mean currency returns.

Even

over the full sample, there is no currency whose average excess log return, relative to
the US dollar, is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero at the 5% level.
VIII. Conclusion
In this paper we have studied the correlations of foreign exchange rates with stock
and bond returns over the period 1975 to 2005 and have drawn out the implications
for risk management by international equity and bond investors. We have found that
many currencies— in particular the Australian dollar, Canadian dollar, Japanese yen,
and British pound— are positively correlated with world stock markets.

The euro,

the Swiss franc, and the bilateral US-Canadian exchange rate, however, are negatively
correlated with the world equity market.

48

These patterns imply that international

equity investors can minimize their equity risk by taking short positions in the Australian and Canadian dollars, Japanese yen, and British pound, and long positions in
the US dollar, euro, and Swiss franc. For risk-minimizing US equity investors, the
implication is that the currency exposures of international equity portfolios should be
at least fully hedged, and probably overhedged, with the exception of the euro and
Swiss franc which should be partially hedged.
These results are robust to variation in the investment horizon between one month
and one year. We obtain similar results when we consider the 1970’s and 1980’s in one
subsample and the 1990’s and 2000’s in another, except that risk-minimizing equity
investors should hold more euros and Swiss francs in the later period and slightly fewer
dollars. Over the full sample period the optimal currency hedging strategy reduces
the standard deviation of a global equity portfolio by 135 basis points relative to a
strategy of fully hedging all currency risk, and by over 250 basis points (for a US
investor) relative to a strategy of leaving currency risk unhedged.
We have found that bond investors’risk management demands for currencies are
small or zero, regardless of the investors’ home country, and regardless of whether
they hold only domestic bonds or an international bond portfolio. These optimal zero
currency demands re‡ect correlations close to zero between bond excess returns and

49

currency excess returns. The only exception is a weak negative correlation of bond
returns with excess returns on the dollar relative to other currencies. This correlation
implies a small positive allocation to the dollar by most bond investors. Our results
thus provide support for the practice prevalent among international bond investors
to fully hedge the currency exposures implicit in their international bond holdings.
Campbell, Viceira, and White (2003) show that long-term investors interested in
minimizing real interest rate risk using international portfolios of bills— or equivalently, currency exposures— also have large demands for bills denominated in euros
and US dollars, because these two currencies have had relatively stable interest rates.
Their results suggest that these two currencies are attractive stores of value for international money market investors. Our results add to this evidence, by showing that
the US dollar and the euro tend to appreciate when international stock markets fall.
This negative correlation generates demands for US dollar and euro denominated bills
as a way to reduce the volatility of international stock portfolios. In other words, the
US dollar and the euro are attractive stores of value for international equity investors.
One might expect that in equilibrium, those currencies that are attractive for
risk management purposes would o¤er lower average returns. Indeed, there is a
positive relation between average currency returns in our sample and the betas of

50

currencies with a currency-hedged world stock index, although the reward for taking
beta exposure through currencies has been quite modest in our sample, certainly well
below the historical equity premium. To the extent that international investors are
willing to receive lower compensation for holding US dollar and euro denominated
bills because of the hedging properties of these currencies, a country bene…ts from
having a reserve currency not only because international demand for its monetary
base generates seigniorage revenue, but also because international demand for its
Treasury bills reduces the interest cost of …nancing the government debt.
We have also explored whether movements in interest di¤erentials over time, which
are known to predict excess currency returns, predict changes in currency risks as
might be expected in capital market equilibrium. Here we obtain a perverse result
that, if anything, currencies become more attractive to risk-minimizing global equity
investors when their interest rates increase. The e¤ect on risk-management currency
demands is small, but certainly we …nd no evidence that the forward premium puzzle
can be explained by changing covariances of currencies with global stock returns.
Our …ndings raise the interesting question why currencies are so heterogeneous
in their correlations with equity markets. The Australian and Canadian economies
are unusually commodity-dependent, and the positive correlations of their currencies

51

with world stock markets are consistent with the idea that ‡uctuations in world
economic growth drive equity and commodity prices in the same direction. It is more
challenging to explain why the US dollar, euro, and Swiss franc behave di¤erently
from other currencies. One possible explanation is that they attract ‡ows of capital
at times when bad news arrives about the world economy, or when investors become
more risk averse. This “‡ight to quality”drives up the dollar, euro, and Swiss franc
at times when the prices of risky …nancial assets decline.

This explanation takes

as given that these currencies are regarded as safe assets and therefore bene…t from
a ‡ight to quality.14 It is consistent with the role of the US dollar and the euro
as reserve currencies in the international …nancial system.

Our …nding that the

risk-minimizing demand for euros has increased over time suggests that the euro has
partially displaced the dollar as a reserve currency.
The analysis of this paper can be extended in several ways. First, we can consider
emerging-market currencies jointly with developed-market currencies, as Lustig and
Verdelhan (2007) and Walker (2008) do. Second, we can allow for short-term in‡ation
risk that makes short-term nominal assets risky in real terms. The results of Cooper
and Kaplanis (1994) and Campbell, Viceira, and White (2003) suggest that this
has only a minor e¤ect on optimal demands for long-term assets and currencies in
developed markets, but it may be more important in emerging markets. Third, we
52

can integrate the speculative and risk-management components of currency demand
by solving the optimal portfolio choice problem for an investor choosing currency
positions jointly with stock and bond positions.15 Given the high historical returns
to the currency carry trade, foreign currencies are likely to play an important role in
such a portfolio choice analysis.
Fourth, we can measure the equity and bond covariances of foreign currencies
more accurately by using high-frequency data. To the extent that these covariances
change predictably over time, covariance forecasts based on high-frequency data can
be used to calculate dynamic hedging strategies that may further reduce portfolio
risk. Finally, we can conduct an out-of-sample analysis to see whether correlations
of currencies with bond and stock returns are stable enough that historically estimated
risk management demands actually reduce portfolio risk in the future.
The …nancial crisis of 2008 is not part of our sample period, and currency movements in 2008 can be used as an informal out-of-sample assessment of our results.
Reserve currencies, particularly the US dollar, and currencies with low unconditional
average interest rates such as the Japanese yen, have tended to strengthen against
other currencies during the stock market declines of 2008, while commodity-dependent
currencies such as the Australian dollar have weakened. This con…rms the attrac-

53

tiveness of reserve currencies as hedges for equity investors. Government bonds have
moved opposite stocks in 2008, and thus the currency positions that have minimized
risk for bond investors are quite di¤erent and much closer to the conventional strategy
of fully hedging all currency risk.

54

Endnotes
*. Campbell: Department of Economics, Littauer Center 213, Harvard University,
Cambridge MA 02138, USA, and NBER. Tel 617-496-6448, email john_campbell@harvard.edu.
Serfaty-de Medeiros: OC&C Strategy Consultants, 33 Arch St., Boston, MA 02110.
Email karine.sdm@gmail.com. Viceira: Harvard Business School, Baker Library 367,
Boston MA 02163. Tel 617-495-6331, email lviceira@hbs.edu. Viceira acknowledges
the …nancial support of the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School.
We are grateful to Anna Milanez and Johnny Kang for research assistance, and to
Cam Harvey (the editor), an anonymous referee, Roderick Molenaar, Sam Thompson, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, and seminar participants at Brandeis University, Boston
University, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Harvard University, and
the Stockholm School of Economics for comments and suggestions.
1. This appendix is available online at http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp.
2. Risk management demands are more commonly called hedging demands, but
this can create confusion in the context of foreign currency because hedging a foreign
currency corresponds to taking a short position to cancel out an implicit long position
in that currency.

In this paper we use foreign currency terminology and avoid the

use of the term hedging demand for assets.
55

3. For a discussion of currency hedging from a practitioner’s perspective, see
Jorion (1989) or the other papers collected in Thomas (1990).
4. In the case of the Swiss short-term interest rate, our data source is the OECD.
We use euro-money rates up to 1989, and LIBOR rates afterwards, as published by
the OECD.
5. This approximation to the log return on a coupon bond is
rc;n;t+1 = Dcn ycnt

(Dcn

1) yc;n

1;t+1 ;

where rc;n;t+1 denotes the log return on a coupon bond with coupon rate c and n
periods to maturity, ycnt

log(1 + Ycnt ) denotes the log yield on this bond at time t,

and Dcn is its duration, which we approximate as
Dcn =

1
1

(1 + Ycnt )
(1 + Ycnt )

n
1:

In our computations we treat all bonds as having a maturity of 10 years, and assume
that bonds are issued at par, so that the coupon rate equals the yield on the bond.
We also assume that the yield spread between a 9 years and 11 months bond and a
10-year bond is zero.
6. If we include only Germany in Euroland, this region also exhibits one of the lowest average short-term nominal interest rates, similar to those of Japan and Switzer56

land.
7. On average, the US stock market represents 49.3% of total market capitalization (and 54.5% at the end of our sample period). The Japanese, Euroland and
British stock markets follow with weights of 20.6% (11.3%), 12.9% (13.7%), and 9.7%
(11.3%), respectively. The Australian, Canadian and Swiss markets are much smaller,
respectively representing 1.7% (2.5%), 3.2% (3.5%) and 2.6% (3.3%) of our seven
countries’ market capitalization.

These weights are fairly stable over our sample

period, with the exception of the Japanese stock market whose market capitalization
share grew rapidly in the late 1980’s before collapsing in the 1990’s.
8. In a similar spirit, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) show that currencies with high
interest rates have high covariances with US consumption growth. The connection
between liquidity preference (the demand for safe assets with low returns) and risk
was …rst made explicitly by Tobin (1958).
9. There are no meaningful di¤erences if we use the log of average currency excess
returns, or calculate betas with respect to a value-weighted global stock portfolio.
Also, note that currency betas with respect to the global stock market portfolio are
proportional to the negative of the currency demands that we …nd in section III for
the case with a global stock portfolio and a single available currency pair.
57

10. To obtain an invariance result similar to the one we have applied in sections 4
and 5, we would need to include the cross-product of each currency excess return with
all interest rate di¤erentials in the regression (4). This would force us to estimate
an excessive number of parameters.
11. All these results are obtained conditional on the restriction that slopes are
equal across foreign currencies.

We …nd no evidence against this restriction in

the single-foreign-currency case, but the evidence is mixed in the multiple-foreigncurrency case, where we reject the restriction at the 5% level for the US base currency,
and the 10% level for the Australian and Japanese base currencies.
12. Interest di¤erentials do take some extreme values, up to 5 standard deviations
in either direction, implying larger e¤ects on optimal currency positions at one or
two points in the sample. However these extreme values are not driving the results
reported in Table 7. If we winsorize di¤erentials at 3 or 4 standard deviations before
including them in the system, we obtain similar results to those reported.
13. A caveat is that this contrast is due to the early part of our sample period. Subperiod results in the appendix show that even with …xed currency positions
available, the synthetic currency has become unattractive to risk-minimizing equity
investors in the period since 1990.
58

14. Similarly, Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2008) argue that long-term US
Treasury bonds bene…t from a ‡ight to quality only at times when their fundamentals
make them negatively correlated with equities. Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) model
fundamentals that a¤ect the correlation between a country’s stock market and its
exchange rate.
15. A simple approach to this problem would use mean-variance analysis as in
Cooper and Kaplanis (1994), but if the investor has a long-term objective function, a
more appropriate framework is the long-term portfolio choice model of Merton (1971),
as implemented for example by Campbell, Chan, and Viceira (2003) and Jurek and
Viceira (2006). Long-horizon mean-variance analysis ignores the fact that investors
can rebalance their portfolios over time, and the alternative framework takes this into
account.

59

References

Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio choice and corporation …nance: A synthesis, Journal of Finance 38, 925–984.
Black, Fischer, 1972, Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, Journal
of Business 45, 444–454.
Black, Fischer, 1990, Equilibrium exchange rate hedging, Journal of Finance 45,
899–907.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Stefan Nagel, and Lasse Pedersen, 2008, Carry trades and
currency crashes, forthcoming NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, 2007,
The returns to currency speculation, unpublished paper, Duke University and
Northwestern University.
Campbell, John Y., Yeung Lewis Chan, and Luis M. Viceira, 2003, A multivariate
model of strategic asset allocation, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 41–80.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics
of Financial Markets, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

60

Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira, 2008, In‡ation bets or
de‡ation hedges?

The changing risks of nominal bonds, unpublished paper,

Harvard University.
Campbell, John Y., Luis M. Viceira, and Joshua S. White, 2003, Foreign currency
for long-term investors, Economic Journal 113, C1–C25.
Cooper, Ian and Evi Kaplanis, 1994, Home bias in equity portfolios, in‡ation hedging, and international capital market equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies
7, 45–60.
Engel, Charles, 1996, The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: a survey
of recent evidence, Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123–192.
Fama, Eugene F., 1984, Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of Monetary
Economics 14, 319–338.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of
Finance 57, 637–659.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix, 2008, Rare disasters and exchange rates, unpublished paper, Harvard University and New York University.

61

Froot, Kenneth A., 1993, Currency hedging over long horizons, NBER Working
Paper No. 4355.
Glen, J. and Philippe Jorion, 1993, Currency hedging for international portfolios,
Journal of Finance 48, 1865–1886.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey, 2007, From world banker to world venture capitalist: the US external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege, in
Richard Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Hodrick, 1980, Forward rates as optimal predictors
of future spot rates: an econometric analysis, Journal of Political Economy 88,
829–853.
Hodrick, Robert J., 1987, The Empirical Evidence on the E¢ ciency of Forward
and Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur,
Switzerland.
Jorion, Philippe, 1989, Asset allocation with hedged and unhedged foreign stocks
and bonds, Journal of Portfolio Management 15, 49–54.
Jurek, Jakub and Luis M. Viceira, 2006, Optimal value and growth tilts in long-

62

horizon portfolios, NBER Working Paper No. 12017.
Lustig, Hanno N. and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007, The cross-section of foreign currency
risk premia and consumption growth risk, American Economic Review 97, 89–
117.
Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuoustime model, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.
Pavlova, Anna and Roberto Rigobon, 2007, Asset prices and exchange rates, Review
of Financial Studies 20, 1139–1181.
Perold, André F. and Evan C. Schulman, 1988, The free lunch in currency hedging: Implications for investment policy and performance standards, Financial
Analysts Journal 44 (3), 45-50.
Siegel, Jeremy J., 1972, Risk, interest rates, and the forward exchange, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 86, 303–309.
Solnik, Bruno H., 1974, An equilibrium model of the international capital market,
Journal of Economic Theory 8, 500–524.
Stulz, René M., 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial
Economics 383–406.
63

Thomas, Lee R., 1990, The Currency-Hedging Debate, IFR Books, London, United
Kingdom.
Tobin, James, 1958, Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk, Review of Economic Studies 25, 68–85.
Walker, Eduardo, 2008, Strategic currency hedging and global portfolio investments
upside down, Journal of Business Research 61, 657–668.

64

Table I
Summary Statistics
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

8.49

7.39

3.69

3.24

8.14

5.83

1.39
Standard Deviation
Excess log stock returns in local currency
7.52
Adjusted Average

1.78

1.78

1.52

1.14

1.57

1.44

6.99

5.24

4.97

8.77

6.93

7.06

Standard Deviation

18.75

17.40

18.65

17.67

16.82

14.63

Excess log bond returns in local currency
1.12
Adjusted Average

2.10

2.55

3.00

2.16

2.85

2.84

Standard Deviation

5.05

8.80

7.89

7.97

5.58

7.84

8.59

Adjusted Average

0.93

-1.33

-0.28

3.80

3.15

-0.07

.

Standard Deviation

11.12

10.30

5.26

12.23

12.88

11.23

.

Adjusted Average

1.66

1.42

1.28

1.74

0.70

2.36

.

Standard Deviation

11.23

10.51

5.39

12.64

13.14

11.45

.

Log interest rates

Average

6.42

18.02

Change in log exchange rate

Excess log currency returns

Note. Stock market returns are from the Morgan Stanley Capital International database. All other variables are from the IMF's IFS
database. Data are monthly. Coverage extends from 1975:7 to 2005:12. Unless otherwise specified, all following tables use data from the
full period.
Interest rates are log 3-month government bill rates, with the exception of Switzerland (see footnote 4 in text)
Excess log stock (bond) excess returns are the returns on foreign stocks (bonds) to a fully hedged investor, i.e. local currency returns, in
excess of the local log nominal interest rate.
The currency excess return is the log return to a US investor of borrowing in dollars to hold foreign currency.
Rows labeled Adjusted Average report the mean of each variable plus one-half its variance, in percentage points per annum. The mean
gives an estimate of the mean simple excess return.

Table II
Cross-country return correlations
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

Panel A: Currencies
Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

1.00
0.38
0.45
0.51
0.89
0.68
0.47

1.00
0.70
0.34
0.20
0.38
0.54

1.00
0.35
0.24
0.44
0.89

1.00
0.54
0.40
0.42

1.00
0.50
0.27

1.00
0.47

1.00

Panel B : Stocks
Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

1.00
0.55
0.61
0.50
0.80
0.69
0.71

1.00
0.66
0.35
0.54
0.55
0.61

1.00
0.44
0.56
0.55
0.75

1.00
0.42
0.44
0.41

1.00
0.66
0.68

1.00
0.65

1.00

Panel B : Bonds
Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

1.00
0.45
0.60
0.51
0.65
0.50
0.62

1.00
0.44
0.36
0.35
0.33
0.43

1.00
0.43
0.46
0.45
0.79

1.00
0.35
0.31
0.44

1.00
0.39
0.45

1.00
0.40

1.00

Note. This table presents cross-country correlations of log excess returns on currencies, stocks and bonds.
Each cell of Panel A reports the correlation of currency log excess returns (s c,t +i c,t -i d,t , where c indexes the base country), between the
row and column currencies. The correlation reported is an average across all possible base countries.
Panels B and C report correlations of hedged stock market excess returns (r c,t -i c,t , see Table I note) and hedged bond excess return
(rb c,t -i c,t , see Table I note) between the row and column countries.
All correlations are computed using overlapping monthly observations of quarterly returns.

Table III
Optimal currency exposure for single-country stock portfolios: single and multiple
currency cases

Stock market

Currency
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.57***
(0.14)
0.13
(0.13)

-0.32***
(0.09)
0.18*
(0.11)
0.13
(0.10)

0.37*
(0.20)
0.32***
(0.11)
0.35***
(0.10)
0.36***
(0.12)

-0.37***
(0.12)
0.16
(0.14)
0.14
(0.12)
0.17*
(0.10)
-0.32***
(0.09)

-0.52***
(0.14)
0.29**
(0.12)
0.96***
(0.22)
0.04
(0.13)
-0.43***
(0.11)
-0.24*
(0.13)

Panel A : Single currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

-0.43***
(0.11)
0.39***
(0.12)
0.42***
(0.11)
0.34***
(0.12)
-0.51***
(0.17)
0.26*
(0.13)
0.19*
(0.11)

-0.02
(0.12)
-0.09
(0.11)
-0.37***
(0.08)
-0.26**
(0.11)
-0.14
(0.09)

-0.06
(0.12)
-0.44***
(0.10)
-0.32**
(0.13)
-0.77***
(0.17)

-0.27***
(0.09)
-0.10
(0.08)
-0.03
(0.10)

0.26**
(0.10)
0.19**
(0.09)

0.09
(0.11)

-0.10
(0.12)
-0.20
(0.14)
-0.06
(0.11)
-0.18
(0.16)
-0.15
(0.10)
-0.13
(0.11)
0.04
(0.09)

-0.40*
(0.24)
-0.66***
(0.20)
-1.00***
(0.24)
-0.58**
(0.26)
-0.20
(0.21)
-0.49**
(0.22)
-0.91***
(0.18)

-0.19
(0.12)
-0.11
(0.13)
-0.21*
(0.11)
-0.27*
(0.15)
-0.02
(0.12)
-0.18*
(0.10)
-0.23**
(0.10)

0.34
(0.21)
0.11
(0.22)
0.32
(0.23)
0.16
(0.20)
0.40**
(0.19)
0.27
(0.22)
0.31*
(0.17)

-0.09
(0.14)
-0.31*
(0.17)
-0.31**
(0.15)
0.03
(0.13)
-0.01
(0.14)
-0.01
(0.16)
-0.01
(0.12)

Panel B : Multiple currencies

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

0.42
(0.26)
0.55**
(0.24)
0.34
(0.23)
0.38*
(0.21)
0.12
(0.24)
0.34
(0.25)
0.09
(0.21)

0.02
(0.24)
0.62**
(0.25)
0.92***
(0.23)
0.46*
(0.25)
-0.13
(0.23)
0.20
(0.22)
0.71***
(0.20)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of equity from his own country, who chooses a
foreign currency position to minimize the variance of his portfolio. Panel A allows the investor to use only one foreign
currency. Panel B allows her to choose a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies. Rows indicate the equity
being held (as well as the base country), columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Cells of Panel A are obtained by regressing the hedged excess return to the row country stock market onto the excess
return on the column country currency. Rows of Panel B (excluding diagonal terms) are obtained by regressing the
excess return to the row country stock market onto the vector of all foreign currency excess returns. All regressions
include an intercept. Diagonal terms in Panel B are obtained by computing the opposite of the sum of other terms in the
same row and the corresponding standard deviation.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping quarterly returns. Standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation due to
overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table IV
Optimal currency exposure for an equally-weighted global equity portfolio: multiplecurrency case

Time Period

Currency
Euroland Australia

Panel A : 7 country optimization
0.32*
-0.11
Full period
Subperiod I
Subperiod II

(0.17)
0.14
(0.21)
0.44
(0.28)

(0.09)
-0.05
(0.12)
-0.17
(0.14)

Panel B : 5 country optimization
0.56***
-0.27***
Full period
Subperiod I
Subperiod II

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.61***
(0.16)
-0.63**
(0.26)
-0.65***
(0.21)

-0.17*
(0.09)
-0.20
(0.14)
-0.08
(0.10)

0.27*
(0.15)
0.22
(0.18)
0.37
(0.23)

-0.10
(0.11)
-0.09
(0.15)
-0.12
(0.14)

0.40**
(0.18)
0.62*
(0.35)
0.22
(0.19)

-0.09
(0.11)
-0.10

-0.06
(0.14)
0.05

(0.15)
-0.11
(0.13)

(0.20)
-0.15
(0.17)

(0.11)
0.35**

(0.10)
-0.15

-0.14*
(0.08)
-0.15

(0.17)
0.79***
(0.13)

(0.11)
-0.47***
(0.12)

(0.11)
-0.06
(0.11)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of stocks from all countries, with equal weights,
who chooses a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio. In this
case, the optimal currency positions do not depend on the investor's base country.
Panel A considers a case where all 7 currencies are available, whereas Panel B excludes the Canadian dollar and the
Swiss franc.
Within each Panel, rows indicate the time period over which the optimization is computed, columns the currencies
used to manage risk. The full period runs from 1975 to 2005, the first subperiod covers years 1975 through 1989 and
the second subperiod covers the rest of the sample.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping 3 -months returns. Standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation due to
overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table V
Optimal currency exposure for an equally-weighted global bond portfolio: multiplecurrency case

Time Period

Currency
Euroland Australia

Panel A : 7 country optimization
-0.03
0.04
Full period
Subperiod I
Subperiod II

(0.07)
-0.02
(0.10)
-0.17
(0.12)

(0.04)
0.04
(0.05)
0.13**
(0.06)

Panel B : 5 country optimization
-0.06
0.01
Full period
Subperiod I
Subperiod II

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.10
(0.08)
-0.30**
(0.14)
-0.08
(0.11)

-0.07*
(0.04)
-0.16***
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.05)

-0.03
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.08)
0.06
(0.11)

0.01
(0.05)
0.02
(0.06)
0.04
(0.06)

0.18***
(0.06)
0.43***
(0.12)
0.04
(0.06)

(0.05)
-0.03
(0.08)

(0.03)
-0.04
(0.04)

-0.08*
(0.04)
-0.14**
(0.07)

0.01
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)

0.11***
(0.04)
0.20***
(0.06)

-0.13**
(0.06)

0.12***
(0.04)

0.00
(0.05)

0.03
(0.06)

-0.02
(0.05)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of long term bonds from all countries, with equal
weights, who chooses a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio.
In this case, the optimal currency positions do not depend on the investor's base country.
Panel A considers a case where all 7 currencies are available, whereas Panel B excludes the Canadian dollar and the
Swiss franc.
Within each Panel, rows indicate the time period over which the optimization is computed, columns the currencies
used to manage risk. The full period runs from 1975 to 2005, the first subperiod covers years 1975 through 1989 and
the second subperiod covers the rest of the sample.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping 3 -months returns. Standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation due to
overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table VI
Optimal conditional currency exposure for an equally-weighted global portfolio:
single and multiple - currency case

Base
Currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switz.
UK

Equity
Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

0.08
(1.02)
0.04
(0.47)
0.31
(0.70)
0.05
(0.36)
0.27
(0.78)
0.00

1.00

5.94*
(3.15)
-0.35
(1.79)
1.74
(2.63)
0.95
(2.98)
4.49**
(1.91)
1.10

0.64

0.04
(0.22)
-0.02
(0.16)
0.03
(0.17)
-0.01
(0.16)
0.04
(0.15)
0.09

0.99

0.86
(1.33)
-1.49**
(0.58)
0.28
(1.59)
0.66
(1.21)
0.46
(0.73)
2.25

0.01

0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

(0.54)

US

Bonds

0.22
(0.57)

0.10
0.13
0.10
0.67
0.22

(2.83)
1.00

4.78*
(2.50)

1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.99

(0.21)
0.07

0.06
(0.22)

0.77
0.22
0.09
0.00
0.08

(1.41)
1.00

1.38
(1.06)

0.09

Note. This table reports optimal currency exposure conditional on interest rate. For each base country-currency pair, we
now let the optimal currency position vary with the log interest rate differential (interest rate of the foreign country minus
that of the base country). Yet, we impose the constraints that the slopes of the optimal positions with respect to the
interest rate differential be equal across foreign currencies.
The "Single Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using one currency at a time to manage risk, but still
constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients from a SUR estimation are
reported for each base country, followed by the P-value of a test of the constraint. A P-value of x% indicates that the
constraint can be rejected at the x% level.
The "Multiple Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using all foreign currencies simultaenously to manage
risk, but still constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients are reported for
each base country, followed by the P-value of a test of the constraint. A P-value of x% indicates that the constraint can be
rejected at the x% level.

Table VII
Standard deviations of hedged global equity and bond portfolios
Optimal hedge
Base
country

No hedge Half hedge Full hedge

Baseline

Conditional
hedging
(constrained)

Tests of significance
Baseline vs. full
hedge

Baseline vs. no
hedge

Conditional vs.
Baseline

F-Stat P-value

F-Stat P-value

F-Stat P-value

Equity

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

17.67
15.00
13.74
17.08
19.19
16.78
15.05

15.47
13.52
13.22
14.67
16.09
14.74
13.91

13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86

12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51

12.45
12.51
12.50
12.50
12.40
12.50
12.45

7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

33.36
20.09
6.49
31.32
41.75
25.47
15.20

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

3.55
0.04
0.44
0.10
5.54
0.15
3.67

6.05
84.37
50.85
74.89
1.91
69.90
5.63

8.39
12.08
10.18
10.86
9.93
10.35
10.53

6.10
7.85
7.12
6.85
6.52
6.98
7.36

5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40

5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21

5.21
5.19
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.19
5.20

2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76

1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23

54.14
210.02
85.17
87.07
85.62
87.03
127.73

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.42
6.57
0.03
0.30
0.40
2.53
1.68

51.99
1.08
86.00
58.52
52.89
11.23
19.53

Bonds

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

Note. This table reports the standard deviation of portfolios featuring different uses of currency for risk-management.

We present results for equally-weighted global portfolios, for equity and bonds as respectively described in Table IV and Table VI. Within each panel, rows represent base
countries and columns represent the risk-management strategy.
"No hedge" refers to the simple equity portfolio. "Half hedge" refers to a portfolio in which half of the implicit currency risk is neutralized. "Full hedge" refers to a portfolio in
which all of the implicit currency risk is neutralized. "Optimal hedge"
Reported standard deviations are annualized, and measured in percentage points.
All results presented are computed considering returns at a quarterly horizon.

50

0

-50

-100

-150
1975m1

1980m1

1985m1

1990m1
date

US to Canadian dollar

1995m1

2000m1

2005m1

World stock market

Figure 1: Annualized Excess Returns on US Dollar Long, Canadian Dollar Short Portfolio
and the Hedged World Stock Market.

50

0

-50

-100

-150
1975m1

1980m1

1985m1
Euro

1990m1
date

1995m1

2000m1

2005m1

World stock market

Figure 2: Excess Returns on the Euro and the Hedged World Stock Market.

3
2
1
0
-1

0

.2
Euro pairs
Other Country Pairs

.4
Beta

.6

.8

US/Ca
Regression line

Figure 3: Mean-Beta Diagram for Currency Pairs, Full Sample Period (1975-2005). Betas
are calculated with respect to a value-weighted, currency-hedged world market portfolio.
Regression of mean returns on betas imposes a zero intercept.

4
2
0
-2

0

.2

.4
Beta

Subperiod 1:
Euro pairs
USD/CAD pair
Other Currency Pairs
Regression line

.6

.8

Subperiod 2:
Euro pairs
USD/CAD pair
Other Currency Pairs
Regression line

Figure 4: Mean-Beta Diagram for Currency Pairs, Subperiods (1975-1989 and 1990-2005).
Betas are calculated with respect to a value-weighted, currency-hedged world market portfolio.
Regression of mean returns on betas imposes a zero intercept.

Internet Appendix for “Global Currency Hedging”

A. Hedged Portfolio Return
Let Rc;t+1 denote the gross return in currency c from holding country c stocks
from the beginning to the end of period t + 1, and let Sc;t+1 denote the spot exchange
rate in dollars per foreign currency c at the end of period t + 1. By convention, we
index the domestic country by c = 1 and the n foreign countries by c = 2; :::; n + 1.
Of course, the domestic exchange rate is constant over time and equal to 1: S1;t+1 = 1
for all t:
At time t, the investor exchanges a dollar for 1=Sc;t units of currency c in the
spot market which she then invests in the stock market of country c. After one
period, stocks from country c return Rc;t+1 , which the US investor can exchange for
Sc;t+1 dollars, to earn an unhedged gross return of Rc;t+1 Sc;t+1 =Sc;t . For an arbitrarily
weighted portfolio, the unhedged gross portfolio return is given by
uh
Rp;t+1
= R0t+1 ! t (St+1

where ! t = diag (! 1;t ; ! 2;t ; :::; ! n+1;t ) is the (n + 1

St ) ;
n + 1) diagonal matrix of weights

on domestic and foreign stocks at time t, Rt+1 is the (n+1 1) vector of gross nominal
stock returns in local currencies, St+1 is the (n + 1
65

1) vector of spot exchange rates,

and

denotes the element-by-element ratio operator, so that the c-th element of

(St+1

St ) is Sc;t+1 =Sc;t . The weights add up to 1 in each period t:
n+1
P

8t:

! c;t = 1

c=1

(A1)

We next consider the hedged portfolio. Let Fc;t denote the one-period forward
exchange rate in dollars per foreign currency c, and

c;t

the dollar value of the amount

of forward exchange rate contracts for currency c the investor enters into at time t
per dollar invested in her stock portfolio.1 At the end of period t + 1, the investor gets
to exchange

c;t =Sc;t

units of the foreign-currency denominated return Rc;t+1 ! c;t =Sc;t

back into dollars at an exchange rate Fc;t . She then exchanges the rest, which amounts
to (Rc;t+1 ! c;t =Sc;t

c;t =Sc;t )

units of foreign currency c, at the spot exchange rate

h
of
Sc;t+1 . Collecting returns for all countries leads to a hedged portfolio return Rp;t+1

h
Rp;t+1
= R0t+1 ! t (St+1

0
t

St )

(St+1

St ) +

where Ft is the (n+1 1) vector of forward exchange rates, and

0
t

(Ft

t

=(

St ) ,

(A2)

0
1;t ; 2;t ; :::; n;t ; n+1;t ) .

Of course, since S1t = F1;t = 1 for all t, the choice of domestic hedge ratio

1;t

is ar-

bitrary. For convenience, we set it so that all hedge ratios add up to 1:

1;t

n+1
P

=1

c;t :

(A3)

c=2

Under covered interest parity, the forward contract for currency c trades at Fc;t =
66

Sc;t (1 + I1;t )=(1 + Ic;t ), where I1;t denotes the domestic nominal short-term riskless
interest rate available at the end of period t, and Ic;t is the corresponding country c
nominal short-term interest rate. Thus the hedged dollar portfolio return (A2) can
be written as
h
Rp;t+1
= R0t+1 ! t (St+1

0
t

St )

(St+1

where It = (I1;t ; I2;t :::; In+1;t ) is the (n + 1

St ) +

0
t

(1 + Idt )

(1 + It ) ,

(A4)

1) vector of nominal short-term interest

rates and Idt = I1;t 1.
Equation (A4) shows that selling currency forward— i.e., setting

c;t

> 0— is anal-

ogous to a strategy of shorting foreign bonds and holding domestic bonds, i.e. borrowing in foreign currency and lending in domestic currency.2
To capture the fact that the investor can alter the currency exposure implicit in
her foreign stock position using forward contracts or lending and borrowing, we now
de…ne a new variable

c;t

as

c;t .

! c;t

c;t

A fully hedged portfolio, in which

the investor does not hold any exposure to currency c, corresponds to
positive value of

c;t

c;t

= 0. A

means that the investor wants to hold exposure to currency c,

or equivalently that the investor does not want to fully hedge the currency exposure
implicit in her stock position in country c. Of course, a completely unhedged portfolio
corresponds to

c;t

= ! c;t . Thus

c;t

is a measure of currency demand or currency
67

exposure. Accordingly we refer to

c;t

as currency demand or currency exposure

indistinctly.
For convenience, we now rewrite equation (A4) in terms of currency demands:
h
Rp;t+1
= R0t+1 ! t (St+1
0
t

+
where

t

=

Note that

1;t ;

t

(St+1

2;t ; :::;

= !t1

St )

n+1;t

t.

10 ! t (St+1

St )

0

(1 + Idt )

(1 + Idt )

St )

(1 + It )
(A5)

(1 + It ) ;

.

Given the de…nition of

c;t ,

equations (A1) and (A3)

imply that
1;t

=

n+1
P

c;t :

(A6)

c=2

or

0
t1

= 0, so that

1;t

indeed represents the domestic currency exposure. That

currency demands must add to zero is intuitive. Since the investor is fully invested in
stocks, she can achieve a long position in a particular currency c only by borrowing—
or equivalently, by shorting bonds— in her own domestic currency, and investing the
proceeds in bonds denominated in that currency. Thus the currency portfolio is a
zero investment portfolio.
B. Log Portfolio Returns Over Short Time Intervals
Assuming log-normality of the hedge returns, the derivation of the optimal
68

hedge
requires an expression for the log-return on the hedged portfolio, rp;t+1
. We com-

pute this log hedged return as a discrete-time approximation to its continuous-time
counterpart. In order to do this, we need to specify, in continuous time, the return
processes for stocks Pc;t , for currencies Xc;t and for interest rates Bc;t :We assume that
they all follow a geometric brownian motions:
dPc;t
=
Pc;t
dBc;t
=
Bc;t
dXc;t
=
Xc;t

Pc dt

+(

Pc )t

dWtPc ;

Bc dt;
Xc dt

+(

(B2)

c = 1:::n + 1
Xc )t

dWtXc ;

(B3)

c = 1:::n + 1;

where WtPc ; WtBc and WtXc are di¤usion processes.
dBc;t
Bc;t

(B1)

c = 1:::n + 1

dPc;t
Pc;t

represents the stock return,

the nominal return to holding a riskless bond from country and

dXc;t
Xc;t

the return

to holding foreign currency c:
For notational simplicity, in what follows, we are momentarily dropping time
subscripts for the standard deviations.
Using Ito’s lemma, the log returns on each asset are given by:
dPc;t
Pc;t
dBc;t
=
Bc;t
dXc;t
=
Xc;t

d log Pc;t =
d log Bc;t
d log Xc;t

69

1
2
1
2
1
2

2
Pc dt
2
Bc dt
2
Xc dt:

Note that, because country 1 is the domestic country, which has a …xed exchange rate
of 1, we have d log X1;t = 0: This implies

X1

=

X1

= 0:

The domestic currency return on foreign stock is then given by

dPc;t Xc;t
.
Pc;t Xc;t

To derive

an expression for this return, we will note that the return dynamics above, by standard
calculations, imply :
log Pc;t Xc;t = log Pc;0 Xc;0 +
+

Pc

WtPc

Pc

+

W0Pc +

Xc

Xc

1
2

2
Pc

WtXc

1
2

2
Xc

t

W0Xc

Di¤erentiating, and then applying Ito’s lemma, yields :
dPc;t Xc;t
dPc;t dXc;t
=
+
+ Pc Xc Pc ;Xc dt
Pc;t Xc;t
Pc;t
Xc;t
dPc;t Xc;t
1
= d log Pc;t + d log Xc;t + Vart (pc;t + xc;t ) dt,
Pc;t Xc;t
2

(B4)
(B5)

where xc;t = d log Xc;t and pc;t = dlogPc;t : Note that for c=1, the formula does yield
the simple stock return as

dP1;t X1;t
P1;t X1;t

=

dP1;t
P1;t

+

dX1;t
X1;t

+

P1

X1 P1 ;X1 dt

=

dP1;t
:
P1;t

A similar calculation yields the following dynamics for the return of the strategy
consisting in holding the domestic bond and shorting the foreign one :
d (B1;t =Bc;t )
= d log B1;t
B1;t =Bc;t

d log Bc;t

(B6)

We note Vt the value of the portfolio.The log return on the portfolio, by Ito’s
70

lemma, is :
d log Vt =

1
2

dVt
Vt

dVt
Vt

2

:

We can now derive each of the right-hand side terms:
dVt X
=
! c;t
Vt
c=1
n+1

dPc;t Xc;t
Pc;t Xc;t

+

n+1
X

d (B1;t =Bc;t )
c ! c;t
B1;t =Bc;t

c=1

n+1
X

c ! c;t

c=1

dXc;t
;
Xc;t

which follows from our convention regarding the domestic country.
Using expressions (B3) ; (B5) ; and (B6) to substitute and moving to matrix
notation, we get :
dVt
0
= 10 ! (pt+1 + xt+1 )
bdt + bt
t xt+1
Vt
1
0
+ [10 ! t diag (Vart (pt+1 + xt+1 ))
t diag (Vart xt+1 )] dt
2

,

where pt+1 = (d log P1;t ; d log P2;t :::; d log Pn+1;t )0 ; xt+1 = (d log X1;t ; d log X2;t :::; d log Xn+1;t )0 ,
bdt = (d log B1;t ) 1, bt = (d log B1;t ; d log B2;t :::; d log Bn+1;t )0 and diag (X) denotes,
for a symmetric (n

n) matrix X; the (n

71

1) vector of its diagonal terms:

Then,
dVt
Vt

2

= Vart 10 ! t (pt+1 + xt+1 )
2

6
6
6
= 6
6
6
4

0
t

bdt + bt

xt+1

dt + o (dt)
3

10 ! t Vart (pt+1 + xt+1 ) ! t

210 ! t covt pt+1 + xt+1 ; xt+1
+

0

bdt + bt

bdt + bt

! t Vart xt+1

t

t

7
7
7
7 dt + o (dt) :
7
7
5

So, …nally,
d log Vt = 10 ! t (pt+1 + xt+1 )

0
t

xt+1

bdt + bt

(B7)

1
0
+ [10 ! t diag (Vart (pt+1 + xt+1 ))
t diag (Vart xt+1 )] dt
2
1
0
Vart 10 ! t (pt+1 + xt+1 )
bdt + bt dt + o (dt)
t xt+1
2

.

h
Now, we get the approximation for rp;t+1
by computing the previous expression

for dt = 1, replacing d log Xc;t =

sc;t+1 ; dlogPc;t = rc;t+1 ; and dlogBc;t = ic;t and

neglecting the higher order terms: Noting, for any variable, zt , the (n + 1

1) vector

(z1;t ; z2;t ::zn+1;t ) ; this is equivalent to replacing in equation (B7) pt+1 by rt+1 , xt+1
by

st+1 , bdt by idt and bt by it :
h
rp;t+1
' 10 ! t (rt+1 +

0
t

st+1 )

72

st+1

idt + it +

1
2

h
t

h
t+1

where

is equal to :
h
t

= 10 ! t diag (Vart (rt+1 +
Vart 10 ! t (rt+1 +

0
t diag

st+1 ))
0
t

st+1 )

(Vart

st+1

st+1 )

idt + it

where, for any variable z, zt denotes the vector of country observations (z1;t ; z2;t :::zn+1;t )0
and small case letters denote logs in the following fashion : rc;t+1 = log (Rc;t+1 ) ;
st+1 = log (St+1 ) ; idt = log (1 + I1;t ) 1 and ic;t = log (1 + Ic;t ) :

We can now rewrite the portfolio return as a function of
t.

t

by substituting for

This yields :
h
rp;t+1
= 10 ! t rt+1 + idt

= id1;t + 10 ! t (rt+1

0
t

it +

st+1
0
t

it ) +

st+1

1
2
1
idt + it +
2

idt + it +

h
t
h
t;

where:
h
t

= 10 ! t diag (Vart (rt+1 +

st+1 ))

Vart 10 ! t rt+1 + idt

it +

73

(
0
t

t

+ ! t 1)0 diag (Vart ( st+1 )) (B8)

st+1

idt + it

:

C. Equivalence Between Forward Contracts and Foreign Currency Borrowing and Lending
With the same notations and assumptions as above, when the investor uses forward
contracts to hedge currency risk, the portfolio return is:
h
Rp;t+1
= R0t+1 ! t (St+1

0
t

St )

(St+1

St )

(1 + Idt )

(1 + It )

Another natural view is one in which the investor borrows in foreign currency and
lends in domestic currency to hedge currency risk. Then, the portfolio return is:
BL
Rp;t+1
= R0t+1 ! t (St+1

0

St )

(St+1

St ) (1 + It ) +

0

1 + Idt

Then, with VtBL the value of the portfolio with borrowing and lending, we have in
continuous time:
n+1
X
dVtBL
! c;t
=
VtBL
c=1

=

n+1
X

dPc;t Xc;t
Pc;t Xc;t

n+1
X
c=1

dXc;t Bc;t X
+
c;t
Xc;t Bc;t
c=1

! c;t log Pc;t + log Xc;t +

c=1
n+1
X

c;t

+

c;t

c=1
n+1
X

n+1

c;t

dB1;t
B1;t

1
Vart (pc;t + xc;t ) dt
2

log (Xc;t ) + log (Bc;t ) +

1
Vart (xc;t ) dt
2

log (B1;t )

c=2

= 10 ! t (pt+1 + xt+1 )
1
2

0

0

xt+1 + bt

diag Vart (xt+1 ) dt
74

1
bdt + 10 ! t diag Vart (pt+1 + xt+1 ) dt
2

and
dVtBL
VtBL

2

= Vart ! 0t (pt+1 + xt+1 )

0

bdt

xt+1 + bt

dt + o (dt) :

So
d log VtBL

dVtBL
=
VtBL

1
2

dVtBL
VtBL

= ! 0t (pt+1 + xt+1 )

2

0

1
bdt + ! 0t diag Vart (pt+1 + xt+1 ) dt
2

xt+1 + bt

1 0
diag Vart (xt+1 ) dt
2
1
Vart ! 0t (pt+1 + xt+1 )
2

0

xt+1 + bt

bdt

dt + o (dt)

We now go to the limit of dt = 1 and get :
BL
rp;t+1
' 10 ! t (rt+1 +

0

st+1 )

idt +

st+1 + it

1
2

h
t

h
= rp;t+1

D. Mean-Variance Optimization
D.1. Unconstrained Hedge Ratio
h
In the general case, rp;t+1

id1;t = 10 ! t (rt+1

it ) +

0
t

st+1

idt + it + 12

h
t;

the Lagrangian is:
$ e

=

1
(1
2
+

) Vart 10 ! t (rt+1
H

0
Et 1 ! t (rt+1

75

0
t

it ) +
it ) +

0
t

st+1
st+1

idt + it
idt + it

1
2

h
t

and

h
t

Substituting for
$ e

=

1
Vart 10 ! t (rt+1
2
+

=

0
t

st+1

it )

0
t

it ) +

0
Et 1 ! t (rt+1

H

2
$ e

using equation (B8), this expression is equivalent to :

10 ! t diag (Vart (rt+1 +
1
Vart
2
0
t

2

0
t

idt + it

st+1 ))

0
t

it ) ;

1
+ Vart (10 ! t (rt+1
2

1
=
2

0
t

st+1

idt + it

idt + it

st+1
0

it ))

Et (1 ! t (rt+1

+ 10 ! t [diag (Vart ( st+1 ))
2

$ e

0
t

Et

diag (Vart ( st+1 ))

diag (Vart ( st+1 ))

+ covt 10 ! t (rt+1

+

0
t)

(! t 1

idt + it

st+1

idt + it

st+1

it ))

diag (Vart (rt+1 +

st+1 ))]

H

Vart

st+1

+ covt 10 ! t (rt+1

idt

+ it

it ) ;

0
t

t

st+1

3

2

st+1 idt + it 7
6 Et
7
6
5
4
+ 12 diag (Vart ( st+1 ))

idt + it

t

+K ( )
where
K( ) =

H

+

1
Vart (10 ! t (rt+1
2

it ))

+ 10 ! t [diag (Vart ( st+1 ))
2
76

0

Et (1 ! t (rt+1
diag (Vart (rt+1 +

it ))
st+1 ))]

K ( ) is independent of e t .

Now, we need to solve only for e t as

1;

the demand for domestic currency, is

given once the other currency demands are determined. We rewrite the Lagrangian
in terms of e t :
$ e

1 e0
Vart fst+1
=
2 t
+ covt 10 ! t (rt+1
+K ( )

eid + eit e t
t

2

it ) ; fst+1

6
e 0t 6
4

Et fst+1

eid + eit
t

+ 12 diag Vart fst+1

eid + eit
t

et

3
7
7
5

The F.O.C. gives the following expression for the optimal e t :

0 = covt 10 ! t (rt+1
+ Vart fst+1

it ) ; fst+1

eid + eit e
t
t

eid + eit
t

Et fst+1

Finally, the optimal vector of currency demands is :
e ( ) =
t

Vart 1 fst+1
Vart

1

fst+1

eid + eit
t

eid + eit
t

eid + eit + 1 diag Vart fst+1
t
2
i
0
d
e
e
f
1 ! t (rt+1 it ) ;
st+1 it + it

Et fst+1

h

covt

77

eid + eit + 1 diag Vart fst+1
t
2

D.2. Constrained Hedge Ratio
In the case where e t =

e (where 1
e denotes an n

1 vector of ones), we note

t1

the optimal scalar constrained hedge ratio and we have :

1
$ ( t) =
2

2 e0
t1

+

t

Vart

eid + eit 1
e
t

fst+1

covt 10 ! t (rt+1

+K ( )

it ) ; fst+1

2

6
6
t1 4
e0

Et fst+1

eid + eit
t

+ 12 diag Vart fst+1

eid + eit
t

e
1

and

=

t

h
e0 Et fst+1
1

eid + eit + 1 diag Vart fst+1
t
2

e0 Vart fst+1
1

covt 10 ! t (rt+1

In this case,

eidt + eit 1
e

it ) ; fst+1

e0 Vart fst+1
1

eid + eit
t

eidt + eit 1
e

i

e
1

can equivalently be written in terms of the full matrices :

t

t

=

10 Et

st+1 idt + it + 12 diag (Vart ( st+1 ))
10 Vart
st+1 idt + it 1

10 covt ! t (rt+1
10 Vart

it ) ;
st+1
78

st+1 idt + it
idt + it 1

1

3
7
7
5

t

This case corresponds to a domestic investor hedging the same ratio of his foreign
stock holdings for all foreign currencies.
E. Invariance of Optimal Currency Demand With Respect to Base
Country
In the system of n2 bilateral exchange rates, there are really only n free parameters
as all exchange rates can be backed out of the n bilateral rates for one base domestic
country. We use this fact to show that, for a portfolio of stocks from the n + 1
countries in our model, the optimal hedge ratios on stocks from country c;

j
c

is the

same for any base country j. Let us now use the subscript j to index the domestic
country.
We assume for this derivation that weights on international stocks are the same
for investors from all countries so that ! jt = ! t : In terms of our empirical tests, this
result will hence apply to the cases of an equally weighted or a value weighted world
portfolios, in which weights do not vary with the base country. They do not hold for
a home biased porftolio, in which weights by de…nition vary with base country.
Let us think of country 1 as our base country, and write the optimal vector of
foreign currency demand assuming that

j

= 0 for all values of j: We have :

79

e1

RM

=
=

where x1t+1 =

1
Vart fst+1

Vart x
e1t+1
s1t+1

1

ei1;d
e1
t + it

1

h

covt 10 ! t (rt+1

W
covt yt+1
;x
e1t+1

1
W
0
i1;d
t + it and yt+1 = 1 ! t (rt+1

1
it ) ; fst+1

ei1;d
e1
t + it

i

it ) :

Now, let us consider exchange rates from the perspective of country 2. By de…nition of the exchange rate between countries 1 and 2, it follows that s2t+1;1 =

s1t+1;2 :

2
Also, by de…nition of the exchange rates, St+1;3
units of currency 2 can be ex-

changed into one unit of currency 3. And one unit of currency 3 is equivalent to
1
1
1
St+1;3
units of currency 1, which is equivalent to St+1;3
=St+1;2
units of currency 2.
1
1
2
: In logs,
=St+1;2
= St+1;3
So, the absence of arbitrage implies the equality: St+1;3

s2t+1;3 = s1t+1;3

s1t+1;2 : More generally, the following equality can be derived from the

absence of arbitrage:
s2t+1;c = s1t+1;c

s1t+1;2

c = 3:::n + 1

2
1
In matrix notation, this amounts to a linear relationship between fst+1 and fst+1 :

fs2 = A2 fs1
t+1
t+1

80

0

B
B
B
B
B
B
B
where A2 = B
B
B
B
B
B
B
@

1

-1 0 .. .. 0 C
C
C
-1 1 0 .. .. C
C
C
C
-1 0 1 0 .. C
C:
C
C
-1 0 0 .. 0 C
C
C
A
-1 0 .. 0 1

Given our notations :

and

ei1;d
t

ei2;d
t
It follows that: ei2;d
t

ei1 = (it;2
t

ei2 = (it;1
t
ei2 = A ei1;d
t
t

it;1 ; it;3

it;2 ; it;3

it;1 ; ::it;n+1

it;1 )0

it;2 ; ::; it;n+1

it;2 )0 :

ei1 :
t

e2t+1 and x
e1t+1 :
Similarly, we have the following linear relationship between x
e2t+1 = Ae
x
x1t+1

,

(E1)

e2t+1 ; into equation (??), the formula
Let us substitute equation (E1), the formula for x
for the optimal hedge ratio. We use the properties of matrix second moments that

81

Var (AX) = A Var (X) A0 , cov(AX; Y ) = Acov (X; Y ) ; and the property of inverse
matrices that (AB)

1

= B 1 A 1 : Also, we note that A2 = (A2 )

1

and (A02 )

1

= A02 .

Substitution yields:
e2

RM

e2

2

RM

=

e2t+1
Vart x
(A02 )

1

=

(A02 )

1

=

RM

Given the property that

n+1
P
c=1

;

1
4

;

1

1

e1t+1
Vart x

1

(A2 )

W
e1t+1 ; yt+1
A2 covt x

W
e1t+1 ; yt+1
covt x

e 2 = A0 e 1
2

e2

1
3

W
e2t+1
covt yt+1
;x

e1t+1
Vart x

We write out the vector e 2RM :

1
1

1

; ::;

1
n+1

=

n+1
P
c=2

j
c

1
c

;

1
3

;

1
4

1
n+1

; ::;

= 1 for j = 1::n + 1,

1
1

=

n+1
P

1
c

c=2

: Applying this same property twice,

2
2

so that e 2RM =

=

n+1
P

2
c

=

c6=2

n+1
P

1
c

=

1
2

, so that:

2
RM

=

1
1

;

1
2

;

1
3

;

1
4

; ::;

1
n+1

=

1
RM :

Finally, the

c6=2

vector of optimal currency positions is the same for investors based in country 2 as
that of country 1 investors.

82

0

0
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
@

B
B
B
B
B
B
B
Similar results hold for j = 3:::n + 1; where A3 = B
B
B
B
B
B
B
@
1

1 0
0
0
0
0

-1 .. 0 C
C
C
1 .. .. .. C
C
C
C
0 -1 0 .. C
C, etc...
C
C
.. .. 1 0 C
C
C
A
-1 -1 0 1

1

1 -1 .. .. 0 C
C
C
0 -1 0 .. .. C
C
C
C
0 -1 1 0 .. C
C , A4 =
C
C
0 .. 0 .. 0 C
C
C
A
0 -1 .. 0 1

This analysis justi…es dropping the base-country subscript j and interpreting the
1) vector

(n + 1

=

n+1
P
c=2

1
c

;

1
2

;

1
3

; ::;

1
n+1

0

as a common vector of foreign

currency demands that is independent of the country of origin.
A situation in which investors from all countries are hedged perfectly corresponds
to

= (0; 0; ::; 0)0 :
A situation in which investors from country 1 are not hedged at all corresponds

to

=

0

1; ! 12 ; ! 13 ::; ! 1n+1 : That is, investors from country i undo the hedge of the

fully hedged portfolio by taking long positions in each foreign currency proportional

83

to the weight of each foreign country in their stock portfolio. (The perfectly hedged
portfolio obtains by shorting each foreign currency by that same amount.) They need
to borrow one unit of domestic currency to …nance that.
Finally, note that this proof relies on the fact that all relevant exchange rates for
an investor in a given base country are linear combinations of the relevant exchange
rates for each other base country. In other words, the assumption is that all investors
optimize over the same set of currencies.
F. Computation of Sharpe Ratios
Table A14 reports in-sample Sharpe Ratios generated by the set of currency hedging strategies for global portfolios of stocks and bonds considered in the paper. The
denominator of the Sharpe ratio is given by the standard deviations of log portfolio
returns reported in Table VII of the main text.
The numerator of the Sharpe ratio is given by the log of the mean gross return
on each of the portfolios. We compute a time series of gross returns for each strategy
using equation (A5), where

t

is resplaced by the vector of …xed or time-varying

currency demands that corresponds to each currency hedging strategy— for example,
t

is a vector of zeroes for the “Full Hedge”strategy. Next we average the time series

of gross returns, and take the natural log of the arithmetic mean.
84

Thus our Sharpe ratio is computed as
h
log E Rp;t+1
q
;
h
Var rp;t+1

which at high frequency observation of returns or under lognormality is equivalent to
h
h
+ 21 Var rp;t+1
E rp;t+1
q
:
h
Var rp;t+1

85

Internet Appendix Endnotes
*. Citation format: John Y. Campbell, Karine Serfaty-de Medeiros, and Luis M.
Viceira, Global currency hedging, Journal of Finance [-volume-], [-pages-], Internet
Appendix http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp.
1. That is, at the end of month t, the investor can enter into a forward contract
to sell one unit of currency c at the end of month t + 1 for a forward price of Fc;t
dollars.
2. Note, however, that the two strategies are not completely equivalent except in
the continuous time limit. We show in Appendix B that, in continuous time, the two
strategies are exactly equivalent.

86

Table A1
Currency return correlations
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

Base country: Euroland

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

1.00
0.70
0.35
-0.09
0.31
0.63

1.00
0.35
-0.11
0.34
0.87

1.00
0.20
0.24
0.40

1.00
-0.02
-0.07

1.00
0.38

1.00

1.00
.
0.53
0.67
0.92
0.78
0.59

.
.
.
.
.
.

1.00
0.46
0.47
0.51
0.85

1.00
0.69
0.59
0.55

1.00
0.72
0.54

1.00
0.58

1.00

1.00
0.23
.
0.59
0.91
0.71
0.32

1.00
.
0.25
0.20
0.24
0.11

.
.
.
.
.

1.00
0.62
0.50
0.35

1.00
0.65
0.31

1.00
0.34

1.00

1.00
0.46
0.55
.
0.87
0.72
0.55

1.00
0.74
.
0.33
0.49
0.67

1.00
.
0.39
0.56
0.90

.
.
.
.

1.00
0.60
0.41

1.00
0.58

1.00

1.00
0.47
0.52
0.31
.
0.56
0.51

1.00
0.77
0.46
.
0.49
0.71

1.00
0.47
.
0.53
0.91

1.00
.
0.37
0.51

.
.
.

1.00
0.55

1.00

1.00
0.35
0.42
0.50
0.84
.
0.42

1.00
0.71
0.42
0.25
.
0.64

1.00
0.44
0.30
.
0.88

1.00
0.52
.
0.48

1.00
.
0.32

.
.

1.00

1.00
0.26
0.18
0.55
0.90
0.69
.

1.00
0.43
0.25
0.21
0.25
.

1.00
0.10
0.12
0.14
.

1.00
0.58
0.44
.

1.00
0.61
.

1.00
.

.

Base country: Australia

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US
Base country: Canada

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US
Base Country: Japan

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US
Base Country: Switzerland

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US
Base Country: UK

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US
Base Country: US

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

Note. This table presents cross-country correlations of foreign currency log excess returns s c,t +i c,t -i d,t , where d indexes the base
country. Correlations are presented separately for investors from each base country. They are computed using monthly returns.

Table A2
Optimal currency exposure for an equally-weighted global equity portfolio: singlecurrency case

Base country

Currency
Euroland Australia

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

0.37***
(0.09)
0.45***
(0.10)
0.25***
(0.07)
-0.28*
(0.15)
0.30***
(0.09)
0.33***
(0.11)

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.37***

-0.45***

-0.25***

0.28*

-0.30***

-0.33***

(0.09)

(0.10)
0.02
(0.08)

(0.07)
0.14*
(0.07)
0.15*
(0.09)

(0.15)
0.33***
(0.07)
0.38***
(0.09)
0.32***
(0.08)

(0.09)
0.21**
(0.09)
0.25**
(0.11)
0.05
(0.06)
-0.29***
(0.07)

(0.11)
0.16**
(0.08)
0.55***
(0.16)
-0.06
(0.09)
-0.30***
(0.09)
-0.13
(0.11)

-0.02
(0.08)
-0.14*
(0.07)
-0.33***
(0.07)
-0.21**
(0.09)
-0.16**
(0.08)

-0.15*
(0.09)
-0.38***
(0.09)
-0.25**
(0.11)
-0.55***
(0.16)

-0.32***
(0.08)
-0.05
(0.06)
0.06
(0.09)

0.29***
(0.07)
0.30***
(0.09)

0.13
(0.11)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of stocks from all countries, with equal weights, who
chooses a position in one foreign currency at a time to minimize the variance of his portfolio. Rows indicate the base
country of the investor, columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Cells of Panel A are obtained by regressing the excess return to the global equity portfolio onto the excess return of the
column country currency to an investor based in the row country. All regressions include an intercept.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping quarterly returns. Standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation due to
overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A3
Optimal currency exposure for an equally-weighted global equity portfolio: multiplecurrency case

Time horizon

Currency
Euroland Australia

Panel A : 7 country optimization
0.17
-0.16
1 month
2 months
3 months
6 months
12 months

(0.15)
0.29
(0.15)
0.32
(0.17)
0.20
(0.26)
-0.20
(0.40)

(0.11)
-0.13
(0.09)
-0.11
(0.09)
-0.05
(0.14)
0.21
(0.20)

Panel B : 5 country optimization
0.37*
-0.29*
1 month
2 months
3 months
6 months
12 months

(0.11)
0.50*
(0.11)
0.56*
(0.11)
0.53*
(0.14)
0.44*
(0.19)

(0.11)
-0.27*
(0.09)
-0.27*
(0.10)
-0.21
(0.13)
0.05
(0.17)

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.61*
(0.14)
-0.63*
(0.15)
-0.61*
(0.16)
-0.38
(0.25)
-0.22
(0.36)

-0.11
(0.07)
-0.19*
(0.07)
-0.17
(0.09)
-0.25*
(0.12)
-0.41*
(0.17)

0.23
(0.12)
0.26
(0.13)
0.27
(0.15)
0.35
(0.20)
0.67*
(0.30)

-0.11
(0.08)
-0.11
(0.09)
-0.10
(0.11)
-0.06
(0.16)
-0.20
(0.21)

0.60*
(0.15)
0.51*
(0.15)
0.40*
(0.18)
0.19
(0.28)
0.15
(0.37)

-0.10
(0.08)
-0.09
(0.09)
-0.09
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.15)
-0.16
(0.19)

0.11
(0.08)
0.01
(0.11)
-0.06
(0.14)
-0.09
(0.18)
0.01
(0.22)

-0.08
(0.07)
-0.15*
(0.07)
-0.14
(0.08)
-0.21*
(0.10)
-0.34*
(0.15)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of stocks from all countries, with equal weights,
who chooses a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio. In this
case, the optimal currency positions do not depend on the investor's base country.
Rows indicate the time-horizon T of the investor, columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Rows are obtained by regressing the excess return on the global equity portfolio onto the vector of all foreign currency
excess returns. All regressions include an intercept. All returns considered are at the row time-horizon.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping T -months returns, T varying from 1 month to 12 months. Standard errors
are corrected for auto-correlation due to overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A4
Subperiod analysis
Equally-weighted global equity portfolio: multiple-currency case
Currency

Time horizon

Euroland Australia
Panel A : 7 country optimization

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.11
(0.16)
-0.05
(0.12)
0.23
(0.22)

-0.73***
(0.23)
-0.63**
(0.26)
-0.15
(0.61)

-0.06
(0.12)
-0.20
(0.14)
-0.31
(0.23)

0.08
(0.13)
0.22
(0.18)
0.57*
(0.33)

-0.06
(0.11)
-0.09
(0.15)
-0.04
(0.23)

0.73***
(0.24)
0.62*
(0.35)
0.33
(0.61)

-0.25**
(0.12)
-0.17
(0.14)
-0.17
(0.29)

-0.49***
(0.18)
-0.65***
(0.21)
-0.31
(0.37)

-0.15
(0.09)
-0.08
(0.10)
-0.23
(0.23)

0.51**
(0.23)
0.37
(0.23)
0.47
(0.49)

-0.20
(0.13)
-0.12
(0.14)
-0.22
(0.25)

0.48***
(0.18)
0.22
(0.19)
-0.11
(0.37)

Subperiod I : 1975-1989

1 month
3 months
12 months

0.15
(0.20)
0.14
(0.21)
-0.62
(0.45)

Suberiod II : 1990-2005

1 month
3 months
12 months

0.10
(0.27)
0.44
(0.28)
0.56
(0.52)

Panel B : 5 country optimization
Subperiod I : 1975-1989

1 month
3 months
12 months

0.21
(0.19)
0.35**
(0.17)
-0.10
(0.22)

-0.22
(0.16)
-0.15
(0.11)
0.14
(0.20)

-0.06
(0.12)
-0.15
(0.11)
-0.20
(0.15)

-0.06
(0.11)
-0.10
(0.15)
-0.02
(0.21)

0.13
(0.10)
0.05
(0.20)
0.18
(0.24)

-0.40***
(0.12)
-0.47***
(0.12)
-0.40*
(0.23)

-0.08
(0.08)
-0.06
(0.11)
-0.22
(0.19)

-0.20*
(0.11)
-0.11
(0.13)
-0.20
(0.25)

0.12
(0.13)
-0.15
(0.17)
-0.20
(0.32)

Suberiod II : 1990-2005

1 month
3 months
12 months

0.56***
(0.12)
0.79***
(0.13)
1.02***
(0.21)

Note. This table replicates Table 5 for two subperiods, respectively extending from 1975:7 to 1989:12 and from
1990:1 to 2005:12. Time horizons include 1, 3 and 12 months only.

Table A5
Optimal currency exposure for a value-weighted global equity portfolio: multiplecurrency case

Time horizon

Currency
Euroland Australia

Panel A : 7 country optimization
0.13
-0.09
1 month
2 months
3 months
6 months
12 months

(0.17)
0.22
(0.16)
0.22
(0.17)
0.11
(0.24)
-0.29
(0.39)

(0.10)
-0.07
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.09)
0.01
(0.14)
0.25
(0.22)

Panel B : 5 country optimization
0.29***
-0.25***
1 month
2 months
3 months
6 months
12 months

(0.11)
0.42***
(0.11)
0.46***
(0.11)
0.45***
(0.13)
0.39*
(0.20)

(0.09)
-0.25**
(0.10)
-0.24**
(0.10)
-0.20
(0.13)
0.01
(0.20)

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.70***
(0.15)
-0.73***
(0.15)
-0.76***
(0.17)
-0.60***
(0.22)
-0.49
(0.36)

-0.13*
(0.08)
-0.22***
(0.08)
-0.23**
(0.10)
-0.32**
(0.12)
-0.46**
(0.18)

0.22*
(0.13)
0.26*
(0.13)
0.30**
(0.15)
0.39**
(0.19)
0.72**
(0.30)

-0.09
(0.08)
-0.06
(0.09)
-0.03
(0.11)
0.03
(0.15)
-0.09
(0.21)

0.66***
(0.15)
0.60***
(0.16)
0.55***
(0.19)
0.39
(0.26)
0.36
(0.37)

-0.08
(0.08)
-0.05
(0.09)
-0.03
(0.11)
0.06
(0.15)
-0.08
(0.21)

0.12
(0.09)
0.04
(0.11)
-0.03
(0.14)
-0.07
(0.18)
0.00
(0.23)

-0.08
(0.07)
-0.16**
(0.08)
-0.17*
(0.09)
-0.24**
(0.11)
-0.32**
(0.16)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of stocks from all countries, with constant value
weights (reflecting the end-of-period 2005:12 weights as reported in Table 7), who chooses a vector of positions in all
available foreign currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio. In this case, the optimal currency positions do not
depend on the investor's base country.
Rows indicate the time-horizon T of the investor, columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Rows are obtained by regressing the excess return on the global equity portfolio onto the vector of all foreign currency
excess returns. All regressions include an intercept. All returns considered are at the row time-horizon.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping T -months returns, T varying from 1 month to 12 months. Standard errors are
corrected for auto-correlation due to overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A6
Optimal currency exposure for a home-biased global equity portfolio: single and
multiple currency cases

Base country

Currency
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.52***
(0.12)
0.09
(0.11)

-0.31***
(0.08)
0.16*
(0.09)
0.12
(0.09)

0.34*
(0.18)
0.31***
(0.09)
0.35***
(0.09)
0.35***
(0.10)

-0.32***
(0.11)
0.17
(0.12)
0.17
(0.11)
0.15*
(0.08)
-0.29***
(0.08)

-0.45***
(0.13)
0.25**
(0.10)
0.88***
(0.19)
0.02
(0.11)
-0.38***
(0.10)
-0.21*
(0.12)

PANEL A : Single currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

-0.40***
(0.10)
0.37***
(0.10)
0.42***
(0.10)
0.31***
(0.10)
-0.45***
(0.15)
0.25**
(0.11)
0.23**
(0.11)

-0.01
(0.10)
-0.09
(0.09)
-0.35***
(0.08)
-0.24**
(0.10)
-0.14*
(0.08)

-0.08
(0.10)
-0.42***
(0.09)
-0.30***
(0.12)
-0.71***
(0.16)

-0.29***
(0.09)
-0.10
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.09)

0.25***
(0.09)
0.22**
(0.09)

0.11
(0.11)

-0.50**
(0.21)
-0.68***
(0.17)
-0.94***
(0.21)
-0.63***
(0.21)
-0.35*
(0.19)
-0.56***
(0.19)
-0.83***
(0.17)

-0.20*
(0.11)
-0.14
(0.11)
-0.22**
(0.10)
-0.25**
(0.12)
-0.07
(0.11)
-0.20**
(0.09)
-0.22**
(0.09)

0.33*
(0.18)
0.15
(0.19)
0.31
(0.20)
0.20
(0.16)
0.37**
(0.17)
0.28
(0.18)
0.30*
(0.15)

-0.08
(0.13)
-0.24*
(0.15)
-0.23*
(0.13)
0.01
(0.12)
-0.02
(0.13)
-0.02
(0.13)
-0.03
(0.11)

Panel B : Multiple currencies at once

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

0.36
(0.23)
0.47**
(0.20)
0.30
(0.20)
0.34*
(0.17)
0.14
(0.21)
0.30
(0.21)
0.15
(0.18)

-0.08
(0.11)
-0.16
(0.12)
-0.05
(0.10)
-0.14
(0.13)
-0.12
(0.09)
-0.11
(0.10)
0.00
(0.09)

0.17
(0.22)
0.60***
(0.22)
0.83***
(0.21)
0.48**
(0.21)
0.04
(0.21)
0.30
(0.20)
0.62***
(0.19)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a home-biased portfolio of global equity. The portfolio is constructed
by assigning a 75% weight to the home country of the investor, and distributing the remaining 25% over the four other
countries according to their value weights. The investor chooses a foreign currency position to minimize the variance
of his portfolio. Panel A allows the investor to use only one foreign currency. Panel B allows her to choose a vector of
positions in all available foreign currencies. Rows indicate the base country of the investor, columns the currencies
used to manage risk.
Cells of Panel A are obtained by regressing the excess return on the row country home biased global equity portfolio
onto the excess return on the column country currency. Rows of Panel B (excluding diagonal terms) are obtained by
regressing the excess return on the row country portfolio on the vector of all foreign currency excess returns. All
regressions include an intercept. Diagonal terms in Panel B are obtained by computing the opposite of the sum of
other terms and the corresponding standard deviation.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping quarterly returns. Standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation due
to overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A7
Optimal currency exposure for single-country bond portfolios: single and multiple
currency cases

Bond market

Currency
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

0.05
(0.03)
0.04
(0.07)

-0.03
(0.04)
0.00
(0.05)
-0.07
(0.05)

-0.02
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.05)
-0.08*
(0.04)
0.01
(0.05)

0.09**
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
-0.07
(0.06)
0.10**
(0.05)
0.09**
(0.04)

0.06*
(0.04)
0.06
(0.05)
0.24***
(0.08)
0.16***
(0.05)
0.05
(0.03)
0.12***
(0.04)

Panel A : Single currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

0.04
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.05)
-0.07
(0.05)
0.05
(0.05)
0.08
(0.07)
0.22***
(0.05)
-0.21***
(0.05)

0.12**
(0.05)
0.09**
(0.04)
0.02
(0.02)
0.07**
(0.04)
0.03
(0.05)

0.14***
(0.05)
0.05
(0.03)
0.11**
(0.05)
-0.21**
(0.09)

-0.02
(0.04)
0.02
(0.04)
-0.15***
(0.05)

0.13***
(0.05)
-0.18***
(0.04)

-0.09*
(0.05)

0.01
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.08)
0.18***
(0.05)
-0.02
(0.05)
-0.03
(0.04)
0.01
(0.06)
0.19***
(0.06)

-0.01
(0.07)
-0.07
(0.13)
-0.35***
(0.11)
0.00
(0.10)
0.05
(0.08)
-0.05
(0.14)
-0.30**
(0.12)

-0.07*
(0.04)
0.00
(0.06)
-0.08
(0.06)
-0.12*
(0.06)
-0.06
(0.05)
-0.10
(0.06)
-0.10
(0.06)

0.03
(0.07)
0.03
(0.12)
-0.08
(0.11)
-0.07
(0.08)
-0.04
(0.08)
-0.04
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.09)

0.08*
(0.05)
0.06
(0.07)
-0.07
(0.08)
0.07
(0.05)
0.10**
(0.05)
-0.23***
(0.06)
0.09
(0.07)

Panel B : Multiple currencies

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

-0.10
(0.08)
-0.13
(0.15)
0.03
(0.12)
-0.05
(0.10)
-0.03
(0.08)
0.28**
(0.13)
-0.22*
(0.11)

0.07
(0.06)
0.14
(0.10)
0.36***
(0.08)
0.18*
(0.09)
0.01
(0.07)
0.13
(0.10)
0.36***
(0.09)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of long-term bonds from his own country, who
chooses a foreign currency position to minimize the variance of his portfolio. Panel A allows the investor to use only
one foreign currency. Panel B allows her to choose a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies. Rows
indicate the bond being held (as well as the base country), columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Cells of Panel A are obtained by regressing the hedged excess return to the row country bond onto the excess return
on the column country currency. Rows of Panel B (excluding diagonal terms) are obtained by regressing the excess
return to the row country stock bond onto the vector of all foreign currency excess returns. All regressions include an
intercept. Diagonal terms in Panel B are obtained by computing the opposite of the sum of other terms in the same row
and the corresponding standard deviation.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping quarterly returns. Standard errors are corrected for auto-correlation due to
overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A8
Optimal currency exposure for an equally-weighted global bond portfolio: multiplecurrency case

Time horizon

Currency
Euroland Australia

Panel A : 7 country optimization
0.02
0.00
1 month
2 months
3 months
6 months
12 months

(0.05)
-0.01
(0.07)
-0.03
(0.07)
-0.08
(0.11)
-0.26
(0.17)

(0.02)
0.03
(0.03)
0.04
(0.04)
0.13*
(0.05)
0.17
(0.09)

Panel B : 5 country optimization
-0.02
-0.03
1 month
2 months
3 months
6 months
12 months

(0.03)
-0.04
(0.04)
-0.06
(0.05)
-0.08
(0.08)
-0.14
(0.12)

(0.02)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.03)
0.11*
(0.04)
0.18*
(0.06)

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

-0.12*
(0.05)
-0.14*
(0.06)
-0.10
(0.08)
-0.05
(0.10)
0.03
(0.16)

-0.06*
(0.03)
-0.08*
(0.03)
-0.07
(0.04)
-0.10
(0.06)
-0.11
(0.08)

-0.04
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.05)
-0.03
(0.07)
0.00
(0.10)
0.11
(0.13)

-0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.04)
0.01
(0.05)
0.06
(0.07)
0.14
(0.11)

0.22*
(0.05)
0.23*
(0.05)
0.18*
(0.06)
0.05
(0.08)
-0.08
(0.11)

-0.01
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.05)
0.06
(0.07)
0.12
(0.11)

0.13*
(0.03)
0.15*
(0.04)
0.11*
(0.04)
0.01
(0.06)
-0.06
(0.07)

-0.07*
(0.03)
-0.09*
(0.03)
-0.08
(0.04)
-0.10
(0.06)
-0.10
(0.07)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of bonds from all countries, with equal weights,
who chooses a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio. In this
case, the optimal currency positions do not depend on the investor's base country.
Rows indicate the time-horizon T of the investor, columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Rows are obtained by regressing the excess return on the global bond portfolio onto the vector of all foreign currency
excess returns. All regressions include an intercept. All returns considered are at the row time-horizon.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping T -months returns, T varying from 1 month to 12 months. Standard errors
are corrected for auto-correlation due to overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A9- Subperiod analysis
Optimal currency exposure for an equally-weighted global bond portfolio: multiplecurrency case

Time horizon

Currency
Euroland Australia

Canada

Japan

Switzerland

UK

US

(0.04)
0.04
(0.05)
0.24**
(0.11)

-0.24**
(0.10)
-0.30**
(0.14)
-0.14
(0.19)

-0.11***
(0.04)
-0.16***
(0.06)
-0.25***
(0.08)

-0.06
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.08)
0.12
(0.10)

0.00
(0.03)
0.02
(0.06)
0.20**
(0.09)

0.33***
(0.09)
0.43***
(0.12)
0.13
(0.14)

(0.09)

0.00
(0.03)

-0.05
(0.06)

-0.04
(0.03)

0.04
(0.07)

0.00
(0.04)

0.12**
(0.06)

-0.17
(0.12)
-0.42**
(0.21)

0.13**
(0.06)
0.24**
(0.12)

-0.08
(0.11)
-0.14
(0.22)

-0.01
(0.05)
0.04
(0.09)

0.06
(0.11)
0.25*
(0.15)

0.04
(0.06)
0.12
(0.11)

0.04
(0.06)
-0.10
(0.10)

Panel A : 7 country optimization
Subperiod I: 1975-1989
0.08
0.01
1 month
3 months
12 months

(0.07)
-0.02
(0.10)
-0.29*
(0.16)

Subperiod 2: 1990-2005
-0.07
1 month
3 months
12 months

Panel B : 5 country optimization
Subperiod I: 1975-1989
0.02
-0.04
1 month
3 months
12 months

(0.06)
-0.03
(0.08)
-0.18
(0.12)

Subperiod 2: 1990-2005
-0.05
1 month
3 months
12 months

(0.04)
-0.13**
(0.06)
-0.16
(0.13)

(0.03)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.16*
(0.09)

-0.11**
(0.04)
-0.14**
(0.07)
-0.21***
(0.07)

-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.05)
0.20**
(0.09)

0.15***
(0.04)
0.20***
(0.06)
0.03
(0.11)

-0.01
(0.03)
0.12***
(0.04)
0.20***
(0.05)

-0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.05)
0.04
(0.08)

0.00
(0.04)
0.03
(0.06)
0.08
(0.11)

0.10**
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.05)
-0.16*
(0.10)

Note. This table considers an investor holding a portfolio composed of bonds from all countries, with equal weights,
who chooses a vector of positions in all available foreign currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio. In this
case, the optimal currency positions do not depend on the investor's base country.
Rows indicate the time-horizon T of the investor, columns the currencies used to manage risk.
Rows are obtained by regressing the excess return on the global equity portfolio onto the vector of all foreign currency
excess returns. All regressions include an intercept. All returns considered are at the row time-horizon.
Reported currency positions are the amount of dollars invested in foreign currency per dollar in the portfolio.
We run monthly regressions on overlapping T -months returns, T varying from 1 month to 12 months. Standard errors
are corrected for auto-correlation due to overlapping intervals using the Newey-West procedure.

Table A10 - Subperiod I
Optimal conditional currency exposure for an equally-weighted global portfolio:
single and multiple - currency case

Base
Currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switz.
UK

Equity
Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

-0.10
(0.94)
-0.08
(0.51)
-0.02
(0.49)
0.00
(0.07)
0.24
(0.87)
-0.05

1.00

-7.57
(7.55)
4.19
(2.58)
5.72
(3.83)
2.20
(4.81)
-8.22
(5.53)
2.77

0.11

0.10
(0.34)
0.01
(0.28)
0.04
(0.36)
0.05
(0.44)
0.11
(0.35)
0.12

0.99

1.92
(3.62)
2.75***
(0.84)
3.22
(2.92)
-0.07
(2.07)
1.74
(2.92)
-1.21

0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

(0.38)

US

Bonds

0.02
(0.34)

0.32
0.83
0.07
0.04
0.11

(3.75)
1.00

-1.88
(4.48)

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

(0.32)
0.21

0.07
(0.57)

0.61
0.54
0.03
0.03
0.06

(1.90)
1.00

-0.69
(1.99)

0.09

Note. This table reports optimal currency exposure conditional on interest rate. For each base country-currency pair, we
now let the optimal currency position vary with the log interest rate differential (interest rate of the foreign country minus
that of
The "Single Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using one currency at a time to manage risk, but still
constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients from a SUR estimation are
reported for each b
The "Multiple Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using all foreign currencies simultaenously to manage
risk, but still constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients are reported for
each base c

Table A10 - Subperiod II
Optimal conditional currency exposure for an equally-weighted global portfolio:
single and multiple - currency case

Base
Currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switz.
UK

Equity
Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

-1.24
(2.90)
-0.71
(1.79)
-1.37
(3.19)
0.10
(1.31)
-1.49
(2.56)
-0.71

0.99

8.48**
(3.62)
8.96**
(3.81)
15.96**
(6.44)
3.59
(4.53)
8.40***
(2.70)
8.14

0.23

0.04
(0.39)
0.00
(0.30)
0.04
(0.21)
-0.01
(0.15)
0.00
(0.24)
0.06

1.00

-3.32*
(1.95)
0.42
(1.50)
-0.79
(2.79)
-0.03
(2.48)
-0.37
(1.08)
-0.89

0.58

1.00
0.95
1.00
0.97
0.99

(2.34)

US

Bonds

-0.77
(1.78)

0.91
0.42
0.52
0.11
0.03

(7.16)
0.98

1.90
(4.46)

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

(0.20)
0.19

0.03
(0.20)

0.41
0.14
0.89
0.41
0.16

(3.27)
1.00

-1.84
(1.74)

0.42

Note. This table reports optimal currency exposure conditional on interest rate. For each base country-currency pair, we
now let the optimal currency position vary with the log interest rate differential (interest rate of the foreign country minus
that of
The "Single Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using one currency at a time to manage risk, but still
constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients from a SUR estimation are
reported for each b
The "Multiple Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using all foreign currencies simultaenously to manage
risk, but still constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients are reported for
each base c

Table A11
Optimal synthetic carry-trade currency exposure for equally-weighted global equity and bond portfolios
Multiple Currencies
Euroland Australia
Panel A: Stocks
0.33**
Full period
Subperiod I
Subperiod II

Subperiod II

Canada

Japan

Switz.

UK

US

Synthetic

Synthetic

(0.16)
0.22
(0.21)

-0.17*
(0.09)
-0.25
(0.18)

-0.68***
(0.17)
-0.91***
(0.22)

-0.08
(0.10)
0.00
(0.20)

0.34**
(0.15)
0.48**
(0.22)

-0.18
(0.13)
-0.23
(0.14)

0.27*
(0.14)
0.69**
(0.33)

0.27*
(0.14)
0.73*
(0.38)

-0.23**
(0.12)
-0.13
(0.14)

0.36
(0.30)

-0.14
(0.14)

-0.57***
(0.21)

-0.17*
(0.10)

0.38*
(0.23)

0.02
(0.20)

0.12
(0.21)

-0.26
(0.17)

-0.37*
(0.20)

(0.07)
0.00
(0.09)

0.02
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.07)

-0.14
(0.09)
-0.39***
(0.15)

-0.04
(0.05)
-0.10
(0.07)

0.00
(0.07)
0.08
(0.09)

-0.02
(0.06)
-0.03
(0.07)

0.20***
(0.07)
0.45***
(0.12)

0.11
(0.08)
0.24*
(0.14)

0.13***
(0.05)
0.19***
(0.07)

-0.16
(0.12)

0.12**
(0.06)

-0.10
(0.13)

0.02
(0.06)

0.07
(0.11)

0.00
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.07
(0.09)

0.07
(0.06)

Panel B: Bonds
-0.02
Full period
Subperiod I

Single currency

Note: The first eight columns of this table consider an investor holding a global, equally weighted, stock (Panel A) or bond portfolio (Panel B)
who chooses a vector of positions in available currencies to minimize the variance of his portfolio. Available currencies include all foreign
currencies as well as a synthetic currency. At each point in time, the synthetic currency return is the average of the return of holding the
currencies of the three highest interest rates countries and financing the position using the currencies of the three lowest interest rate countries.
The time t return is based on currencies chosen using time t-1 interest rates.
The last column considers the same investor now choosing an optimal position in only one currency: the synthetic currency to minimize the
variance of his portfolio.

Table A12
Standard deviations of hedged global equity and bond portfolios
Optimal hedge
Base
country

No hedge Half hedge Full hedge

Baseline

Conditional
hedging
(constrained)

Tests of significance
Synthetic
currency

Baseline vs. full
hedge

Baseline vs. no
hedge

Conditional vs.
Baseline

F-Stat P-value

F-Stat P-value

F-Stat P-value

Panel A: Full period
Equity

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

17.67
15.00
13.74
17.08
19.19
16.78
15.05

15.47
13.52
13.22
14.67
16.09
14.74
13.91

13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86
13.86

12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51
12.51

12.45
12.51
12.50
12.50
12.40
12.50
12.45

12.43
12.43
12.43
12.43
12.43
12.43
12.43

7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98
7.98

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

33.36
20.09
6.49
31.32
41.75
25.47
15.20

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

3.55
0.04
0.44
0.10
5.54
0.15
3.67

6.05
84.37
50.85
74.89
1.91
69.90
5.63

8.39
12.08
10.18
10.86
9.93
10.35
10.53

6.10
7.85
7.12
6.85
6.52
6.98
7.36

5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40
5.40

5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.21

5.21
5.19
5.21
5.21
5.21
5.19
5.20

5.19
5.19
5.19
5.19
5.19
5.19
5.19

2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76
2.76

1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23
1.23

54.14
210.02
85.17
87.07
85.62
87.03
127.73

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.42
6.57
0.03
0.30
0.40
2.53
1.68

51.99
1.08
86.00
58.52
52.89
11.23
19.53

Bonds

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

Note. This table reports the standard deviation of portfolios featuring different uses of currency for risk-management.

We present results for equally-weighted global portfolios, for equity and bonds as respectively described in Table 4 and Table 6. Within each panel, rows represent base countries and
columns represent the risk-management strategy.
"No hedge" refers to the simple equity portfolio. "Half hedge" refers to a portfolio in which half of the implicit currency risk is neutralized. "Full hedge" refers to a portfolio in which all of the
implicit currency risk is neutralized. "Optimal hedge"
Reported standard deviations are annualized, and measured in percentage points.
All results presented are computed considering returns at a quarterly horizon.

Table A12 (continued)
Standard deviations of hedged global equity and bond portfolios
Optimal hedge
Base
country

No hedge Half hedge Full hedge

Baseline

Conditional
hedging
(constrained)

Tests of significance
Synthetic
currency

Baseline vs. full
hedge

Baseline vs. no
hedge

Conditional vs.
Baseline

F-Stat P-value

F-Stat P-value

F-Stat P-value

Panel B: Subperiod I
Equity

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

16.79
16.49
15.31
16.53
18.46
16.85
16.16

14.89
14.09
13.90
14.42
15.47
14.51
14.40

13.74
13.74
13.74
13.74
13.74
13.74
13.74

13.12
13.12
13.12
13.12
13.12
13.12
13.12

13.08
13.03
13.07
13.11
13.04
13.09
13.11

12.85
12.85
12.85
12.85
12.85
12.85
12.85

2.84
2.84
2.84
2.84
2.84
2.84
2.84

1.18
1.18
1.18
1.18
1.18
1.18
1.18

14.87
14.33
6.14
16.94
20.15
11.63
8.04

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
2.64
2.23
0.21
2.21
0.55
0.18

31.76
10.63
13.74
64.78
13.94
46.13
67.56

8.84
13.15
11.27
9.77
10.50
11.63
11.75

6.48
8.45
7.85
6.40
6.80
7.65
8.23

5.76
5.76
5.76
5.76
5.76
5.76
5.76

5.20
5.20
5.20
5.20
5.20
5.20
5.20

5.19
5.10
5.16
5.20
5.19
5.19
5.20

5.13
5.13
5.13
5.13
5.13
5.13
5.13

3.51
3.51
3.51
3.51
3.51
3.51
3.51

0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27

34.23
104.09
48.74
38.76
50.64
68.36
67.75

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.28
10.58
1.22
0.00
0.35
0.41
0.12

59.67
0.14
27.08
97.45
55.31
52.45
72.89

Panel C: Subperiod II
Equity
Euroland
18.38
Australia
13.46
Canada
12.07
Japan
17.72
Switzerland
19.71
UK
16.46
US
13.94

15.94
12.92
12.50
15.02
16.54
14.80
13.41

13.92
13.92
13.92
13.92
13.92
13.92
13.92

11.25
11.25
11.25
11.25
11.25
11.25
11.25

11.16
11.12
11.04
11.24
11.09
11.21
11.25

11.14
11.14
11.14
11.14
11.14
11.14
11.14

10.70
10.70
10.70
10.70
10.70
10.70
10.70

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

37.18
9.92
3.34
32.12
44.78
28.00
9.98

0.00
0.00
0.38
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5.49
5.54
6.15
0.63
9.66
1.29
0.18

2.02
1.97
1.41
42.94
0.22
25.69
67.05

Bonds
Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

5.42
7.23
6.24
7.06
5.93
6.00
6.32

4.82
4.82
4.82
4.82
4.82
4.82
4.82

4.67
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.67

4.64
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.66

4.66
4.66
4.66
4.66
4.66
4.66
4.66

1.88
1.88
1.88
1.88
1.88
1.88
1.88

8.58
8.58
8.58
8.58
8.58
8.58
8.58

45.10
159.78
67.75
78.46
75.94
74.16
100.90

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

2.91
0.08
0.08
0.00
0.12
0.07
1.11

8.98
77.85
77.78
99.12
73.43
78.60
29.25

Bonds

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

7.69
11.07
9.03
11.54
9.07
8.68
9.21

Note. This table reports the standard deviation of portfolios featuring different uses of currency for risk-management.
We present results for equally-weighted global portfolios, for equity and bonds as respectively described in Table 4 and Table 6. Within each panel, rows represent base countries and
columns represent the risk-management strategy.

"No hedge" refers to the simple equity portfolio. "Half hedge" refers to a portfolio in which half of the implicit currency risk is neutralized. "Full hedge" refers to a portfolio in which all of the
implicit currency risk is neutralized. "Optimal hedge"
Reported standard deviations are annualized, and measured in percentage points.
All results presented are computed considering returns at a quarterly horizon.

Table A13
Optimal conditional currency exposure for an equally-weighted global portfolio:
single and multiple - currency case using the real interest rate differential

Base
Currency

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switz.
UK

Equity
Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Single Currency

Multiple Currencies

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

Slope

P-Value

-0.23
(0.62)
0.00
(0.33)
0.03
(0.37)
-0.05
(0.17)
-0.09
(0.48)
0.01

1.00

0.73
(2.22)
0.41
(0.68)
-2.60
(1.98)
-0.64
(1.45)
0.48
(1.86)
2.59***

0.38

0.02
0.11
0.00
0.07
-0.02
0.12
-0.02
0.09
0.00
0.10
0.02

1.00

-0.24
0.94
-0.21
0.28
-1.55
0.88
-0.27
0.49
-1.01
0.73
0.17

0.09

1.00
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00

(0.36)

US

Bonds

0.05
(0.34)

0.10
0.06
0.06
0.37
0.63

(0.97)
1.00

2.17
(2.22)

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

0.07
0.18

0.00
0.11

0.20
0.19
0.00
0.66
0.00

0.43
1.00

0.56
0.98

0.49

Note. This table reports optimal currency exposure conditional on real interest rate. For each base country-currency pair,
we now let the optimal currency position vary with the log real interest rate differential (ex-post real interest rate of the
foreign country minus that of the base country). Yet, we impose the constraints that the slopes of the optimal positions
with respect to the interest rate differential be equal across foreign currencies.
The "Single Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using one currency at a time to manage risk, but still
constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients from a SUR estimation are
reported for each base country, followed by the P-value of a test of the constraint. A P-value of x% indicates that the
constraint can be rejected at the x% level.
The "Multiple Currency" columns consider the case of an investor using all foreign currencies simultaenously to manage
risk, but still constrain the slopes to be the same across foreign currencies. Resulting slope coefficients are reported for
each base country, followed by the P-value of a test of the constraint. A P-value of x% indicates that the constraint can be
rejected at the x% level.

Table A14
Sharpe ratios
Optimal hedge
Base
country

No hedge Half hedge Full hedge

Baseline

Conditional
hedging
(constrained)

Synthetic
currency

Panel A: Full period
Equity

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

0.41
0.47
0.48
0.42
0.45
0.38
0.53

0.46
0.50
0.50
0.47
0.49
0.45
0.52

0.51
0.47
0.47
0.48
0.52
0.49
0.48

0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.48

0.51
0.47
0.49
0.49
0.53
0.48
0.55

0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54

0.31
0.25
0.26
0.26
0.39
0.20
0.36

0.41
0.35
0.36
0.38
0.48
0.32
0.43

0.44
0.46
0.45
0.43
0.44
0.45
0.46

0.43
0.44
0.43
0.43
0.44
0.43
0.44

0.45
0.41
0.44
0.46
0.45
0.51
0.49

0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50

Bonds

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

Note. Table 10 reports Sharpe ratios of portfolios featuring different uses of currency for risk-management.
Please refer to Table 9 for a detailed description of these portfolios.
The Sharpe Ratio of each portfolio is calculated as the ratio of the log mean gross return on the portfolio divided
by the standard deviation of the log return on the portfolio. Please see Appendix for a detailed description of the
calculation of the Sharpe Ratio.

All results presented are computed considering returns at a quarterly horizon.

Table 14 (continued)
Sharpe ratios
Optimal hedge
Base
country

No hedge Half hedge Full hedge

Baseline

Conditional
hedging
(constrained)

Synthetic
currency

Panel B: Subperiod I
Equity

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

0.51
0.61
0.54
0.41
0.55
0.52
0.60

0.57
0.64
0.59
0.52
0.60
0.59
0.62

0.61
0.59
0.59
0.59
0.62
0.60
0.61

0.53
0.54
0.53
0.53
0.54
0.53
0.54

0.49
0.56
0.63
0.58
0.41
0.59
0.50

0.73
0.73
0.73
0.72
0.73
0.73
0.73

0.14
0.23
0.12
-0.04
0.25
0.14
0.22

0.18
0.25
0.16
0.04
0.27
0.18
0.23

0.19
0.20
0.20
0.16
0.18
0.19
0.22

0.05
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.06
0.05

0.08
0.08
0.19
0.04
0.13
-0.01
0.02

0.20
0.21
0.20
0.19
0.21
0.21
0.20

0.32
0.32
0.42
0.43
0.37
0.26
0.45

0.37
0.36
0.40
0.43
0.40
0.33
0.43

0.41
0.35
0.35
0.39
0.42
0.39
0.37

0.39
0.39
0.39
0.40
0.40
0.39
0.40

0.46
0.51
0.50
0.44
0.48
0.45
0.43

0.34
0.33
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.33
0.34

Euroland
Australia

0.50
0.27

0.68
0.47

0.74
0.77

0.80
0.80

0.74
0.81

0.84
0.84

Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK

0.42

0.60

0.76

0.80

0.79

0.84

0.50
0.55
0.28
0.53

0.67
0.72
0.50
0.68

0.75
0.75
0.75
0.76

0.81
0.81
0.79
0.81

0.80
0.79
0.78
0.73

0.85
0.84
0.84
0.85

Bonds

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US

Panel C: Subperiod II
Equity

Euroland
Australia
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
UK
US
Bonds

US

