NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN WORKPLACE SEGREGATION IN THE UNITED STATES BETWEEN 1990 AND 2000:
EVIDENCE FROM MATCHED EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE DATA
Judith Hellerstein
David Neumark
Melissa McInerney
Working Paper 13080
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13080

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

This research was funded by NICHD grant R01HD042806. We also thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
for its generous support. We are grateful to Ron Jarmin and Julia Lane for helpful comments. The
analysis and results presented in this paper are attributable to the authors and do not necessarily reflect
concurrence by the Center for Economics Studies, Bureau of the Census, or by the Sloan Foundation.
This paper has undergone a more limited review by the Census Bureau than its official publications.
It has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Changes in Workplace Segregation in the United States between 1990 and 2000: Evidence
from Matched Employer-Employee Data
Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney
NBER Working Paper No. 13080
May 2007
JEL No. J15,J16,J71
ABSTRACT
We present evidence on changes in workplace segregation by education, race, ethnicity, and sex, from
1990 to 2000. The evidence indicates that racial and ethnic segregation at the workplace level remained
quite pervasive in 2000. At the same time, there was fairly substantial segregation by skill, as measured
by education. Putting together the 1990 and 2000 data, we find no evidence of declines in workplace
segregation by race and ethnicity; indeed, black-white segregation increased. Over this decade, segregation
by education also increased. In contrast, workplace segregation by sex fell over the decade, and would
have fallen by more had the services industry - a heavily female industry in which sex segregation
is relatively high - not experienced rapid employment growth.
Judith Hellerstein
Department of Economics
Tydings Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hellerst@econ.umd.edu
David Neumark
Department of Economics
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER and IZA
dneumark@uci.edu

Melissa McInerney
Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau
4700 Silver Hill Road, Stop 6300
Washington, DC 20233
and University of Maryland
melissa.powell.mcinerney@census.gov

I. Introduction
In recent work we have constructed and described the 1990 Decennial Employer-Employee
Dataset (DEED) based on matching records in the 1990 Decennial Census of Population to a Census
Bureau list of most business establishments in the United States. We have used the 1990 DEED to
estimate earnings and productivity differentials in manufacturing by demographic and skill group
(Hellerstein and Neumark, 2004), to study the influence of language skills on workplace segregation and
wages (Hellerstein and Neumark, 2003), to document the extent of workplace segregation by race and
ethnicity and to assess the contribution of residential segregation as well as skill to this segregation
(Hellerstein and Neumark, forthcoming).
We just recently completed the construction of the 2000 Beta-DEED1 (based on the 2000 Census
of Population). In this paper, we use the 1990 and 2000 DEEDs to measure changes in establishmentlevel workplace segregation over the intervening decade, an analysis for which the DEEDs are uniquely
well-suited. We study segregation by education, by race and Hispanic ethnicity, and by sex. With
respect to segregation by race and ethnicity, this work is complementary to a flurry of research studying
changes in residential segregation from 1990 to 2000 (Glaeser and Vigdor, 2001; Iceland and Weinberg,
2002; and McConville et al., 2001). As we have suggested elsewhere (and see Estlund, 2003), however,
workplace segregation may be far more salient for interactions between racial and ethnic groups than is
residential segregation. The boundaries used in studying residential segregation may not capture social
interactions, and are to some extent explicitly drawn to accentuate segregation among different groups;
for example, Census tract boundaries are often generated in order to ensure that the tracts are “as
homogeneous as possible with respect to population characteristics, economic status, and living

1

The 2000 Beta-DEED is an internal U.S. Census Bureau dataset that will ultimately become part of an integrated
matched employer-employee database at the U.S. Census Bureau. The new integrated data will have characteristics
of the Decennial Employer-Employee Database (DEED) and the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics
Program (LEHD). Hereafter, the 2000 Beta-DEED will be referred to as the 2000 DEED.
1

conditions.”2 In contrast, workplaces – specifically establishments – are units of observation that are
generated by economic forces and in which people clearly do interact in a variety of ways, including
work, social activity, labor market networks, etc. Thus, while it is more difficult to study workplace
segregation because of data constraints, measuring workplace segregation may be more useful than
measuring residential segregation, as traditionally defined, for describing the interactions that arise in
society between different groups in the population.3 Of course similar arguments to those about
workplaces could be made about other settings, such as schools, religious institutions, etc. (e.g., James
and Taeuber, 1985), but data constraints truly prevent saying much of anything about segregation along
these lines.
Segregation is potentially important for a number of reasons. Aside from general social issues
regarding integration between different groups, labor market segregation by race and ethnicity accounts –
at least in a statistical sense – for a sizable share of wage gaps between white males and other
demographic groups (e.g., Carrington and Troske, 1998a; Bayard et al., 1999; King, 1992; Watts, 1995;
Higgs, 1977), and the same is true of labor market segregation by sex (Bayard et al., 2003; Blau, 1977;
and Groshen, 1991).4 There has generally been less attention paid to segregation by education, but in our
earlier work (Hellerstein and Neumark, forthcoming), we documented rather extensive segregation by
education (as well as language, which we do not consider in the present paper) in the 1990 DEED.

2

U.S. Census Bureau, www.census.gov/geo/www/GARM/Ch10GARM.pdf (viewed April 27, 2005). Echenique
and Fryer (2005) develop a segregation index that relies much less heavily on ad-hoc definitions of geographical
boundaries.
3

Moreover, industry code, the closest proxy in public-use data to an establishment identifier, is a very crude
measure to use to examine segregation. For example, we calculate that racial and ethnic segregation at the threedigit industry level in the DEED is typically on the order of one-third as large as the establishment-level segregation
we document below.

4

This segregation may occur along industry and occupation lines, as well as at the more detailed level of the
establishment or job cell (occupations within establishments). For example, Bayard et al. (1999) found that, for
men, job cell segregation by race accounts for about half of the black-white wage gap and a larger share of the
Hispanic-white wage gap.
2

Measuring changes in workplace segregation along these lines is of interest for a number of
reasons. First, although much attention has been paid to changes in residential segregation – of which
there is evidence of modest declines from 1990 to 2000 – changes in workplace segregation may be more
salient to understanding changing social forces. Second, aside from the relative importance of workplace
and residential segregation, in the United States there are extensive efforts to reduce labor market
discrimination, and therefore measuring changes in workplace segregation is one indicator of the success
of these efforts. Finally, increases in the productivity (and pay) of more-educated workers relative to
less-educated workers may have led to increased segregation by skill (e.g., Kremer and Maskin, 1996).5
A comparison of education segregation between 1990 and 2000 possibly can shed some light on this
hypothesis, although relatively more of the run-up in wage inequality occurred prior to 1990 (Autor et al.,
2005).
We measure changes in segregation using the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Employer-Employee
Databases (DEEDs). For each year, the DEED is based on matching records in the Decennial Census of
Population for that year to a Census Bureau list of most business establishments in the United States. The
matching yields data on multiple workers matched to establishments, providing the means to measure
workplace segregation (and changes therein) in the United States based on a large, fairly representative
data set. In addition, the data from the Decennial Census of Population provides the necessary
information on race, ethnicity, etc. Thus, data from the 1990 and 2000 DEEDs provides unparalleled
opportunities to study changes in workplace segregation by skill, race, ethnicity, and sex.6

For example, let the production function be f(L1, L2) = L1cL2d, with d > c. Assume that there are two types of
workers: unskilled workers (L1) with labor input equal to one efficiency unit, and skilled workers (L2) with
efficiency units of q > 1. Kremer and Maskin show that for low q, it is optimal for unskilled and skilled workers to
work together, but above a certain threshold of q (that is, a certain amount of skill inequality), the equilibrium will
reverse, and workers will be sorted across firms according to skill. Thus, as the returns to education rise (q
increases), there may be increased segregation by education.
5

6

Carrington and Troske (1998a, 1998b) use data sets much more limited in scope than the ones we use here to
examine workplace segregation by race and sex. In general, the paucity of research on workplace segregation is
presumably a function of the lack of data linking workers to establishments.
3

II. The 1990 and 2000 DEEDs
The analysis in this paper is based on the 1990 and 2000 DEEDs, which we have created at the
Center for Economic Studies at the U.S. Bureau of the Census. We have described the construction of the
1990 DEED in detail elsewhere (in particular, Hellerstein and Neumark, 2003). The construction of the
2000 DEED follows the same procedures, and our detailed investigation of the 2000 data thus far has
indicated that no new serious problems arise that require different methods for 2000. Thus, in this section
we simply provide a quick overview of the construction of the datasets.
The DEED for each year is formed by matching workers to establishments. The workers are
drawn from the Sample Edited Detail File (SEDF), which contains all individual responses to the
Decennial Census of Population one-in-six Long Form. The establishments are drawn from the Census
Bureau’s Business Register list (BR), formerly known as the Standard Statistical Establishment List or
SSEL; the BR is a database containing information for all business establishments operating in the United
States in each year, which is continuously updated (see Jarmin and Miranda, 2002).
Households receiving the Decennial Census Long Form were asked to report the name and
address of the employer in the previous week for each employed member of the household. The file
containing this employer name and address information is referred to as the “Write-In” file, which
contains the information written on the questionnaires by Long-Form respondents, but not actually
captured in the SEDF. The BR is a list of all business establishments with one or more employees
operating in the United States. The Census Bureau uses the BR as a sampling frame for its Economic
Censuses and Surveys, and continuously updates the information it contains. The BR contains the name
and address of each establishment, geographic codes based on its location, its four-digit SIC code, and an
identifier that allows the establishment to be linked to other establishments that are part of the same
enterprise, and to other Census Bureau establishment- or firm-level data sets that contain more detailed
employer characteristics. We can therefore use employer names and addresses for each worker in the
Write-In file to match the Write-In file to the BR. Because the name and address information on the
Write-In file is also available for virtually all employers in the BR, nearly all of the establishments in the
4

BR that are classified as “active” by the Census Bureau are available for matching. Finally, because both
the Write-In file and the SEDF contain identical sets of unique individual identifiers, we can use these
identifiers to link the Write-In file to the SEDF. Thus, this procedure yields a very large data set with
workers matched to their establishments, along with all of the information on workers from the SEDF.
Matching workers and establishments is a difficult task, because we would not expect employers’
names and addresses to be recorded identically on the two files. To match workers and establishments
based on the Write-In file, we use MatchWare – a specialized record linkage program. MatchWare is
comprised of two parts: a name and address standardization mechanism (AutoStan); and a matching
system (AutoMatch). This software has been used previously to link various Census Bureau data sets
(Foster et al., 1998). Our method to link records using MatchWare involves two basic steps. The first
step is to use AutoStan to standardize employer names and addresses across the Write-In file and the BR.
Standardization of addresses in the establishment and worker files helps to eliminate differences in how
data are reported. The standardization software considers a wide variety of different ways that common
address and business terms can be written, and converts each to a single standard form.
Once the software standardizes the business names and addresses, each item is parsed into
components. The value of parsing the addresses into multiple pieces is that we can match on various
combinations of these components. We supplemented the AutoStan software by creating an acronym for
each company name, and added this variable to the list of matching components.7
The second step of the matching process is to select and implement the matching specifications.
The AutoMatch software uses a probabilistic matching algorithm that accounts for missing information,
misspellings, and even inaccurate information. This software also permits users to control which
matching variables to use, how heavily to weight each matching variable, and how similar two addresses
must be in order to constitute a match. AutoMatch is designed to compare match criteria in a succession
of “passes” through the data. Each pass is comprised of “Block” and “Match” statements. The Block

7

For 2000, we also added standard acronyms or abbreviations for cities, such as NY or NYC and LA. However,
this added a negligible number of additional matches, so we did not go back and do the same for the 1990 DEED.
5

statements list the variables that must match exactly in that pass in order for a record pair to be linked. In
each pass, a worker record from the Write-In file is a candidate for linkage only if the Block variables
agree completely with the set of designated Block variables on analogous establishment records in the
BR. The Match statements contain a set of additional variables from each record to be compared. These
variables need not agree completely for records to be linked, but are assigned weights based on their
value and reliability.
For example, we might assign “employer name” and “city name” as Block variables, and assign
“street name” and “house number” as Match variables. In this case, AutoMatch compares a worker
record only to those establishment records with the same employer name and city name. All employer
records meeting these criteria are then weighted by whether and how closely they agree with the worker
record on the street name and house number Match specifications. The algorithm applies greater weights
to items that appear infrequently. The employer record with the highest weight will be linked to the
worker record conditional on the weight being above some chosen minimum. Worker records that cannot
be matched to employer records based on the Block and Match criteria are considered residuals and we
attempt to match these records on subsequent passes using different criteria.
It is clear that different Block and Match specifications may produce different sets of matches.
Matching criteria should be broad enough to cover as many potential matches as possible, but narrow
enough to ensure that only matches that are correct with a high probability are linked.8 Because the
AutoMatch algorithm is not exact there is always a range of quality of matches, and we therefore are
cautious in accepting linked record pairs. Our general strategy is to impose the most stringent criteria in
the earliest passes, and to loosen the criteria in subsequent passes, while always maintaining criteria that

8

One might also considering trying to impute matches where this strategy fails, by matching based on imputed
place of work instead of information in the Write-In file. However, this turns out to be problematic. Even imputing
place of work at the level of the census tract is not easy. For example, there are workers in the SEDF that we are
able to match to an employer in the DEED using name and address information whose place of work code actually
is allocated in the SEDF. For these workers, the allocated census tract in the SEDF disagrees with the BR census
tract of the matched establishment in more than half the cases.
6

err on the side of avoiding false matches. We choose matching algorithms based on substantial
experimentation and visual inspection of many thousands of records.
The final result is an extremely large data set, for each year, of workers matched to their
establishment of employment. The 1990 DEED consists of information on 3.29 million workers matched
to around 972,000 establishments, accounting for 27.1 percent of workers in the SEDF and 18.6 percent
of establishments in the BR. The 2000 DEED consists of information on 4.09 million workers matched to
around 1.28 million establishments, accounting for 29.1 percent of workers in the SEDF and 22.6 percent
of establishments in the BR.9
In Table 1 we provide descriptive statistics for the matched workers from the DEED as compared
to the SEDF. Columns (1) and (4) report summary statistics for the SEDF for the sample of workers who
were eligible to be matched to their establishments, for 1990 and 2000 respectively. Columns (2) and (5)
report summary statistics for the full DEED sample. For both years, the means of the demographic
variables in the full DEED are quite close to the means in the SEDF across most dimensions. For
example, for the 1990 data, female workers comprise 46 percent of the SEDF and 47 percent of the full
DEED, and the number of children (for women) is 0.75 in the SEDF and 0.73 in the DEED. Nonetheless,
there are cases of somewhat larger differences. Race and ethnic differences are larger in both years; for
example, in 2000 the percent white is 78 in the SEDF versus 83 in the DEED, and correspondingly the
share black (and also Hispanic) is lower in the DEED. In addition, the percent female in the 2000 data is
46 in the SEDF, but 50 in the DEED; this is different than the discrepancy in 1990 where the percent
female is 46 in the SEDF and only a slightly higher 47 percent in the DEED.

9

For both the DEED and SEDF we have excluded individuals as follows: with missing wages; who did not work in
the year prior to the survey year or in the reference week for the Long Form of the Census; who did not report
positive hourly wages; who did not work in one of the fifty states or the District of Columbia (whether or not the
place of work was imputed); who were self-employed; who were not classified in a state of residence; or who were
employed in an industry that was considered “out-of-scope” in the BR. (Out-of-scope industries do not fall under
the purview of Census Bureau surveys. They include many agricultural industries, urban transit, the U.S. Postal
Service, private households, schools and universities, labor unions, religious and membership organizations, and
government/public administration. The Census Bureau does not validate the quality of BR data for businesses in
out-of-scope industries.)
7

Part of the explanation for differences in racial and ethnic representation that result from the
matching process is that there are many individuals who meet our sample inclusion criteria but for whom
the quality of the business address information in the Write-In file is poor, and race and ethnic differences
in reporting account for part of the differences in representation. We suspect that the differences in
business address information partially reflect weaker labor market attachment among minorities,
suggesting that the segregation results we obtain might best be interpreted as measuring the extent of
segregation among workers who have relatively high labor force attachment and high attachment to their
employers.
The last eight rows of the table report on the industry distribution of workers. We do find some
overrepresentation of workers in manufacturing – more so in 1990 when manufacturing comprised a
larger fraction of workers to begin with in the SEDF. The reasons for this are given below when we
discuss establishment-level data.
Columns (3) and (6) report summary statistics for the workers in the DEED who comprise the
sample from which we calculate segregation measures. The sample size reductions relative to columns
(2) and (5) arise for two reasons. First, for reasons explained in the methods section, we exclude workers
who do not live and work in the same Metropolitan Statistical Area/Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA/PMSA). Second, we exclude workers who are the only workers matched to their establishments,
as there are methodological advantages to studying segregation in establishments where we observe at
least two workers. The latter restriction effectively causes us to restrict the sample to workers in larger
establishments, which is the main reason why some of the descriptive statistics are slightly different
between the second and third columns (for example, slightly higher wages and earnings in columns (3)
and (6)).
In addition to comparing worker-based means, it is useful to examine the similarities across
establishments in the BR and the DEED for each year. Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for
establishments in each data set. As column (1) indicates, there are 5,237,592 establishments in the 1990
BR, and of these 972,436 (18.6 percent) also appear in the full DEED for 1990, as reported in column (2).
8

For 2000, the percentage in the full DEED is somewhat higher (22.6). Because only one in six workers
are sent Decennial Census Long Forms, it is more likely that large establishments will be included in the
DEED. One can see evidence of the bias toward larger employers by comparing the means across data
sets for total employment. (This bias presumably also influences the distribution of workers and
establishments across industries, where, for example, the DEEDs over-represent workers in
manufacturing establishments.) On average, establishments in the BRs have 18-19 employees, while the
average in the DEEDs is 49-53 workers. The distributions of establishments across industries in the
DEED relative to the BR are similar to those for workers in the worker sample. In columns (3) and (6)
we report descriptive statistics for establishments in the restricted DEEDs, corresponding to the sample of
workers in columns (3) and (6) of Table 1. In general, the summary statistics are quite similar between
columns (2) and (3) and between columns (5) and (6), with an unsurprising right shift in the size
distribution of establishments. Overall, however, the DEED samples are far more representative than
previous detailed matched data sets for the United States constructed using just the SEDF and the BR (see
Hellerstein and Neumark, 2003).10
Because the DEED captures larger establishments and because our sample restrictions accentuate
this, our analysis focuses on larger establishments. So, for example, the first quartile of the establishment
size distribution for workers in our analysis is approximately 41 workers in 1990 and 36 in 2000, whereas
the first quartile of the employment-weighted size distribution of all establishments in the BR for each
year is 19 in 1990 and 21 in 2001.11 Although we acknowledge that it would be nice to be able to
measure segregation in all establishments, this is not the data set with which to do that convincingly.
Nonetheless, most legislation aimed at combating discrimination is directed at larger establishments;

10

These earlier matched data sets—the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database (WECD), which covers
manufacturing only, and the New Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database (NWECD), which covers all
industries—were smaller and less representative because the matching algorithm used could only be applied to
establishments that were unique in a cell defined by detailed geographic information and industry classification.
Thus, for example, manufacturing establishments were much more likely to occupy their own industry-location cell
than were retail establishments.

11

In order to adhere to U.S. Census Bureau confidentiality rules, these are “pseudo quartiles” based on averages of
observations symmetrically distributed around the actual quartiles.
9

EEOC laws cover employers with 15 or more workers and affirmative action rules for federal contractors
cover employers with 50 or more workers. Since policy has been directed at larger establishments,
examining the extent of and changes in workplace segregation in larger establishments is important.

III. Methods
We focus our analysis on a measure of segregation that is based on the percentages of workers in
an individual’s establishment, or workplace, in different demographic groups. Consider for clarity
measuring segregation between white and Hispanic workers. For each white or Hispanic worker in our
sample, we compute the percentage of Hispanic workers with which that worker works, excluding the
worker him or herself. Because we exclude an individual’s own ethnicity in this calculation, our analysis
of segregation is conducted on establishments where we observe at least two workers.
We then average these percentages separately for white workers in our sample and for Hispanic
workers. These averages are segregation measures commonly used in the sociology literature. The
average percentage of co-workers in Hispanic workers’ establishments who are Hispanic, denoted HH, is
called the “isolation index,” and the average percentage of co-workers in white workers’ establishments
who are Hispanic, denoted WH, is called the “exposure index.” We focus more on a third measure, the
difference between these, or
CW = HH − WH,
as a measure of “co-worker segregation.” CW measures the extent to which Hispanics are more likely
than are whites to work with other Hispanics. For example, if Hispanics and whites are perfectly
segregated, then HH equals 100, WH is zero, and CW equals 100.12
We first report observed segregation, which is simply the sample mean of the segregation
measure across workers. We denote this measure by appending an ‘O’ superscript to the co-worker
segregation measure B i.e., CWO. One important point that is often overlooked in research on segregation,

12 We

could equivalently define the percentages of white workers with which Hispanic or white workers work, HW
and WW, which would simply be 100 minus these percentages, and CW’ = WW − HW.
10

however, is that some segregation occurs even if workers are assigned randomly to establishments, and
we are presumably most interested in the segregation that occurs systematically – i.e., that which is
greater than would be expected to result from randomness (Carrington and Troske, 1997). Rather than
considering all deviations from proportional representation across establishments as an “outcome” or
“behavior” to be explained, we subtract from our measured segregation the segregation that would occur
by chance if workers were distributed randomly across establishments, using Monte Carlo simulations to
generate measures of randomly occurring segregation. We denote this random segregation CWR (and
similarly for the isolation and exposure indexes), and then focus on the difference {CWO − CWR}, which
measures segregation above and beyond that which occurs randomly.13 Although theoretically one can
have CWO < CWR (that is, there is less segregation than would be generated randomly), or CWO > CWR,
only the latter occurs in practice in our data. Again following Carrington and Troske, we scale this
difference by the maximum segregation that can occur, or {100 − CWR}, which we refer to as “effective
segregation.” Thus, the effective segregation measure is:
[{CWO − CWR}/{100 − CWR}]·100,
which measures the share of the maximum possible segregation that is actually observed.
There are two reasons that we exclude the worker’s own ethnicity when computing the fraction of
Hispanics with which he or she works. First, this ensures that, in large samples of workers, if workers are
randomly allocated across establishments, HH and WH both equal the share Hispanic in the population.
That is, in the case of random allocation we expect to have CWR equal to 0. This is a natural scaling to
use, and stands in contrast to what happens when the worker is included in the calculations, where CWR
will exceed 0 because Hispanic workers are treated as working with “themselves.” Second, and perhaps
more important, when the own worker is excluded our segregation measures are invariant to the sizes of
establishments studied. To see this in a couple of simple examples, first consider a simple case of an

13

This distinction between comparing measured segregation to a no-segregation ideal or segregation that is
generated by randomness is discussed in other work (see, e.g., Cortese et al., 1976; Winship, 1977; Boisso et al.,
1994; and Carrington and Troske, 1997). Of course, to build CWR we also compute the isolation and exposure
indexes that would be generated in the case of random allocation of workers, and we report these as well.
11

economy with equal numbers of Hispanics and whites all working in two-person establishments.
Establishments can therefore be represented as HH (for two Hispanic workers), HW, or WW. With
random allocation, 1/4 of establishments are HH, 1/2 are WH, and 1/4 are WW. Thus, excluding the own
worker, HHR = (1/2)·1 + (1/2)·0 = 1/2, WHR = (1/2)·1 + (1/2)·0 = 1/2, and CWR = 0.14 If we count the
individual, then HHR = (1/2)·1 + (1/2)·(1/2) = 3/4, WHR = (1/2)·(1/2) + (1/2)·0 = 1/4, and CWR = 1/2. With
three-worker establishments and random allocation, 1/8 of establishments are HHH (employing 1/4 of
Hispanic workers), 1/8 are WWW (employing 1/4 of white workers), 3/8 are HWW (employing 1/4 of
Hispanic and 1/2 of white workers), and 3/8 are HHW (employing 1/2 of Hispanic and 1/4 of white
workers). Going through the same type of calculation as above, if we include the worker, then HHR =
(1/4)·1 + (1/4)·(1/3) + (1/2)·(2/3) = 2/3, WHR = (1/4)·0 + (1/4)·(2/3) + (1/2)·(1/3) = 1/3 and CWR = 1/3,
whereas if we exclude the worker we again get HHR = 1/2, WHR = 1/2, and CWR = 0.
Although we just argued that in the case of random allocation Hispanics and whites should work
with equal percentages of Hispanic co-workers on average (so that CWR is zero), this result may not hold
in parts of our analysis for two reasons. First, this is a large-sample result, and although the baseline
sample size in our data set is large, the samples that we use to calculate some of our segregation measures
are not necessarily large enough to generate this asymptotic result. Second, some of our segregation
measures are calculated conditional on geography (in particular, MSA/PMSA of residence), for reasons
explained below. When we condition on geography, we calculate the extent of segregation that would be
expected if workers were randomly allocated across establishments within a geographic area. If
Hispanics and whites are not evenly distributed across geographic borders, random allocation of workers
within geographical areas still will yield the result that Hispanics are more likely to have Hispanic coworkers than are white workers, because for example, more Hispanics will come from areas where both
whites and Hispanics work with a high share of Hispanic workers. For these reasons, in order to

14

For the first calculation, for example, 1/2 of Hispanic workers are in HH establishments, for which the share
Hispanic is 1, and 1/2 are in WH establishments, for which the share Hispanic (excluding the worker) is 0.
12

determine how much segregation would occur randomly, in all cases we conduct Monte Carlo simulations
of the extent of segregation that would occur with random allocation of workers.
There are, of course, other possible segregation measures, such as the traditional Duncan index
(Duncan and Duncan, 1955) or the Gini coefficient. We prefer the co-worker segregation measure (CW)
to these other measures for two reasons. First, the Duncan and Gini measures are scale invariant,
meaning that they are insensitive to the proportions of each group in the workforce. For example, if the
number of Hispanics doubles, but they are allocated to establishments in the same proportion as the
original distribution, the Duncan and Gini indexes are unchanged. However, except in establishments
that are perfectly segregated, the doubling of Hispanics leads each Hispanic worker in the sample to work
with a larger percentage of Hispanic co-workers, and also each white worker to work with more
Hispanics. In general, this implies that both the isolation and exposure indexes (HH and WH,
respectively), will increase. But the isolation index will increase by more, since establishments with more
Hispanics to begin with will have larger increases in the number of Hispanic workers, and hence CW will
increase.15 In our view, this kind of increase in the number of Hispanic workers should be characterized
as an increase in segregation. Second, these alternative segregation measures are also sensitive to the
number of matched workers in an establishment (the same issue outlined above), and because they are
measures that are calculated at only the establishment-level – unlike the co-worker segregation measure
we use – there is no conceptual parallel to excluding the own worker from the calculation.16

15 More

generally, WH will also increase, but not by as much as HH, and CW will therefore rise. For perhaps the
simplest such case, start with four establishments as follows: one HHH, one HHW, one HWW, and one WWW. In
this case HH = 2/3, WH = 1/3, and CW = 1/3. Doubling the number of Hispanics and allocating them proportionally,
we get the following four establishments: HHHHHH, HHHHW, WWHH, and WWW: In this case HH rises to
29/36 (increasing by 5/36), WH rises to 14/36 (increasing by 2/36), and CW rises to 15/36 (increasing by 3/36).
16 We

believe this explains why, in Carrington and Troske (1998a, Table 3), where there are small samples of
workers within establishments, the random Gini indexes are often extremely high.
13

At the same time, because calculated changes in segregation between 1990 and 2000 based on our
co-worker segregation index are sensitive to the overall proportions of each group in the workforce,
changes over the decade in the proportions of particular demographic groups that are matched to
establishments can generate changes in measured segregation. So, for example, the fact that the fraction
of workers who are Hispanic grew from 1990 to 2000 should yield a small increase in measured coworker segregation by ethnicity over the decade (even if Hispanics and whites are distributed across
establishments in the same proportion in each year). We could avoid this problem by using scaleinvariant segregation measures, but then we would fail to capture changes in segregation due to actual
changes in workforce composition. That is, the fact that Hispanics make up a growing fraction of the
workforce is an important phenomenon to capture.17
We present some “unconditional” nationwide segregation measures, as well as “conditional”
measures that first condition on metropolitan area (MSA/PMSA) of residence. In the first, the
simulations randomly assign workers to establishments anywhere in the country; not surprisingly, in these
simulations the random segregation measures are zero or virtually indistinguishable from zero. For
comparability, when we construct these unconditional segregation measures we use only the workers
included in the MSA/PMSA sample used for the conditional analysis.18 The unconditional estimates
provide the simplest measures of the extent of integration by skill, race, ethnicity, or sex, in the
workplace. However, they reflect the distribution of workers both across cities and across establishments
within cities. As such, the unconditional measures may tell us less about forces operating in the labor
market to create segregation, whereas the conditional measures – which can be interpreted as taking
17 Some

measured changes in the sample composition of workers over time may reflect changes in the match rates
of various kinds of workers to establishments rather than a change in the underlying population composition. This
is obviously a limitation of matched data sets like ours, one that exists to a much smaller extent in administrative
data sets that come closer to capturing fully the universe of workers.
18

The results in this paper are generally robust to measuring segregation at the level of the MSA/CMSA
metropolitan area (rather than the MSA/PMSA level), as well as measuring unconditional segregation by including
all workers in the United States whether or not they live and work in a metropolitan area. For the within
MSA/CMSA analysis, results are very similar to the within MSA/PMSA analysis, with the only difference that the
increase in black-white segregation is about one-quarter smaller in the first case. For the national analysis using the
full DEEDs vs. the MSA/PMSA sample, the changes in segregation are always in the same direction and
qualitatively similar, although the estimated percentage changes are a bit more moderate.
14

residential segregation by city as given – may tell us more about these forces. Because we use the same
samples for the conditional and unconditional analyses, for these analyses the observed segregation
measures are identical. Only the simulations differ, but these differences of course imply differences in
the effective segregation measures.
For the Monte Carlo simulations that generate measures of random segregation, we first define
the unit within which we are considering workers to be randomly allocated. We use U.S. Census Bureau
MSA/PMSA designations, because these are defined to some extent based on areas within which
substantial commuting to work occurs.19 We then calculate for each metropolitan area the numbers of
workers in each category for which we are doing the simulation – for example, blacks and whites – as
well as the number of establishments and the size distribution of establishments (in terms of sampled
workers). Within a metropolitan area, we then randomly assign workers to establishments, ensuring that
we generate the same size distribution of establishments within a metropolitan area as we have in the
sample. We do this simulation 100 times, and compute the random segregation measures as the means
over these 100 simulations. Not surprisingly, the random segregation measures are very precise; in all
cases the standard deviations were trivially small.

IV. Changes in Segregation
With the preceding technical material out of the way, the empirical results can be presented quite
concisely.

Segregation by Education
The findings for changes in segregation by education are reported in Table 3. We begin by
computing segregation between those with at least some college education and those with at most a high
19

See U.S. Census Bureau, http://www.census.gov/geo/lv4help/cengeoglos.html (viewed April 18, 2005). This is
not to say that residential segregation at a level below that of MSAs and PMSAs may not influence workplace
segregation. However, an analysis of this question requires somewhat different methods. For example, in
conducting the simulations it is not obvious how one should limit the set of establishments within a metropolitan
area in which a worker could be employed.
15

school education. The observed segregation measure for 1990 indicates that on average low education
workers are in workplaces in which 54.2 percent of their co-workers are low education, while high
education workers are in workplaces in which only 34.5 percent are low education, for a difference of
19.7. This is also the effective segregation measure for the national sample because random allocation of
workers to establishments anywhere in the country leads to a random coworker segregation measure of
zero. When we look within MSAs/PMSAs, randomness generates a fairly small amount of segregation,
so the effective segregation measure declines only a little, to 17.3.
In the 2000 data, observed segregation is 1.4 percentage points higher (21.1), while random
segregation is lower. In combination, then, looking within MSAs/PMSAs, effective segregation by
education rises two percentage points, or by 11.3 percent, from 1990 to 2000. In the national data, the
increase is smaller, from 19.7 to 21.1 percent, or 7.0 percent.20 The next two panels of Table 3 report
results for two alternative education cutoffs: high school dropouts vs. at least a high school degree; and
less than a bachelor’s degree vs. at least a bachelor’s degree. For the high school dropouts vs. at least a
high school degree breakdown, the overall national figures indicate an increase in segregation similar to
that seen in the first panel of the table; educational segregation increased by 1.7 percentage points (11.1
percent), and by 1.9 percentage points (13.6 percent) within MSAs/PMSAs. When we instead classify
workers by whether or not they have a bachelor’s degree, the increases in segregation are somewhat
larger, between 2.8 and 3.3 percentage points, or 16 to 16.2 percent.21
These figures strike us as modest but measurable increases in segregation by education. The
direction of change is consistent with the conjecture of Kremer and Maskin (1996), and it is possible that
the decade of the 1980s might have experienced even a greater increase in segregation by education,
given the sharper increase in schooling-related earnings differentials in that period, although the
workforce adjustments may occur relatively slowly. Nonetheless, we may want to be cautious in
20

We remind that reader that when we say “national,” we refer to the MSA/PMSA sample.

21

In Hellerstein and Neumark (forthcoming), we report bootstrapped standard errors for differences in estimates of
effective segregation. Differences considerably smaller than the types of increases we find in this paper were
strongly significant.
16

inferring that the increase in segregation by education is attributable to increased returns to skill. One of
the mechanisms for this increase in segregation by education is the decline over the decade in the fraction
of workers in the sample with low levels of education – for example, the fraction with at most a high
school degree drops from 42.9 percent in 1990 to 35.8 percent in 2000. It is also possible, then, that
segregation by skill (rather than measured education) is actually unchanged but more workers with high
unobserved skills have higher education in the 2000 data.

Segregation by Race
Evidence on changes in segregation by race is reported in Table 4. In 1990, the observed
segregation measures indicate that blacks on average worked with workforces that were 23.7 percent
black, whereas the comparable figure for whites was only 5.8 percent, for an observed segregation
measure of 17.8. This rose between 1990 and 2000 to 21.8, driven mainly by an increase in the average
share black in workplaces were blacks were employed. Nationally, black-white segregation rose four
percentage points, from 17.8 to 21.8, or an increase of 22.3 percent. Within MSAs/PMSAs, the increase
is slightly smaller, at 2.8 percentage points, or 20.3 percent. We interpret these magnitudes as indicating
a relatively large increase in workplace segregation by race from 1990 to 2000.

Hispanic-White Segregation
Next, Table 5 reports results for Hispanic-white segregation.22 Observed Hispanic-white
segregation is pronounced. In 1990, Hispanic workers on average worked in establishments with
workforces that were 39.4 percent Hispanic, compared with a 4.5 percent figure for whites. Both of these
numbers increased slightly as of 2000, to 40.7 percent and 6 percent, respectively, so that the observed
segregation measure remained roughly constant – 34.9 percent in 1990 and 34.7 percent in 2000.

22

Using the 1990 data only, Hellerstein and Neumark (forthcoming) go into considerable detail regarding Hispanicwhite segregation, finding that differences in English language skills account for about one-third of this segregation.
17

Because of relatively sharp differences in the Hispanic composition of urban areas across the
United States, randomness generates a considerable amount of Hispanic-white segregation. This is
indicated in the table, where random segregation equals 18.8 in 1990 and 18.0 in 2000. However, again
the changes are small, so that the change in effective Hispanic-white segregation appears to be relatively
minor. Segregation declines in the national data by 0.2 percentage points, or by less than one percent.
And within urban areas, segregation increases slightly, from 19.8 to 20.4, or by only three percent.
Overall, then, both the small magnitudes and the differences in results across and within urban areas lead
us to conclude that little changed with respect to Hispanic-white workplace segregation between 1990 and
2000.

Sex Segregation
Finally, we turn to segregation by sex. A priori, we might expect to find substantial declines in
this form of segregation, because of the declining differences in the types of jobs done by men and
women (Wells, 1998). As Table 6 reports, in 1990 women on average worked in establishments with
workforces that were 59.9 percent female, as compared with establishments in which men worked, which
were 36.2 percent female. Thus, observed segregation was 23.6. As of 2000, the increase in the share
female with which men work increased relatively sharply, from 36.2 to 40.2, and as a result observed
segregation fell to 20.4. Random segregation by sex is relatively trivial, because neither men nor women
constitute a very small share of the workforce. As a result, the change in effective segregation is close to
the change in observed segregation. In particular, effective segregation by sex declined from 23.6 to 20.4,
or 13.7 percent, on a national basis. And virtually the same decline, 3.2 percentage points or 13.6 percent,
is estimated within urban areas because, of course, the distributions of men and women across cities are
similar. We view the magnitude of these changes in sex segregation as suggesting a substantive decline
over the decade.
One possible explanation for the overall decline in sex segregation is convergence in the
occupational distributions of men and women, rather than a reduction in segregation across workplaces
18

even for men and women in the same occupation. To address this possibility, following the methods in
Hellerstein and Neumark (forthcoming), we construct “conditional” random segregation measures, where
we simulate segregation holding the distribution of workers by occupation fixed across workplaces. So,
for example, if an establishment in our sample is observed to have three workers in occupation A, then
three workers in occupation A will be randomly allocated to that establishment. As before, we compute
the average (across the simulations) simulated fraction of co-workers who are female for females,
denoting this FFC, and the average (across the simulations) simulated fraction of co-workers who are
female for males, denoting this MFC. The difference between these two is denoted CWC, and we define
the extent of “effective conditional segregation” to be:
[{CW0 − CWC}/{100 − CWR}]×100,
where CWR is the measure of random segregation obtained when not conditioning on occupation. A
conditional effective segregation measure of zero would imply that all of the effective segregation
between women and men can be attributed to differences in the occupations employed by various
establishments (“occupational segregation”), coupled with differences in the occupational distributions of
women and men. Conversely, a conditional effective segregation measure equal to that of the
(unconditional) effective segregation measure would imply that none of the effective segregation between
women and men can be attributed to occupational segregation across workplaces.
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 6 report the results of doing this calculation based on a consistent
occupation classification across 1990 and 2000, as developed in Meyer and Osborne (2005), which is
approximately at the 3-digit level.23 We do this only for the within MSA/PMSA sample, because central
to this analysis is the ability to randomly distribute workers to different establishments, and it only makes
sense to do this within the urban areas in which workers commute. The estimates for 1990, in column (5),
indicate that a substantial fraction (nearly 50 percent) of the effective segregation of women from men is
attributable to differences in the occupational distribution; conditional on occupation, effective
23

There are non-trivial differences in occupation codes at the 3-digit level between 1990 and 2000. The structure
of occupation codes at the 1-digit level changed even more dramatically between 1990 and 2000, so we do not
attempt a concordance at this higher level of aggregation.
19

segregation by sex falls from 23.3 (column (2)) to 10.4. In the 2000 data, reported in column (6), the
effect of occupation is a little bit more pronounced, accounting for 61.2 percent of effective segregation.
Finally, conditional on occupation, sex segregation within MSAs/PMSAs declines over time by 2.6
percentage points (from 10.4 to 7.8); in absolute terms, this is similar to the decline in unconditional
segregation, but because effective segregation conditional on occupation (in 1990) was only about 45
percent as large as the unconditional effective segregation measure, the decline in conditional segregation
between columns (5) and (6) represents a much larger percentage decline – 24.8 percent. Altogether,
these results suggest that the decline in sex segregation over the decade is not being driven by the
increased propensity of women to work in the same occupations as men.

V. The Impact of Changing Establishment and Industry Composition
Changes in segregation can arise due to a multitude of factors, some of them compositional, such
as the changing occupational distribution of women as discussed in the previous section. In this section,
we explore the robustness of our full-sample results to two other types of potentially important
compositional changes. First, we explore whether the changes in segregation are due to the changing
composition of establishments by recalculating our segregation indexes for only the sample of
establishments that exist in both the 1990 and 2000 Restricted DEED samples (corresponding to columns
(3) and (6) of Table 1).24 Ideally, we would like to isolate the separate roles of establishment entry and
exit – i.e., births of new establishments and deaths of existing ones. However, given that we only match
some establishments, we cannot necessarily distinguish births and deaths from matches and non-matches.
But assuming that matching is random with respect to segregation, focusing on the set of establishments
that are in both samples is informative about the combined roles of establishment entry and exit.
Second, we explore the robustness of our changes in segregation to changes in the industry mix of
employment over the decade by reweighting the segregation indexes for 2000 to reflect the industrial
24

By restricting the sample to establishments that exist in the Restricted DEED samples in both years we drop some
very small MSAs from some of the samples we used to calculate segregation indexes in earlier tables, in cases
where there are no matched workers for whom to calculate indexes across the two years.
20

composition of employment at the 1-digit level that exists in our 1990 data. This is a little more
complicated. First, because we are interested in calculating within-MSA indexes, it is actually the withinMSA industry composition that we need to hold fixed at 1990 levels. As a result, we include in the
sample only MSAs that exist in both years. Second, we exclude mining, because mining makes up such a
trivial proportion of employment that there are some MSAs that have matched workers in mining in 1990
but not in 2000.
To understand how we construct changes in segregation over the decade while holding the
distribution of employment across industries within MSAs fixed at 1990 levels, consider again the
example of ethnic segregation we discussed in Section III above. Obviously, we compute HH (the
isolation index) and WH (the exposure index) for 1990 in the same way we did previously, since no
adjustment needs to be made when accounting for the 1990 industry composition. In order to compute
HH for 2000 with industry composition fixed as of 1990, we compute the isolation index separately for
each industry/MSA pair in 2000.25 We then take a weighted average across industries of these isolation
indexes, where the weight is product of two components: the fraction of total Hispanic employment (in
this example) that works in that industry/MSA pair in 2000, and the ratio of the employment share in the
industry/MSA pair in 1990 relative to 2000. The fraction of Hispanic employment serves to aggregate up
the industry/MSA-specific isolation indexes to the full-sample isolation index (and if used alone to weight
up the industry/MSA-specific indexes would yield the 2000 unadjusted isolation index), while the ratio of
the employment shares adjusts the data appropriately to reflect the composition of employment in 1990
across industries. For the exposure index, WH, we do the same thing, calculating a separate exposure
index for each industry/MSA pair and then weighting by the product of the industry employment share
ratio times the fraction of white employment in that pair in 2000. Because the fraction Hispanic in an
industry MSA/pair may differ from the fraction white in that same industry/MSA pair, the reweighting
may have differential effects on the exposure and isolation indexes. As a consequence, adjusting for
industry employment changes over the decade will have the largest impact on measured changes in

21

segregation when there has been differential employment growth in industries with a large share Hispanic
coupled with a large difference between the share of Hispanic and the share of white employment in the
industry (or if there is a large difference between the isolation and exposure indexes).26
The results of these alternative computations are presented in condensed form in Table 7, where
we report only the within-MSA effective segregation measures in each year and the changes over the
decade. In the first panel of Table 7, we report results for co-worker segregation by high school degree
status. In column (1), we first report the within-MSA effective segregation measure in 1990 of 17.3 (from
Table 3). Below that number, we report the corresponding figure for the sample of establishments that
existed both in 1990 and 2000, finding that co-worker segregation by high school degree status in 1990 is
somewhat lower, at 15.7. The fixed-industry-composition co-worker segregation measure for 1990 is
17.3, identical to that for the full sample.27 In column (2) we report the co-worker segregation measures
for 2000. For the fixed-establishment sample, co-worker segregation by high school degree status is 17.0,
2.2 percentage points lower than for the full sample, and for the results holding industry composition
fixed, the co-worker measure is slightly higher, at 20.3. Overall, the change over the decade of 2
percentage points for the full sample is close to the 1.4 percentage point increase for the fixed
establishment sample, and the increase holding industry composition fixed is a bit larger, at 3.1
percentage points. In general, though, the observed increase in co-worker segregation for the full sample
over the decade is robust to the changing mix of establishments and industries.
In the second and third panels of Table 7 we report the results for the alternative education cutoffs. The results again reflect some small differences across the sample of establishments and mix of
industries, and the overall qualitative results again point to increases in segregation by education over the
decade.

25 For

the random segregation indexes, the industry used is the random industry to which the worker is assigned.

26

This turns out to be quite significant in our calculations for changes in sex segregation holding the industry
composition of employment fixed, where the services industry grew rapidly, and is also heavily female.

27

Because we exclude workers in mining and workers in MSAs that were not defined as such in 1990 and 2000, the
results for 1990 can be slightly different than we report in the full sample in Table 3.
22

Racial segregation increased over the decade for the full sample by 2.8 percentage points (20.3
percent), but increased by only about half that much for the sample of establishments that exist in both
years. This means that new establishments in 2000 are characterized by more racial segregation than
establishments that existed in 1990. Moreover, holding the industry composition of employment fixed at
1990 levels, racial segregation increased by a much smaller amount over the decade – 0.6 percentage
points (4.6 percent). The fact that newer establishments and the industries that are gaining in employment
over the decade are also more segregated by race in 2000 than older establishments and declining
industries could portend continuing increases in racial segregation.
Interestingly, the results are somewhat different for Hispanic-white segregation, as we report in
the fifth panel of Table 7. In the overall sample co-worker segregation increased relatively little over the
decade, by only 0.6 percentage points (three percent). For the sample of establishments that exist in both
years, co-worker segregation actually fell a little, from 16.5 to 15.6, whereas for the employment-constant
industry results, the co-worker segregation measure rose over the decade from 19.1 to 22.0. While none
of these results point to major differences, it appears that the changing industry mix served to decrease
Hispanic-white segregation, while the entry and exit of establishments seems to have worked in the
opposite direction.
As reported in the last panel of Table 7, the results are most notably different for sex segregation
– in particular, with respect to the role of industry composition. First, for the full sample, co-worker
segregation fell by 3.2 percentage points over the decade, whereas for the sample of continuing
establishments it fell by 2.3 percentage points. Since the baseline co-worker segregation measure in 1990
for the continuing establishments sample is slightly higher (25.2) than for the full sample (23.3), on a
percentage basis segregation actually declined somewhat more for the full sample, but the difference is
small. However, a much sharper difference arises when comparing the change over the decade to that
obtained holding the distribution of employment across industries fixed at 1990 levels. In particular, coworker segregation in 2000 is 20.1 in the full sample, but only 14.4 in the fixed-industry-composition

23

results. As a result, co-worker segregation for the fixed-industry-composition calculation falls over the
decade by a full nine percentage points, or 38.3 percent.
Industry composition has such a strong influence on changes in measured sex segregation
because there was very sharp employment growth in services, which is a highly sex segregated industry
with a high share of female employment. Thus, absent the growth in services (which is what we mimic by
holding the industry composition of employment fixed), sex segregation would have declined by
considerably more. To see this, Table 8 presents detailed information on isolation and exposure indexes
and observed segregation by industry, as well as the distribution of employment of men and women
across industries, and industry employment growth over the decade. The table shows, first, that with the
exception of transportation, which is a relatively small industry, services is the most segregated industry
in both years. The percentage point decline in observed segregation is relatively similar across industries,
with the exception of wholesale. In addition, the services industry was the largest employer of women in
both years, accounting for 35 percent of female employment in 1990 and 44 percent of female
employment in 2000. So, for example, services alone accounts for half of the isolation index in 2000.28
Services was also the second largest employer of men in both years, but well behind manufacturing.
Employment of both men and women in services grew sharply over the decade. This is reflected in the
distribution of men and women across industries by year (columns (4) and (5)), as well as in the ratio of
overall employment in 1990 relative to 2000, as reported in column (6); services has the lowest ratio
(0.76), corresponding to the sharpest growth.
As a result of the fact that services is a relatively highly sex segregated industry, coupled with the
fact that it is a heavily female industry that grew tremendously over the decade, the services industry
plays a large role in overall changes in sex segregation. To reinforce the importance of the growth in
services employment in mitigating the decline in sex segregation, Table 9 shows our calculations of
effective sex segregation and how it changed over the decade, with and without holding the industry
28

This can be seen by multiplying the isolation index for services of 72.7 percent by the employment share of
services in female employment of 44 percent, as reported in Table 8, accounting for 53 percent of the overall
isolation index in 2000 of 60.7 corresponding to the sample used in that table.
24

composition of employment fixed, and with and without including services. The top panel shows
calculations for all industries, echoing the earlier results.29 In the bottom panel, however, services is
simply dropped from the calculation, and the difference in the change in segregation from holding
industry composition fixed is only about half as large.30

VI. Conclusions
We present evidence on changes in workplace segregation by education, race, ethnicity, and sex.
For this analysis, we use the newly-constructed 2000 Decennial Employer-Employee Dataset (DEED).
The 2000 DEED, like the 1990 DEED, provides new opportunities to study workplace segregation at the
establishment level. More significantly, by pairing the two we are able to present what we believe are the
first estimates of changes in workplace segregation based on 2000 Census data. These estimates provide
evidence that is complementary to that on changes in residential segregation in the decade between the
Censuses. Moreover, we believe that evidence on workplace segregation and how it has changed is likely
to be more informative about social interactions between groups (with reference to race, ethnicity, and
sex), and directly informative about hypotheses regarding changes in workplace segregation by skill.
The evidence indicates that racial and ethnic segregation at the workplace level remains quite
pervasive. For example, if we compare black and white workers, the difference in the share black among
the workforce at the establishments where they work is around 22 percentage points. If we compare
Hispanics and whites, the difference is about 50 percent larger. At the same time, there is fairly
substantial segregation by skill, as measured by education. In other work (Hellerstein and Neumark
(forthcoming), using only the 1990 DEED) we explore the extent to which racial and ethnic segregation
are attributable to skill differences between blacks and whites or Hispanics and whites; in the latter case

29

As noted earlier, the estimates allowing the industry composition to change are slightly different from in Table 6
because of changes in the sample to do the calculation holding industry composition fixed.

30

Note that there was also strong growth in retail, another industry that is relatively sex segregated.
25

we focus on language skills. Only for the latter is there evidence that skill differences play a substantial role,
explaining about one-third of Hispanic-white segregation.
More significantly, putting together the 1990 and 2000 data, we find no evidence of declines in
workplace segregation by race and ethnicity. Hispanic-white segregation was largely unchanged, while
black-white segregation increased by about three to four percentage points, or about 20 percent. This
increase in racial segregation was reinforced by the entry and exit of establishments and by the changing
industry composition of employment, suggesting that there may be forces at work that will lead to the
persistence of or even increases in racial segregation. Over this decade, segregation by education also
increased, by about two to three percentage points, or 11 to 16 percent. This increase is consistent with
conjectures that rising returns to skill might generate more segregation by skill, although it could also be
attributable to rising education levels among workers with more unobserved skills but with an unchanging
pattern of segregation based on these skills.31
To the extent that declines in segregation are positive developments, the one bright spot is the
decline in workplace segregation by sex, which fell about three percentage points, or 14 percent, from 1990
to 2000. Changes in the occupational distribution of men and women did not play a major role in this
decline in segregation. If we hold the distribution of men and women across 3-digit occupations fixed, the
absolute decline in segregation is roughly the same, although it is larger in percentage terms. On the other
hand, shifts in the industry composition of employment worked against the decline in sex segregation, as the
fastest-growing industry was services, which is also one of the most sex-segregated and most heavily female
industries. What this implies for future changes in sex segregation depends on whether the shifts in
industrial composition continue as in the recent past or change course, on changes in the distribution of
women across industries, and on changes in sex segregation across establishments within industries.
31 Coupled

with the earlier findings suggesting that black-white segregation is largely unrelated to education
differences, this likely has little if anything to do with the increase in workplace segregation by race.

26

References
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2005. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: ReAssessing the Revisionists.” NBER Working Paper No. 11627.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske. 2003. “New Evidence on Sex
Segregation and Sex Differences in Wages from Matched Employee-Employer Data.” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 21, No. 4, October, pp. 887-922.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske. 1999. “Why Are Racial and
Ethnic Wage Gaps Larger for Men than for Women? Exploring the Role of Segregation Using the New
Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database.” In The Creation and Analysis of Employer-Employee
Matched Data, eds. Haltiwanger, Lane, Spletzer, Theeuwes, and Troske (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
B.V.), pp. 175-203.
Blau, Francine D. 1977. Equal Pay in the Office (Lexington, MA: Heath).
Boisso, Dale, Kathy Hayes, Joseph Hirschberg, and Jacques Silber. 1994. “Occupational Segregation in the
Multidimensional Case.” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 61, No. 1, March, pp. 161-71.
Carrington, William J., and Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. “On Measuring Segregation in Samples with Small
Units.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, Vol. 15, No. 4, October, pp. 402-9.
Carrington, William H., and Kenneth R. Troske. 1998a. “Interfirm Racial Segregation and the Black/White
Wage Gap.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 16, No. 2, April, pp. 231-60
Carrington, William J. And Kenneth Troske. 1998b. “Sex Segregation in U.S. Manufacturing.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 51, April, pp. 445-464.
Cortese, Charles, F., R. Frank Falk, and Jack K. Cohen. 1976. “Further Considerations on the
Methodological Analysis of Segregation Indices.” American Sociological Review, Vol. 51, No. 4, August,
pp. 630-7.
Duncan, Otis D., and Beverly Duncan. 1955. “A Methodological Analysis of Segregation Indices.”
American Sociological Review, Vol. 20, No. 2, April, pp. 210-7.
Echenique, Frederico, and Roland Fryer. 2005. “On the Measurement of Segregation.” NBER Working
Paper No. 11258.
Estlund, Cynthia. 2003. Working Together: How Workplace Bonds Strengthen a Diverse Democracy (New
York: Oxford University Press).
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan. 1998. “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
Microeconomic Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 6803.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2001. “Racial Segregation in the 2000 Census: Promising News.”
The Brookings Institution Survey Series, April.
Groshen, Erica L. 1991. “The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is It Who You Are, What
You Do, or Where You Work?” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 3, Summer, pp. 457-72.

Hellerstein, Judith, and David Neumark. “Workplace Segregation in the United States: Race, Ethnicity, and
Skill.” Forthcoming in Review of Economics and Statistics.
Hellerstein, Judith, and David Neumark. 2004. “Production Function and Wage Equation Estimation with
Heterogeneous Labor: Evidence from a New Matched Employer-Employee Data Set.” NBER Working
Paper No. 10325.
Hellerstein, Judith, and David Neumark. 2003. “Ethnicity, Language, and Workplace Segregation: Evidence
from a New Matched Employer-Employee Data Set.” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, Vol. 71-72,
July-December, pp. 19-78.
Higgs, Robert. 1977. “Firm-Specific Evidence on Racial Wage Differentials and Workforce Segregation.”
American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 2, March, pp. 236-45.
Iceland, John, and Daniel H. Weinberg. 2002. “Racial and Ethnic Segregation in the United States: 19802000.” U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 Special Reports. Available at
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/housing_patterns/pdf/censr-3.pdf (viewed October 2005).
James, Daniel R., and Karl E. Taeuber. 1985. “Measures of Segregation.” In Sociological Methodology, ed.
Tuma (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass), pp. 1-32.
Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda. 2002. “The Longitudinal Business Database.” CES Working Paper No.
CES-WP-02-17.
King, Mary C. 1992. “Occupational Segregation by Race and Sex, 1940-1988.” Monthly Labor Review,
April, pp. 30-7.
Kremer, Michael, and Eric Maskin. 1996. “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 5718.
Massey, Douglas, and Nancy Denton. 1987. “Trends in the Residential Segregation of Blacks, Hispanics,
and Asians: 1970-1980.” American Sociological Review, Vol. 52, No. 6, December, pp. 802-25.
McConville, Shannon, and Paul Ong. 2001. “Examining Residential Segregation Patterns.” Discussion
Paper, The Ralph & Goldy Lewis Center for Regional Policy Studies, UCLA.
Meyer, Peter B. and Anastasiya M. Osborne. 2005. “Proposed Category System for 1960-2000 Census
Occupations.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper 383, September.
U.S. Census Bureau. “Census Geographic Glossary.” http://www.census.gov/geo/lv4help/
cengeoglos.html (viewed April 2005).
U.S. Census Bureau, “Census Tracts and Block Numbering Areas.”
http://www.census.gov/geo/www/GARM/Ch10GARM.pdf (viewed April 2005).
Watts, Martin J. 1995. “Trends in Occupational Segregation by Race and Gender in the U.S.A., 1983-92: A
Multidimensional Approach.” Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 27, No. 4, Fall, pp. 1-36.

Wells, Thomas. 1998. “Change in Occupational Sex Segregation During the 1980s and 1990s.” Center for
Demography and Ecology Working Paper No. 98-14, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Winship, Christopher. 1977. “A Revaluation of Indexes of Residential Segregation.” Social Forces, Vol. 55,
No. 4, June, pp. 1058-66.

Table 1: Means for Workers

Age
Female
Married
White
Hispanic
Black
Fulltime
Number of Kids (if female)
High School Diploma
Some College
BA
Advanced Degree
Ln(Hourly Wage)
Hourly Wage
Hours Worked in previous year
Weeks Worked in previous year
Earnings in previous year
Industry:
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Wholesale
Retail
FIRE
Services
N

1990 SEDF
(1)
37.08
(12.78)
0.46
0.60
0.82
0.07
0.08
0.77
0.75
(1.04)
0.34
0.30
0.13
0.05
2.21
(0.70)
12.10
(82.19)
39.51
(11.44)
46.67
(11.05)
22,575
(26,760)

1990 Full
DEED
(2)
37.51
(12.23)
0.47
0.65
0.86
0.05
0.05
0.83
0.73
(1.01)
0.33
0.32
0.16
0.05
2.30
(0.65)
12.89
(37.07)
40.42
(10.37)
48.21
(9.34)
25,581
(29,475)

1990
Restricted
DEED
(3)
37.53
(12.13)
0.47
0.63
0.84
0.06
0.06
0.84
0.69
(0.99)
0.30
0.33
0.18
0.06
2.37
(0.65)
13.68
(27.41)
40.55
(10.10)
48.46
(9.05)
27,478
(30,887)

0.01
0.07
0.25
0.08
0.05
0.20
0.08
0.26
12,143,183

0.01
0.04
0.34
0.05
0.07
0.17
0.08
0.24
3,291,213

0.01
0.03
0.35
0.05
0.08
0.15
0.09
0.24
1,828,020

2000 SEDF
(4)
39.15
(13.03)
0.46
0.58
0.78
0.09
0.09
0.78
0.78
(1.07)
0.31
0.33
0.15
0.06
2.55
(0.73)
17.91
(137.20)
40.22
(11.74)
47.23
(10.58)
33,521
(42,977)

2000 Full
DEED
(5)
39.57
(12.51)
0.50
0.62
0.83
0.07
0.06
0.82
0.76
(1.04)
0.29
0.35
0.18
0.08
2.63
(0.70)
18.83
(63.61)
40.72
(11.09)
48.38
(9.27)
37,244
(47,237)

2000
Restricted
DEED
(6)
39.53
(12.33)
0.51
0.60
0.79
0.08
0.08
0.83
0.74
(1.03)
0.25
0.35
0.20
0.09
2.70
(0.70)
20.19
(64.05)
40.90
(10.85)
48.56
(9.05)
40,272
(50,406)

0.01
0.08
0.21
0.07
0.05
0.21
0.07
0.31
14,057,121

0.00
0.05
0.26
0.05
0.05
0.21
0.07
0.31
4,089,098

0.00
0.04
0.26
0.05
0.05
0.20
0.07
0.32
2,209,908

Table 2: Means for Establishments
1990 BR
(1)
17.57
(253.75)

1990 Full
DEED
(2)
52.68
(577.39)

1990
Restricted
DEED
(3)
104.67
(996.52)

Establishment Size:
1-25
26-50
51-100
101+

0.88
0.06
0.03
0.03

0.65
0.15
0.10
0.10

Industry:
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Wholesale
Retail
FIRE
Services

0.00
0.09
0.06
0.04
0.08
0.25
0.09
0.28

In MSA
Census Region:
North East
Mid Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific

Total Employment

Payroll ($1000)
Payroll/Total
Employment
Share of Employees
Matched
Multi-Unit Establishment
N

2000 BR
(4)
18.77
(138.11)

2000 Full
DEED
(5)
48.74
(232.05)

2000
Restricted
DEED
(6)
95.54
(371.18)

0.39
0.22
0.19
0.21

0.87
0.06
0.03
0.03

0.66
0.15
0.09
0.09

0.41
0.21
0.17
0.20

0.01
0.07
0.13
0.05
0.11
0.24
0.10
0.26

0.01
0.06
0.23
0.05
0.10
0.23
0.11
0.21

0.00
0.11
0.06
0.04
0.07
0.25
0.09
0.35

0.00
0.08
0.13
0.05
0.07
0.29
0.08
0.30

0.00
0.07
0.18
0.05
0.07
0.27
0.07
0.27

0.81

0.82

1

0.81

0.79

1

0.06
0.16
0.16
0.07
0.18
0.05
0.10
0.06
0.16

0.06
0.15
0.20
0.08
0.16
0.05
0.10
0.05
0.15

0.05
0.16
0.21
0.07
0.15
0.04
0.09
0.05
0.17

0.06
0.15
0.16
0.08
0.18
0.06
0.10
0.07
0.16

0.05
0.14
0.20
0.09
0.16
0.05
0.10
0.06
0.15

0.04
0.14
0.21
0.08
0.16
0.04
0.10
0.06
0.17

397
(5,064)
21.02
(1,385.12)
--

1,358
(10,329)
24.24
(111.79)
0.17

2,910
(16,601)
26.70
(181.48)
0.16

694.44
(69,383)
33.74
(70,72.29)
--

1,993
(115,076)
35.91
(1,834.40)
0.16

4,421
(198,414)
42.27
(1,877.29)
0.14

0.23
5,237,592

0.42
972,436

0.53
317,112

0.26
5,651,680

0.40
1,279,999

0.50
411,300

Table 3: Segregation by Education

Co-Worker Segregation
High school degree or less vs.
more than high school
Observed Segregation
Low Education Workers
High Education Workers
Difference
Random Segregation
Low Education Workers
High Education Workers
Difference
Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Less than high school vs. high
school degree or more
Observed Segregation
Low Education Workers
High Education Workers
Difference
Random Segregation
Low Education Workers
High Education Workers
Difference
Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Less than bachelor’s degree vs.
bachelors’ degree or more
Observed Segregation
Low Education Workers
High Education Workers
Difference
Random Segregation
Low Education Workers
High Education Workers
Difference
Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Number of Workers
Number of Establishments

1990 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Low Ed
(1)

1990 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Low Ed
(2)

2000 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Low Ed
(3)

2000 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Low Ed
(4)

54.2
34.5
19.7

54.2
34.5
19.7

49.3
28.2
21.1

49.3
28.2
21.1

42.9
42.9
0

44.6
41.7
2.9

35.8
35.8
0

37.3
35.0
2.3

19.7

17.3

21.1
1.4 (7.0)

19.2
2.0 (11.3)

26.0
10.8
15.2

26.0
10.8
15.2

25.5
8.6
16.9

25.5
8.6
16.9

12.7
12.7
0

13.8
12.6
1.3

10.4
10.4
0

11.3
10.3
1.0

15.2

14.1

16.9
1.7 (11.1)

16.0
1.9 (13.6)

80.7
60.6
20.2

80.7
60.6
20.2

77.7
54.3
23.4

77.7
54.3
23.4

75.9
75.9
0

76.6
73.5
3.1

70.8
70.8
0

71.9
68.2
3.8

20.2

17.6

23.4
3.3 (16.2)

20.4
2.8 (16.0)

1,828,020
317,112

1,828,020
317,112

2,209,908
411,300

2,209,908
411,300

Table 4: Black-White Segregation
1990 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Black
(1)

1990 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Black
(2)

2000 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Black
(3)

2000 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Black
(4)

Co-Worker Segregation
Observed Segregation
Black Workers
White Workers
Difference

23.7
5.8
17.8

23.7
5.8
17.8

28.7
6.9
21.8

28.7
6.9
21.8

Random Segregation
Black Workers
White Workers
Difference

7.1
7.1
0

11.2
6.8
4.4

8.8
8.8
0

14.2
8.3
5.9

17.8

14.0

21.8
4.0 (22.3)

16.8
2.8 (20.3)

1,618,876
285,988

1,618,876
285,988

1,893,034
360,072

1,893,034
360,072

Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Number of Workers
Number of Establishments

Table 5: Hispanic-White Segregation
1990 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Hispanic
(1)

1990 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Hispanic
(2)

2000 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Hispanic
(3)

2000 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Hispanic
(4)

Co-Worker Segregation
Observed Segregation
Hispanic Workers
White Workers
Difference

39.4
4.5
34.9

39.4
4.5
34.9

40.7
6
34.7

40.7
6
34.7

Random Segregation
Hispanic Workers
White Workers
Difference

6.9
6.9
0

24.4
5.6
18.8

9.2
9.2
0

25.5
7.5
18.0

34.9

19.8

34.7
-0.2 (-0.4)

20.4
0.6 (3.0)

1,625,953
293,989

1,625,953
293,989

1,906,878
373,006

1,906,878
373,006

Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Number of Workers
Number of Establishments

Table 6: Segregation by Sex
1990 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Female
(1)

Unconditional
1990 Within
2000 U.S.
MSA/PMSA
MSA/PMSA
Sample
Sample
% Female
% Female
(2)
(3)

2000 Within
MSA/PMSA
Sample
% Female
(4)

Conditional on 3-Digit
Occupation
1990 Within
2000 Within
MSA/PMSA
MSA/PMSA
Sample
Sample
% Female
% Female
(5)
(6)

Co-Worker
Segregation
Observed Segregation
Female Workers
Male Workers
Difference

59.9
36.2
23.6

59.9
36.2
23.6

60.6
40.2
20.4

60.6
40.2
20.4

59.9
36.2
23.6

60.6
40.2
20.4

Random Segregation
Female Workers
Male Workers
Difference

47.4
47.4
0

47.7
47.2
0.5

50.5
50.5
0

50.7
50.3
0.4

54.4
41.1
13.3

56.8
44.1
12.6

23.6

23.3

20.4
-3.2 (-13.7)

20.1
-3.2 (-13.6)

10.4

7.8
-2.6 (-24.8)

55.4

61.2

1,828,020
317,112

2,209,908
411,300

Effective Segregation
Percentage Point
(Percent) Change,
1990-2000
Fraction of sex
segregation accounted
for by occupation
Number of Workers
Number of
Establishments

1,828,020
317,112

1,828,020
317,112

2,209,908
411,300

2,209,908
411,300

Table 7: Alternative Co-Worker Segregation Calculations
1990 Within MSA/PMSA
Sample,
Effective Segregation
(1)
Segregation by Education
High school degree or less vs. more than
high school
Full sample, Table 3
17.3
Establishments present in 1990 and 2000
15.7
Fixed industry composition
17.3
Less than high school vs. high school
degree or more
Full sample, Table 3
14.1
Establishments present in 1990 and 2000
11.4
Fixed industry composition
13.8
Less than bachelor’s degree vs. bachelor’s
degree or more
Full sample, Table 3
17.6
Establishments present in 1990 and 2000
15.4
Fixed industry composition
17.6

2000 Within MSA/PMSA
Sample,
Effective Segregation
(2)

Percentage Point
(Percent) Change,
1990-2000
(3)

19.2
17.0
20.3

2.0 (11.3)
1.4 (8.9)
3.1 (17.8)

16.0
12.7
15.8

1.9 (13.6)
1.2 (10.7)
2.0 (14.3)

20.4
17.4
21.8

2.8 (16.0)
2.0 (12.8)
4.2 (24.0)

Black-White Segregation
Full sample, Table 4
Establishments present in 1990 and 2000
Fixed industry composition

14.0
11.2
14.1

16.8
12.6
14.7

2.8 (20.3)
1.4 (12.7)
0.6 (4.6)

Hispanic-White Segregation
Full sample, Table 5
Establishments present in 1990 and 2000
Fixed industry composition

19.8
16.5
19.1

20.4
15.6
22.0

0.6 (3.0)
-0.9 (-5.6)
2.9 (15.3)

20.1
23.0
14.4

-3.2 (-13.6)
-2.3 (-8.9)
-9.0 (-38.3)

Segregation by Sex
Unconditional
Full sample, Table 6
23.3
Establishments present in 1990 and 2000
25.2
Fixed industry composition
23.4
Mining is excluded for “Full sample, fixed industry composition.”

Table 8: Observed Sex Segregation, by Industry, Within MSA/PMSA
Percentage Point
1990 Observed
2000
(Percent) Change,
Segregation
Observed
1990-2000
Segregation
(1)
(2)
(3)
Construction
Female
23.7
21.6
Male
21.1
23.9
Difference
2.5
-2.3
-4.9 (-191.4)
Manufacturing
Female
43.7
41.2
Male
28.2
29.8
Difference
15.5
11.4
-4.1 (-26.3)
Transportation
Female
49.0
48.8
Male
29.4
32.2
Difference
19.6
16.7
-3.0 (-15.1)
Wholesale
Female
40.2
38.6
Male
31.9
31.6
Difference
8.3
6.9
-1.4 (-16.3)
Retail
Female
59.3
57.1
Male
42.9
44.7
Difference
16.4
12.4
-4.0 (-24.3)
FIRE
Female
69.3
69.1
Male
61.3
63.7
Difference
8.0
5.4
-2.6 (-32.7)
Services
Female
74.2
72.7
Male
55.1
58.4
Difference
19.2
14.3
-4.8 (-25.1)

1990 Share of Female or
Male Employment in
Industry

2000 Share of Female
or Male Employment in
Industry

Ratio of 1990 to
2000 Industry
Employment

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.02
0.05

0.02
0.06

0.92

0.24
0.44

0.17
0.35

1.29

0.04
0.07

0.04
0.07

1.05

0.06
0.10

0.03
0.07

1.50

0.17
0.14

0.20
0.20

0.80

0.12
0.05

0.09
0.05

1.24

0.35
0.15

0.44
0.21

0.76

Table 9: Effective Sex Segregation, with Fixed Industry Composition of Employment, Including and
Excluding Services
2000 Observed,
1990 Observed
2000 Observed
Fixed Industry
Segregation
Segregation
Composition
Including Services
Observed Segregation
Female
59.9
60.7
55.1
Male
36.2
40.2
40.3
Difference
23.7
20.5
14.7
Random Segregation
Female
Male
Difference
Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Number of Workers
Number of Establishments
Excluding Services
Observed Segregation
Female
Male
Difference
Random Segregation
Female
Male
Difference
Effective Segregation
Percentage Point (Percent)
Change, 1990-2000
Number of Workers
Number of Establishments
Mining is excluded.

47.7
47.2
0.5
23.4

50.7
50.4
0.4
20.2
-3.2 (-13.5)

50.7
50.4
0.4
14.4
-9.0 (-38.3)

1,739,063
301,029

2,151,566
398,958

2,151,566
398,958

52.1
32.9
19.2

51.2
35.4
15.9

48.9
35.1
13.8

41.0
40.5
0.5
18.8

42.2
41.9
0.3
15.7
-3.1 (-16.5)

42.2
41.9
0.3
13.6
-5.2 (-27.7)

1,310,125
236,412

1,450,311
289,206

1,450,311
289,206

