NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AMERICANS DO I.T. BETTER:
US MULTINATIONALS AND THE PRODUCTIVITY MIRACLE
Nicholas Bloom
Raffaella Sadun
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 13085
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13085

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

This is a revised version of the mimeo "It Ain't what you do but the way that you do I.T." We would
like to thank our formal discussants (Susanto Basu, Erik Brynjolfsson, Johannes von Biesebroeck and
Stephen Yeaple), Tony Clayton and Mary O'Mahony and the participants at seminars at Berkeley,
Cambridge, CEPR, Columbia, Hebrew, John Hopkins, LSE, Maryland, the NBER, Northwestern,
Oxford, Stanford, Tel-Aviv, UBC, UCL, UCSD and Yale. We would also like to thank the Department
of Trade and Industry and the Economic and Social Research Council for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Americans Do I.T. Better: US Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle
Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 13085
May 2007
JEL No. E22,O3,O47,O52
ABSTRACT
The US has experienced a sustained increase in productivity growth since the mid-1990s, particularly
in sectors that intensively use information technologies (IT). This has not occurred in Europe. If the
US "productivity miracle" is due to a natural advantage of being located in the US then we would
not expect to see any evidence of it for US establishments located abroad. This paper shows in fact
that US multinationals operating in the UK do have higher productivity than non-US multinationals
in the UK, and this is primarily due to the higher productivity of their IT. Furthermore, establishments
that are taken over by US multinationals increase the productivity of their IT, whereas observationally
identical establishments taken over by non-US multinationals do not. One explanation for these patterns
is that US firms are organized in a way that allows them to use new technologies more efficiently.
A model of endogenously chosen organizational form and IT is developed to explain these new micro
and macro findings.
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
Raffaella Sadun
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
r.sadun@lse.ac.uk

John Van Reenen
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

“[The acceleration in US productivity] may be plausibly accounted for by a pickup in
capital services per hour worked and by increases in organizational capital, the
investments businesses make to reorganize and restructure themselves, in this instance in
response to newly installed information technology”
Economic Report of the President, (2006), p.26
One of the most startling economic facts of the last decade has been the reversal in the longstanding catch-up of Europe’s productivity level with the United States. American labor
productivity growth slowed after the early 1970s Oil Shocks but accelerated sharply after 1995.
Although European productivity growth experienced the same slowdown, it has not enjoyed the
same rebound (see Figure 1). Decompositions of US productivity growth show that the great
majority of this growth occurred in those sectors that either intensively use or produce IT
(information technologies)1. Closer analysis has shown that European countries had a similar
productivity acceleration as the US in IT producing sectors (such as semi-conductors and
computers) but failed to achieve the spectacular levels of productivity growth in the sectors that
used IT intensively (predominantly market service sectors, including retail, wholesale and
financial services)2. Consistent with these trends, Figure 2 shows that IT intensity appears to be
substantially higher in the US than Europe and this gap has widened over time. Given the common
availability of IT throughout the world at broadly similar prices, it is a major puzzle why these IT
related productivity effects have not been more widespread.

1

See, for example, Kevin Stiroh (2002). Dale Jorgenson (2001), Stephen Oliner and Daniel Sichel (2000). In the
2002-2004 period Oliner and Sichel (2005) find that US productivity growth remained strong, but there was a more
widespread increase in productivity growth across sectors. See Robert J. Gordon (2004) for a general discussion.
2
Mary O’Mahony and Bart Van Ark (2003) decompose productivity growth for the same sectors in the US and
Europe under common measurement assumptions. Compared to the 1990-1995 period, US productivity growth in
sectors that intensively used IT accelerated by 3.5 percentage points between 1995 and 2001 (from 1.2% per annum to
4.7% per annum). In Europe, productivity growth in these sectors showed no acceleration (it was 2% per annum pre
and post 1995). Productivity growth accelerated in the IT producing sectors by similar amounts in the US (1.9 points)
and Europe (1.6 points). In the other sectors there was no acceleration in either the US or Europe.

2

There are at least two broad classes of explanation3 of this puzzle. First, there may be some
“natural advantage” to being located in the US, enabling firms to make better use of the
opportunity that comes from rapidly falling IT prices. These natural advantages could be tougher
product market competition, lower regulation, better access to risk capital, more educated or
younger workers, larger market size, greater geographical space, or a host of other factors. A
second class of explanations stresses that it is not the US environment per se that matters but
rather the way that US firms are organized or managed that enables better exploitation of IT.
These explanations are not mutually exclusive. In the final section of this paper we build a model
that has elements of both (i.e. organizational practices in US-based firms are affected by the US
regulatory environment and some of these practices are transplanted overseas through foreign
affiliates of American multinationals). Nevertheless, one straightforward way to test whether the
“US firm organization” hypothesis has any validity is to examine the IT performance of US owned
organizations in a non-US environment. If US multinationals at least partially export their business
models outside the US – and a walk into McDonald’s or Starbucks anywhere in Europe suggests
that this is not an unreasonable assumption – then analyzing the IT performance of US
multinational establishments in Europe should be informative. Finding a systematically better use
of IT by American firms outside the US suggests that we should take the US firm organization
model seriously. Such a test could not be performed easily only with data on plants located in the
US because any findings of higher efficiency of plants owned by US multinationals might arise
because of the advantage of operating on the multinational’s home turf (“home bias”).
In this paper, we examine the productivity of IT in a large panel of establishments located in the
UK, examining the differences in IT-related productivity between establishments owned by US
multinationals, establishments owned by non-US multinationals and domestic establishments. The
UK is a useful testing ground for at least two reasons. First, it experiences extensive foreign
ownership with frequent ownership change. Second, the UK Census Bureau has collected panel
data on IT expenditure and productivity in both manufacturing and services since the mid-1990s.
3

Another possibility is international differences in productivity measurement (Olivier Blanchard, 2004). This is
possible, but the careful work of Mary O’Mahony and Bart Van Ark (2003) focusing on the same sectors in the US

3

Therefore, we have arguably constructed the richest micro-dataset on IT and productivity in the
world.
We report that the key fact in understanding productivity differences is the apparent ability of US
multinationals to obtain higher productivity than non-US multinationals (and domestic UK
establishments) from their IT capital. These findings are robust to a number of tests, including an
examination of establishments before and after they are taken over by a US multinational versus a
non-US multinational. Prior to takeover by a US firm the establishment’s IT performance is no
different from that of other plants that are taken over by non-US firms. After takeover, the
American establishment’s productivity of IT capital increases substantially (while the productivity
of non-IT capital, labor, and materials does not).
Overall, these findings suggest that the higher productivity of IT in the US has something to do
with specific characteristics of US establishments, which we define as their “internal organization”
(we discuss other possible explanations as well). We also show that US firms are organized
differently to non-US firms and that they can change their organizational structure more quickly.
Finally, we present a simple dynamic model that is consistent with the new micro and macro
stylized facts. Based on our earlier discussion, we first assume complementarity between
organization and IT. Then, tailoring our model to the comparison between US and European firms,
we assume that in adjusting their organizations, otherwise identical firms face country-specific
costs arguably related to differences in labor market regulations. Firms optimally choose their
organizational form and factor inputs (including IT) in response to the acceleration in the fall of
quality-adjusted IT prices post-1995. The higher adjustment costs for firms in Europe imply that
they take longer to make the organizational changes, so during the transition US labor productivity
and IT rise more quickly. Because multinationals find it costly to have different organization
forms in their overseas plants, US firms in Europe will “transplant” their organizational practices,
generating the results we see in our data. We also present some direct evidence supporting the
model by using explicit indicators of institutions that could generate organizational inflexibility
and EU, using common adjustments for hedonic prices, software capitalization and demand conditions, still find a
difference.
4

(i.e. measures of labor market regulation). Although there may be other theories that can
rationalize the data, some of which we discuss in extensions of the model, we argue that this
model provides a parsimonious framework for understanding recent productivity changes.
Our paper is related to several other areas of the literature. First, there is a large literature on the
impact of IT on productivity at the aggregate or industry-level.4 Second, there is growing evidence
that the returns to IT are linked to the internal organization of firms. On the econometric side, Tim
Bresnahan, Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt (2002) and Eve Caroli and John Van Reenen (2001)
find that internal organization and other complementary factors, such as human capital, are
important in generating significant returns to IT. On the case study side, there is a large range of
evidence5. For example, Larry Hunter et al (2000) describe how IT radically changed the
organization of US banks in the late 1980s. The introduction of ATMs substantially reduced the
need for tellers. At the same time, PCs and credit-scoring software allowed staff to be located on
the bank floor and to directly sell customers mortgages, loans and insurance, replacing bank
managers as the primary sales channel for these products. Along with the IT enabled ability of
regional managers to remotely monitor branches, this led to a huge reduction in branch-level
management and much greater decentralized decision-making for the front-line staff. This reorganization of banks did not happen in much of Europe, however, until much later because of
strong labor regulation and trade-union power. Third, in a reversal of the Solow Paradox, the
firm-level productivity literature describes returns to IT that are larger than one would expect
under the standard growth accounting assumptions. Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt (2003) argue
that this is due to complementary investments in “organizational capital” that are reflected in the
coefficients on IT capital.

Fourth, there is a literature on the superior establishment-level

productivity of US multinationals versus non-US multinationals, both in the US (Mark Doms and
Bradford Jensen, 1998) and in other countries, such as the UK (Chiara Criscuolo and Ralf Martin,
2005). We suggest that the main reason for this difference is the way in which US multinationals
use new technologies more effectively than other multinationals6. Finally, our paper is linked to
4

See, for example, Basu et al. (2003) or Stiroh (2004).
Olivier Blanchard, Martin Bailey, Hans Gersbach, Monika Schnitzer and Jean Tirole (2002) discuss a large number
of industry-specific examples.
6
In a similar vein, John Haltiwanger Ron Jarmin and Torsten Shank (2003) suggest that differences in the productivity
distribution of Germany and American plants could be due to greater experimentation in the US.
5

5

the literature on growth and regulation.7 One of the unintended consequences of labor market
regulation in our model is that it slows down the ability of firm’s to re-organize. When faced by a
radical technological shock (such as the big fall in IT prices), these adjustment costs can have
serious consequences in terms of technological diffusion and productivity growth.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section I describes the empirical framework, Section II
the data and Section III presents the main results. In Section IV we sketch a simple model that can
account for the stylized facts we see in the data and Section V concludes.

I. Empirical Modelling Strategy
A. Basic Approach
We assume that the basic production function can be written as follows

qit = ait + α itM mit + α itL lit + α itK k it + α itC cit

(1)

Q denotes gross output of establishment i in year t. A denotes (total factor) productivity, M denotes
materials, L denotes labor, K denotes non-IT fixed capital and C denotes computer/IT capital.
Lower case letters indicate that a variable is transformed into natural logarithms, so q it ≡ ln Q it ,
etc.
We are particularly interested in the role of IT capital and whether the impact of computers on
productivity is systematically higher for the establishments belonging to US firms. With this in
mind, consider parameterizing the output elasticities in equation (1) as:

α itJ = α hJ ,0 + α hJ ,USA DitUSA + α hJ , MNE DitMNE

(2)

where DitUSA denotes that the establishment is owned by a US firm in year t and DitMNE denotes that
the establishment is owned by a non-US multinational enterprise (the base case is that the
establishment belongs to a non-multinational domestic UK firm), the sub-script h denotes sector
(e.g. industries that use IT intensively vs. all other sectors) and the super-script J indicates a
7

For example, Juan Botero, Simeon Djankov, Rafael Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Schleifer (2004).
6

particular factor of production (M, L, K, C). We further assume that establishment-specific
efficiency can be parameterized as:
a it = a i + δ h0 + δ hUSA DitUSA + δ hMNE DitMNE + γ h ' z it + ξ kt + u h ,it

(3)

where z are other observable factors influencing productivity - establishment age, region and
whether the establishment is part of a multi-plant group. The ξ kt are industry-time specific shocks
that we will control for with a full set of three-digit industry dummies8 interacted with a full set of
time dummies. So, (combining equations (1) through (3)) the general form of the production
function that we will estimate is:
qit =

∑α

J ,0
h
M , L , K , C ∈J

+ ai + δ

USA
h

xitJ +

USA
it

D

+δ

∑α

J ,USA
h
M , L , K , C ∈J

MNE
h

MNE
it

D

DitUSA xitJ +

∑α

J , MNE
h
M , L , K , C ∈J

DitMNE xitJ

+ δ D + γ h ' z it + ξ kt + u h ,it
0
h

(4)

0
it

where xM = m, etc. Note that the industry*time interactions ( ξ kt ) control for output prices, demand
and any other correlated industry specific shock.
Although we will estimate equation (4) in some specifications, most of the interactions between
factor inputs and ownership status are not significantly different from zero. One interaction that
does stand out is between the US ownership dummy and IT capital: the coefficient on computer
capital is significantly higher for US establishments than for other multinationals and/or domestic
establishments. Consequently, our preferred specifications are usually of the form:
q it = α hM mit + α hL l it + α hK k it + α hC ,0 c it + α hC ,USA DitUSA c it + α hC , MNE DitMNE c it
+ a i + δ hUSA DitUSA + δ hMNE DitMNE + δ h0 Dit0 + γ h ' z it + ξ kt + u h ,it

(5)

where the key hypotheses are whether α hC ,USA DitUSA = 0 and/or α hC ,USA DitUSA = α hC , MNE DitMNE .
8

We also experimented with year-specific four digit dummies and explicit measures of output prices (up to the fivedigit level) which generated very similar results to our baseline model with year-specific three-digit industry dummies.
7

(i.e. whether the output elasticity of IT is significantly greater for US establishments).

B. Sub-sample of establishments who are taken over

One concern with our strategy is that US firms may “cherry pick” the best UK establishments. In
other words, it is not US multinational’s internal organization that helps improve the productivity
of IT but rather the ability to recognize (and take over) UK establishments that are better at using
IT capital. To tackle this issue, we focus on a sub-sample of UK establishments that have been
taken over by another firm at some point in the sample period. We then estimate equation (5)
before and after the takeover to investigate whether the IT coefficient changes if a US
multinational versus a non-US multinational takes over a UK plant. We also investigate the
dynamics of change: because organizational changes are costly, we should expect to see change
taking place slowly over time (so we examine how the IT coefficients change one year after the
takeover compared to two years later, and so on).
The identification assumption here is not that establishments that are taken over are the same as
establishments that are not taken over. We condition on a sample of establishments who are all
taken over at some point in the sample period. We are effectively making two assumptions here.
First, we assume that US multinationals are not systematically taking over plants that are more (or
less) productive in their use of IT than non-US multinationals. We can empirically test this
assumption by examining the characteristics (such as the IT level, IT growth and IT productivity)
of establishments who will be taken over by US multinationals in the pre-takeover period (relative
to non-US multinationals). We will show that there is no evidence of such selection9. Second, we
are assuming that US multinationals are not systematically better than non-US multinationals at
predicting (pre-takeover) the higher future productivity of IT for statistically identical British
establishments. Although we regard this assumption as plausible it is not directly testable. If US
managers did possess such foresight (and we will show that it is only for post-takeover IT
9

If US multinationals have higher IT productivity why do we not observe some systematic selection of US firms
taking over particular UK establishments? In the model we sketch in section IV, for example, US firms would want to
take over firms who were organized in a similar fashion to themselves (as indicated by their prey’s higher IT
productivity). It is likely this incentive, however, is small compared to the many other causes of international merger
and acquisition activity we observe in the data (which we confirm empirically in section III). Allowing for endogenous
takeovers is an interesting area for future work. Identification of such a model of course requires some instrument
which affects takeover probabilities without directly affecting productivity.
8

productivity that the US takeovers appear to be different than non-US multinational’s takeover),
we cannot identify this separately from the more general superiority of American firms’ IT usage.

C. Unobserved Heterogeneity

In all specifications, we choose a general structure of the error term that allows for arbitrary
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation over time. But, there could still be establishment-specific
unobserved heterogeneity. So, we also generally include a full set of establishment-level fixed
effects (the “within-groups” estimator). The fixed-effects estimators are more rigorous, as there
may be many unobservable omitted variables correlated with IT that generate an upwards bias for
the coefficient on computer capital.

D. Endogeneity of the Factor Inputs

We also were concerned about the endogeneity of the factor inputs attributable to unobserved
transitory shocks. We take several approaches to deal with this issue. We experiment with the
“System GMM” estimator of Richard Blundell and Stephen Bond (1998) and with a version of the
Steve Olley and Ariel Pakes (1996) estimator.

II. Data

Our dataset is a panel of establishments covering almost all sectors of the UK private sector, called
the Annual Business Inquiry (ABI). It is similar in structure and content to the US Longitudinal
Research Database (LRD), which contains detailed information on revenues, investment,
employment and material inputs. Unlike the US LRD though, the ABI can be matched to
establishment-level IT expenditure data for several years and it also covers the non-manufacturing
sector from the mid-1990s onwards. This is important, because the majority of the sectors that
intensively use IT, such as retailing and wholesaling, are outside manufacturing. The dataset is
unique in containing such a large sample of establishment-level longitudinal information on IT and
productivity. A full description of the datasets appears in Appendix A.
We build IT capital stocks from IT expenditure flows using the perpetual inventory method and
following Dale Jorgenson (2001), sticking to US assumptions about depreciation rates and hedonic
prices. Our dataset runs from 1995 through 2003, but there are many more observations in each
9

year after 1999. After cleaning, we are left with 21,746 observations with positive values for all
the factor inputs. There are many small and medium-sized establishments in our sample10 - the
median establishment employs 238 workers and the mean establishment employs 811. The
sampling framework of the IT surveys means that our sample, on average, contains larger
establishments than the UK economy as a whole. At rental prices, average IT capital is about 1%
of gross output at the unweighted mean (1.5% if weighted by size) or 2.5% of value added. These
estimates are similar to the UK economy-wide means in Susanto Basu et al (2003).
We also considered several experiments by changing our assumptions concerning the construction
of the IT capital stock. First, because there is uncertainty over the exact depreciation rate for IT
capital, we experimented with a number of alternative values. Second, we do not know the initial
IT capital stock for ongoing establishments the first time they enter the sample. Our baseline
method is to impute the initial year’s IT stock using as a weight the establishment’s observed IT
investment relative to the industry IT investment. An alternative is to assume that the plant’s share
of the industry IT stock is the same as its share of employment in the industry. Finally, we use an
entirely different measure of IT use based on the number of workers in the establishment who use
computers (taken from a different survey). Qualitatively similar results were obtained from all
methods.
We have large numbers of multinational establishments in the sample. About 8% of the
establishments are US owned, 31% are owned by non-US multinationals and 61% are purely
domestic. Multinationals’ share of employment is even higher and their share of output higher still.
Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics for the different types of ownership, all relative to the
three-digit industry average for a typical year (2001). Labor productivity, as measured by output
per employee, is 24% higher for US multinational establishments and 15% higher for non-US
multinational establishments. This suggests a nine percentage point productivity premium for US
establishments as compared to other multinationals.11 But US establishments also look
systematically larger and more intensive in their non-labor input usage than other multinationals.
10

Table A2 sets out the basic summary statistics of the sample.
This is consistent with evidence that the plants of multinational US firms are more productive both on US soil
(Mark Doms and Bradford Jensen, 1998) and on foreign soil (Chiara Criscuolo and Ralf Martin (2004)).

11

10

US establishments have 14 percentage points more employees and use about 8 percentage points
more materials/intermediate inputs per employee and 10 percentage points more non-IT capital per
employee than other multinationals. Most interesting for our purposes, though, the largest gap in
factor intensity is for IT: US establishments are 32 percentage points more IT intensive than other
multinationals. Hence, establishments owned by US multinationals are notably more IT-intensive
than other multinationals in the same industry; this alone could be the reason for their higher
productivity in previous studies (as they have not been able to control for IT capital). In the
econometric analysis, we will show that this is not the full story because for a given amount of IT
capital US productivity appears to be higher.

III. Results
A. Main Results

One key result in our paper is that US establishments’ IT use is associated with greater
productivity than non-US establishments’ IT use. Some indication of this can be seen in the raw
data. In the first row of Table 2 we show that the mean value added per worker (normalized by the
industry average) in establishments with high IT intensity (defined as above the sample median IT
capital per worker) compared to those with lower IT intensity (below the sample median) is 34%
higher among the US owned establishments. In the second row, we show that the equivalent “IT
premium” is only 24% for establishments owned by non-US multinationals. The implied
“difference in differences” effect is a significant US premium in IT productivity of 10%. There are
a host of reasons why this comparison might be misleading, of course, but as we investigate them
below it will become clear that the basic contrast in Table 2 turns out to be remarkably robust.
In Table 3 we examine the output elasticity of IT in the standard production function framework
described in Section II. Column (1) estimates the basic production function, including dummy
variables for whether or not the plant is owned by a US multinational (“USA”) or a non-US
multinational (“MNE”) with domestic establishments being the omitted base. US establishments
are 7.1% more productive than UK domestic establishments and non-US multinationals are 3.9%
more productive. This 3.2% difference between the US and non-US multinationals coefficients is
also significant at the 5% level (p-value =0.02) as shown at the base of the column. This implies
that about two-thirds (6 percentage points of the 9 percentage point gap) of the labor productivity

11

gap between US and other multinationals shown in Table 1 can be accounted for by our
observables, such as greater non-IT factor intensity in the US establishments, but a significant gap
remains.
The second column of Table 3 includes the IT capital measure. This enters positively and
significantly and reduces the coefficients on the ownership dummies. US establishments are more
IT intensive than other establishments; this explains some of the productivity gap. But it only
accounts for about 0.2 percentage points of the initial 3.2% (= 0.0712 - 0.0392) productivity gap
between US and non-US establishments. Column (3) includes two interaction terms: one between
IT capital and the US multinational dummy and the other between IT capital and the non-US
multinational dummy. These turn out to be very revealing. The interaction between the US dummy
and IT capital is positive and significant at conventional levels. According to column (3) doubling
the IT stock is associated with an increase in productivity of 5.35% (= 0.0449 + 0.0086) for a US
multinational but only 4.5% (= 0.0449 + 0.0001) for a non-US multinational. Note that non-US
multinationals are not significantly different from domestic UK establishments in this respect: we
cannot reject the possibility that the coefficients on IT are equal for domestic UK establishments
and non-US multinationals. It is the US establishments that are distinctly different. Furthermore,
the linear US dummy is not significantly different from zero. Interpreted literally, this means that
we can “account” for all of the US multinational advantage by their more effective use of IT.
Hypothetically, US establishments with less than about £1,000 (about $2,000) of IT capital (i.e.
ln(C) = 0) are no more productive than their UK counterparts (none of the US establishments in
the sample have IT spending this low, of course).
To investigate the industries that appear to account for the majority of the productivity acceleration
in the US we split the sample into “high IT using intensive sectors” in column (4) and “Other
sectors” in column (5). Sectors that use IT intensively account for most of the US productivity
growth between 1995 and 2003. These include retail, wholesale and printing/publishing12. The US
interaction with IT capital is much stronger in the IT intensive sectors, in that it is not significantly
12

See Appendix Table A1 for a full list. We follow the same definitions of the sectors that intensively use IT as Kevin
Stiroh (2002). We group the IT producing sectors (like semi-conductors) with the “Other Sectors” because we could

12

different from zero in the other sectors (even though we have twice as many observations in those
industries). The final three columns include a full set of establishment fixed effects. The earlier
pattern of results is repeated with a higher value of the interaction than in the non-fixed effects
results. In particular, column (7) demonstrates that US establishments appear to have significantly
higher productivity of their IT capital stocks than domestic establishments or other multinationals.
A doubling of the IT capital stock is associated with 1% higher productivity for a domestic
establishment and 1.6% for a non-US multinational, but 3.9% higher productivity for an
establishment owned by a US multinational13.
The reported US*IT interaction tests for significant differences in the output-IT elasticity between
US multinationals and UK domestic establishments. However, note that in our key specifications
the IT coefficient for US multinationals is significantly different from the IT coefficient for other
multinationals. The row at the bottom of Table 3 reports the p-value of tests on the equality
between the US*IT and the MNE*IT coefficient (i.e. Ho: α hC ,USA DitUSA = α hC , MNE DitMNE ).

B. Robustness Tests

Table 4 presents a series of tests showing the robustness of the main results - we focus on the fixed
effects specification, which is the most demanding, and on the IT intensive sectors, which we have
shown to be crucial in driving our result. The first column represents our baseline production
function results from column (7) in Table 3. The results were similar if we use value-added-based
specifications (see column (2)), so we stay with the more general specification using gross output
as the dependent variable.
Transfer Pricing - Since we are using multinational data, could transfer pricing be a reason for the

results we obtain? If US firms shifted more of their accounting profits to the UK than other
multinationals this could cause us to over-estimate their productivity. But this would suggest that
not find significant differences in the IT coefficient between US and non-US firms. This is consistent with the
aggregate evidence that the productivity acceleration in these sectors was similar in Europe and the US.
13
The linear US dummy is negative and significant, implying that US multinationals with very low IT stocks are less
productive than domestic establishments. However, using the estimates of column (4) only 2% of the employees of US
multinationals are in these plants (5% using column (7)). Moreover, we show that when US firms take over an
establishment’s productivity can remain low for a year or two during the restructuring process, explaining the negative
direct US dummy given the short time dimension of the sample.
13

the factor coefficients on other inputs, particularly on materials, also would be systematically
different for US establishments. To test this, column (3) estimates the production function with a
full set of interactions between the US multinational dummy and all the factor inputs (and the nonUS multinational dummy and all the factor inputs). None of the additional non-IT factor input
interactions are individually significant, and the joint test at the bottom of the column of the
additional interactions shows that they are jointly insignificant (for example, the joint test of the all
the US interactions except the IT interaction has a p-value of 0.48). We cannot reject the
specification of equation (5) in column (1) as a good representation of the data versus the more
general interactive models of equation (4) in column (3).14 This experiment also rejects the general
idea that the productivity advantage of the US is attributable to differential mark-ups, because then
we would expect to see significantly different coefficients on all the factor inputs, not just on the
IT variable (Tor Klette and Zvi Griliches, 1996).
Another piece of evidence against the transfer pricing story is that our results are strongest in the
IT-using sectors, which are mainly services, like retail. Manipulating the transfer prices of
intermediate inputs is more difficult in services than manufacturing, as intermediate inputs
generally are purchased from independent suppliers. If we estimate the model solely for the retail
sector, for example, the coefficient on the US*IT interaction is 0.0509 with a standard error of
0.0118 (the interaction of other multinationals with IT has a coefficient of -0.0142 with a standard
error of 0.0096).
Systematic mismeasurement of American establishments’ IT capital stock - One concern is that we

may be underestimating the true IT stock of US multinationals in the initial year: this could
generate a positive coefficient on the interaction term, because of greater measurement error of IT
capital for the US establishments. This also could be due to transfer price concerns, causing the US
firms to underestimate their IT expenditure for some reason.

14

The p-value = 0.33 on this test. We also investigated whether the coefficients in the production function regressions
differ by ownership type and sector (IT intensive or not). Running the six separate regressions (three ownership types
by two sectors) we found the F-test rejected at the 1% level the pooling of the US multinationals with the other firms
in the IT intensive sectors. In the non-IT intensive sectors, by contrast, the pooling restrictions were not rejected.
Details from the authors on request.
14

To tackle this issue we turn to an alternative IT survey (the E-commerce Survey, described in the
Appendix) that has data on the proportion of workers in the establishment who are using
computers. This is a pure “stock” measure so it is unaffected by the initial conditions concern15. In
Column (4) we replace our IT capital stock measure with a measure of the number of workers
using computers. Reassuringly, we still find a positive and significant coefficient on the US
interaction with computer usage.
Functional Forms - We tried including a much broader set of interactions and higher order terms

(a “translog” specification) but these were generally individually insignificant. Column (5) shows
the results of including all the pair-wise interactions of materials, labor, IT capital, and non-IT
capital and the square of each of these factors. The additional terms are jointly significant but the
key US interaction with the IT term remains basically unchanged (it falls slightly from 0.0278 to
0.0268) and remains significant.
Selection of US establishments into sectors with high IT productivity - Another possible

explanation for the apparently higher productivity of IT is that US multinationals may be
disproportionately represented in specific industries in which the output elasticity of IT is
particularly high. The interaction of IT capital with the US dummy then would capture omitted
industry characteristics rather than a “true” effect linked to US ownership. To test for this potential
bias, we include in our regression as an additional control the percentage of US multinationals in
the specific four-digit industry (“USA_IND”)16 and its interaction with IT. The interaction was
positive but statistically insignificant (see column (6)), and the coefficient on the IT*US
interaction remains significant and largely unchanged.
Skills - In column (7), we considered the role of skills. Our main control for labor quality in Table

3 was the inclusion of establishment-specific fixed effects which, so long as labor quality does not
change too much over time, should control for the omitted human capital variable. As an
alternative, we assume that wages reflect marginal products of workers, so that conditioning on the
15

Our IT capital stock measure is theoretically more appropriate as it is built analogously to the non-IT stock and is
comparable to best practice existing work. The E-Commerce Survey is available for three years (2001 to 2003), but
the vast majority of the sample is observed only for one period, so we do not control for fixed effects.

15

average wage in the establishment is sufficient to control for human capital17. The average wage is
highly significant and the interaction between the average wage and IT capital is positive and
significant at the 10% level, consistent with technology-skill complementarity. The interaction
between the US dummy and average wages in the establishment is insignificant (a coefficient of
0.0365 and a standard error of 0.0403)18. Nevertheless, even in the presence of these skills
controls, the coefficient on the US ownership and IT interaction remains significantly positive.
Stronger selection effects for US multinationals because of greater distance from the UK - A

further issue is that US firms may be more productive in the UK because the US is geographically
further away than the average non-US multinational’s home base (in our data most foreign
multinationals are European if they are not American) and only the most productive firms are able
to overcome the fixed costs of distance. To test this we divide the non-US multinational dummy
into European versus non-European firms. Under the distance argument, the non-European firms
would have to be more productive to be able to set up greenfield establishments in the UK.
According to column (8) though, the European and non-European multinationals are statistically
indistinguishable from each other; again, it is the US multinationals that appear to be different.
Unmeasured software inputs for US establishments - Could the US*IT interaction effect reflect

greater unmeasured software inputs for US establishments? Although this is certainly possible
when we compare US multinationals with domestic establishments it is less likely when we
compare US multinationals with non-US multinationals because a priori there is no reason to
believe that they have higher levels of software. It could, however, be a problem if US firms were
globally larger than other multinationals (software has a large fixed cost component so will be
cheaper per unit for larger firms than smaller firms). To address this issue, we included a measure
The variable is constructed as an average between 1995 and 2003 and is built using the whole ABI population.
The problem is that wages may control for “too much”, as some proportion of wages may be related to non-human
capital variables. For example, in many bargaining models, firms with high productivity will reward even
homogenous workers with higher wages (for example, see John Van Reenen, 1996, on sharing the quasi-rents from
new technologies).
18
As an alternative we matched in education information by aggregating up individual level survey (the Labor Force
Survey) into industry by regional cells. In the specifications without fixed effects, there was some evidence for a
positive and significant interaction between skills and IT consistent with complementarity between technology and
human capital. The US*IT capital interaction remained significant. Including fixed effects, however, renders the skills
16
17

16

of the “global size” of the multinational parent of our establishments. In our UK ABI data, US
multinationals and non-US multinationals are similar in their median global employment size. As a
more direct test, we introduce an explicit interaction term between the global size of the parent
firm (defined as the log of the total number of worldwide employees) and IT capital in a
specification identical to baseline specification in column (1) of Table 4. The interaction between
global size and IT is insignificant and the US interaction with IT remained significant (at the 1%
level) and significantly different from the non-US multinational interaction with IT at the 10%
level19.
We also used a measure of software capital constructed analogously to our main IT capital
variable (see Appendix A). In our data, software expenditure includes a charge for software
acquired from the multinational’s parent. The IT capital interaction is robust to the inclusion of
this measure of software capital (and its interaction with ownership status). For example, when we
added software capital to a specification identical to column (1) of Table 4 the standard IT
interaction with the US remained positive and significant20.
So the evidence does not appear to support a large role for unmeasured software inputs driving the
superior US productivity of IT. But even if this did play some role, it would still leave the puzzle
of why US firms have so much higher software inputs than other multinationals. Commercial
software is available globally and is costless to transport. One could argue that US firms have
access to a better pool of computer programmers, for example from Silicon Valley, and these
develop more advanced in-house software.21 But even if this were true, market forces would
rapidly provide this commercially if it had such a large positive effect on productivity. The model
presented below in section IV offers one explanation of why the US may have “moved first” in

variables and their interactions insignificant (even though US*IT interaction remains significant). Interactions between
the US dummy and skills were insignificant in all specifications.
19
The global size variable was only available for a sub-sample of 3,000 observations (from the baseline sample of
7,784). When we re-ran the baseline specification on this smaller sub-sample, the US interaction with IT was 0.032
(instead of 0.028 in the baseline) and significant at the 5% level. When we include the global size term the point
estimate rose to 0.036 (the point estimate on the global size interaction was -0.0017). We are very grateful to Ralf
Martin and Chiara Criscuolo for matching in the data.
20
The IT hardware capital interaction had a coefficient of 0.0263 with a standard error of 0.0118.
21
There is, of course, a highly successful European software industry, including firms like SAP that provides global
enterprise application software.
17

organizational change based on lower labor market regulations: it is less clear why this should
have been the case for software.
Controlling for endogenous inputs – We also estimated the production functions to control for the

endogeneity of factor inputs using the GMM “System” estimator of Blundell and Bond (1998) and
the Olley and Pakes (1996) estimator. The full results are shown in Appendix Table A3. In both
cases the main finding - that the output-elasticity of IT for US multinationals is much larger than
the output-elasticity of IT for non-US multinationals - is robust, even though the coefficients are
estimated less precisely than under our baseline within-groups estimates.22

C. US Multinational Takeovers of UK establishments

One possible explanation for our results is that US firms “cherry pick” the best UK establishments,
that is, those that already have the highest productivity of IT. This would generate the positive
interaction we find but it would be due entirely to selection on unobserved heterogeneity rather
than to higher IT productivity caused by US ownership. To look at this issue, we examined the
sub-sample of establishments that were, at some point in our sample period, taken over by another
firm. We considered both US and non-US acquirers. Because of the high rate of merger and
acquisition activity in the UK, this is a large sample (4,888 observations)23.
In column (1) of Table 5, we start by estimating our standard production functions, for all
establishments that are eventually taken over in their pre-takeover years (this is labelled “before
takeover”). The coefficients on the observable factor inputs are very similar to those for the whole
sample in column (2) of Table 3. Unlike the full sample, though, the US and non-US ownership
dummies are insignificant, suggesting that the establishments taken over by multinationals are not
ex ante more productive than those acquired by domestic UK firms.

22

The coefficient on the US*IT interaction in the GMM system estimator is 0.118 with a standard error of 0.064 and
this is significantly different from the non-US multinational interaction at the 10% level. The underlying theoretical
model of Olley-Pakes does not allow us to simply include interactions, so we estimated the production function
separately for the three ownership types (US multinationals, non-US multinationals and domestic UK establishments).
The output-IT elasticity for US multinationals is twice as large as that of non-US multinationals.

18

In column (2) of Table 5 we interact the IT capital stock with a US and a non-US multinational
ownership dummy, again estimated on the pre-takeover data. We see that neither interaction is
significant – that is before establishments are taken over by US firms they do not have unusually
high IT coefficients. So, US firms also do not appear to be selecting establishments that already
provide higher IT productivity. In columns (3) and (4) we estimate production function
specifications identical to columns (1) and (2) but on the post-takeover sample. In column (3), the
non-US and US multinational ownership coefficients are positive and significant. Thus, a transfer
of ownership from domestic to multinational production is associated with an increase in
productivity, particularly for a move to US ownership.
Column (4) is the key result for Table 5. It contains the estimates of a specification that allows the
IT capital stock coefficient to vary by ownership status for the post-takeover sample. For the posttakeover period we indeed see that the interaction between IT and the US dummy is positive and
significant at the 5% level but is insignificant for non-US multinationals. Hence, after a takeover
by a US multinational, an establishment enjoys significantly higher IT-related productivity than a
statistically similar establishment taken over by a non-US multinational. Note that the inclusion of
the US interaction with IT also drives the coefficient on the linear US multinational term into
insignificance, suggesting that the main reason for the improved performance of establishments
after a US takeover is linked to the increased IT productivity (just as we saw in Table 3 for the
whole sample). The fifth column of Table 5 breaks down the post takeover period into the first
year after the takeover and the subsequent years (note that throughout the table we drop the
takeover year itself as we cannot determine the exact timing within the year when the takeover
occurred). The greater productivity of IT capital in establishments taken over by US multinationals
is revealed only two and three years after takeover (this interaction is significant at the 5% level
whereas the interaction in the first year is insignificant). This is consistent with the idea that US
firms take some time to restructure before obtaining higher productivity gains from IT. Domestic

23

We have a larger number of observations “post-takeover” than “pre-takeover” as there was a takeover wave at the
beginning of our sample in the late 1990s associated with the stock market bubble and high tech boom. For these
establishments, we necessarily have a lot more post takeover information than pre-takeover information.
19

and other multinationals again reveal no pattern, with all dummies and interactions remaining
insignificant.24
The sample in Table 5 includes some firms that are taken over by domestic UK firms, so a
stronger test is to drop these and consider only takeovers by multinational firms. In column (6) we
replicate the specification of column (5) for this smaller sample and again find that establishments
taken over by US multinationals have a significantly higher coefficient on IT capital after two or
more years than non-multinational takeovers.
As another cut on the cherry-picking concept we ran linear probability models of US takeovers
where the dependent variable was equal to one for establishments taken over by a US firm and
otherwise zero. There is no evidence that US firms are more likely to take over establishments that
are more IT intensive, or that establishments are increasing their IT intensity (see Appendix Table
A4 for full results)25.

IV. A Simple Theoretical Model of IT and Productivity

In this section, we consider a formal model that potentially can rationalize the macro stylized facts
with the results we see in the micro-econometric analysis. We have established that foreign
affiliates of US firms appear more productive than affiliates of other multinationals and that this
productivity advantage appears to be linked strongly to their use of IT, suggesting an unobserved
complementary input that is more abundant in US firms. The literature suggests that one candidate
for this complementary input may be the internal organization of US firms. In this section, we
build a model in which firms optimally are choosing their organizational form. We show how the
predictions from the simple dynamic model are consistent with what we have observed in the
micro (and macro) data. First (in sub-section IV.A), we present some survey data to corroborate
the idea that US firms have distinctive organizational features. Then (in sub-section IV.B), we
24

Taken literally, the negative coefficient on the US linear term in column (4) implies a negative US effect for firms
with IT capital below approximatively £4,500 ($9,000). Only 0.1% of employment in US establishments is below this
threshold.
25
For example, the marginal effect of (lagged) IT capital in the US takeover equation was 0.0029 with a standard error
of 0.0095 (we included controls for size, non-IT intensity, productivity, age and industry dummies – none of which
were significant).
20

sketch the basic model and finally (in sub-section IV.C) we show how some extensions of the
model fit other features of the data.
We base this theory on the costs of making organizational changes, as this seems to be consistent
with a range of information from case studies and other papers. We readily concede that this is not
the only model that could rationalize some of the facts (see sub-section V.B below). However, we
think that it is a compelling model fitting the general facts in our empirical study as well as the
more general literature. We offer some direct evidence on the model using explicit measures of
labor market regulation in sub-section IV.D.

A. The Organization of US firms

Before we present the model it is worth considering some supporting evidence on the different
internal organization of US versus European firms. In Figure 3, panels 3a and 3b provide new
evidence we collected on the internal organization of over 700 firms in the US and Europe. These
show that, on average, firms operating in the US are significantly more decentralized than those
operating in Europe.26 This is also true when looking at US multinationals in Europe compared to
non-US multinationals in Europe, with the US firms again being significantly more decentralized.
In Panels 3c and 3d we use two other UK surveys, the Workplace Industrial Relations Survey and
the Community Innovation Survey, to show that US multinationals also had a higher rate of
change in organizational structure going back to the mid-1980s. So, in short, US firms are
organized differently, both at home and abroad, and also change organizational structures more
swiftly.

B. Basic Model

Consider two representative firms, one in the US and one in the EU. To keep things as simple as
possible we assume that technology, prices, and all parameters (except organizational adjustment
costs) are common in the two regions. Firms in the US and EU are always optimizing - i.e.
European firms are not making systematic “mistakes” by choosing a different organizational form,

26

Decentralization was measured in the same way as Timothy Bresnahan et al (2002) using questions related to task
allocation and pace setting in order to indicate the degree of employee autonomy.
21

but rather are reacting optimally, given the common economic environment and their different
adjustment costs.
The firms produce output (Q) by combining IT (C) inputs, non-IT capital inputs (K) and labor
inputs (L), with all other inputs assumed to be zero for simplicity, and defined as follows:
Q = A Cα+σO Kβ -σO L1-α-β

Organizational structure is denoted O and is normalized on a scale from zero, from “centralized”
production, to one, as modern “decentralized” production27. The α, β and σ are production function
parameters where 0 < α + β < 1 and 0 < σ < β.28 This specification of the production function is a
simple way of capturing the notion that IT and organizational form are complementary as σ > 0.
Second, we have modelled O as having only adjustment costs. There is no “price” of a level of
organizational capital, nor is there always a positive marginal product of output with respect to O.
This implies that the optimal organizational form will depend on the relative prices of the factor
inputs and technology. In earlier time periods the higher relative price of IT meant that firms were
more intensive in non-IT capital (K), which gave no incentive to maintain positive levels of O.
The firm sells its output in a market with iso-elastic demand elasticity e ( >1) so that P = BQ-1/e
where P is the output price and B is a demand shock parameter. Combining the production with
this demand function we can write revenue as:
PQ = Z(Cα+σO Kβ -σO L1-α-β) 1 - 1/e

27

We choose centralization/decentralization based on some of the case study evidence concerning the introduction of
IT, but to some extent this is just labelling. What matters is that the optimal organizational form changes with IT and
that there are costs associated with making this change. The new form of organization will be different in different
industries, centralized in some, decentralized in others.
28
For simplicity, we have not allowed O to enter into the exponent of L. Nothing fundamental would change by
allowing this – what matters is the strength of the positive interaction between ln(C) and O is stronger than it is with
the other two factors.
22

where Z = BA1-1/e is an arbitrary constant (since A and B are arbitrary scaling constants). Defining
ψ = α(1 - 1/e), µ= β(1 - 1/e), γ = (1-α- β)(1 - 1/e) and λ = σ(1 - 1/e), we combine the production
function parameters and the demand parameters to re-write revenue as:
PQ = Cψ + λO K µ − λO Lγ

Flow profits then can be defined as:
Π = Cψ + λO K µ − λO Lγ − g (∆O ) − WL − ρ C C − ρ K K

where W is the wage rate, ρC is the rental cost of IT capital and ρK is the rental cost of non-IT
physical capital, g(∆O) is the adjustment cost function and ∆ is the first difference operator
(e.g. ∆Ot = Ot - Ot-1). The rental costs of IT and non-IT capital are calculated using the Hall-

(

)

Jorgenson formula, ρtx = ptx r + δ x − [ ptx+1 / ptx − 1] where x = {C, K}, r is the discount rate, ptC and

ptK are the prices of IT and non-IT capital respectively, and δC and δK are the depreciation rates of
IT and non-IT capital respectively.
As appears to be the case in the data (e.g. Dale Jorgensen, 2001) we assume that the cost of IT
investment goods, ptC was falling at 15% per year until 1995 and at 25% per year after 1995. NonIT capital prices and wage rates, in comparison, have been relatively more stable and, for
simplicity in the model, are assumed to be constant.
We assume that the organizational adjustment cost term g(∆O) has a quadratic component and a
fixed disruption component and is borne as a financial cost. Our critical assumption is that the
quadratic component is higher in Europe. We show some econometric evidence below that this
may reflect tougher labor laws making it expensive to rapidly hire and fire workers in any
organizational change. The fixed component of adjustment costs reflects the business disruption
from any organizational change29.

29

We assume this to be common in Europe and the US for modelling simplicity – allowing this to be higher in the EU
would tend to reinforce the qualitative results reported below.
23

g(∆O) = ωm(∆O)2 + ηPQ| ∆O≠0|

where m = {EU,US} and ωEU > ωUS

Firms maximize their present discounted value of profits. Introducing explicit time sub-scripts and
given the structure of the problem, we can write the deterministic value function for a firm as:

Vt (Ot −1 , ρ tC ) = max Ct ,K t ,Lt ,Ot {C tψ +λOt K tµ −λOt Lγt −λOt − g ( ∆Ot ) − WLt − ρ tC C t − ρ K K t +

1
Vt +1 (Ot , ρ tC+1 )}
1+ r

Applying standard results from Nancy Stokey, Robert Lucas and Edward Prescott (1988) it can be
shown that this value function is continuous, strictly decreasing in ρ tC and has an almost
everywhere unique solution in Ct, Kt, Lt and Ot. Given any initial conditions for ρ 0C and O0, the
policy correspondence functions can be used iteratively to solve the time path of Ct, K t, Lt and Ot .
The long-run qualitative features are reasonably obvious. As the price of IT continues to fall, the
steady state optimal organizational form is complete decentralization for all firms (O equal to
unity). The interesting question, however, is the transitional dynamics and whether this differs
between the US and Europe. Although the model has a well-behaved analytical solution, in order
to derive numerical values for any particular set of parameter values we need to use numerical
methods.
To do this we define the parameter values as follows: α = 0.025 reflecting a 2.5% revenue share
for IT; β = 0.3 reflecting a 30% share for non-IT capital in value added; and e = 3 reflecting a 50%
mark-up over marginal costs; MC, ((P-MC)/MC = 1/(1-e)). The parameter λ has no obvious value,
so we set this at λ = ψ so that full “decentralization” (moving from O equal zero to O equal unity)
doubles the value of the marginal product of IT and reduces the value of the marginal product of
capital by just under 10%. Picking larger or smaller values of λ while holding the scaling on O,
constantly increases or reduces the degree of complementarity between O and λ. The discount rate
is set at r = 10%, the IT depreciation rate at δC = 30% (Basu et al, 2003), the non-IT depreciation
rate of δK = 10% and the wage rate is normalized to unity (W = 1). The fixed costs of adjustment
are set at η = 0.2 percent of sales selected on the evidence for the fixed costs of capital investments

24

(see Nick Bloom, 2006); given the lack of any direct evidence on the cost of organizational
adjustment costs. The quadratic adjustment cost parameter is set so that adjustment costs are four
times as high in Europe as in the US (i.e. ωEU/ ωUS = 4), roughly similar to the differences in the
OECD’s labor regulation indices in Giuseppe Nicoletti, Stefano Scarpetta and Olivier Boyland
(2000). The starting values for p0C and O0 are taken as p0C = 0.066 and O0 = 0 in 1975, with the
price process then exponentially decaying (as outlined above) until 2025 at which point prices stop
falling any further, while p K is normalized to unity. The first and last ten years of the simulation
are then discarded to abstract from any initial and terminal restrictions30.
The model has several intuitive predictions that are consistent with the stylized facts and also
contains some novel predictions. First, we trace out the decentralization decisions of firms in
Figure 4. We see that US firms start to decentralize first (in the late 1980s) and are on average
more decentralized than European firms throughout the period under consideration (the
representative EU firm begins to decentralize about nineteen years after the American firm). The
US decentralizes first because of its lower adjustment costs31.
Figure 5 examines the IT capital-labor ratio in logarithms (ln(C/L)). Unsurprisingly, this is rising
in both regional blocs due to the global fall in IT prices. IT intensity grows at an identical rate in
the two regions, until the US starts to decentralize and at this point American firms start to become
more IT intensive than European firms. This is because of the complementarity underlying the
production function (higher O implies higher optimal IT investment). Labor productivity (Q/L) is
shown in Figure 6. The higher IT intensity translates through into higher labor productivity which
accelerates from the mid 1990s.
These findings are consistent with the broad macro facts as discussed earlier. We now discuss
extensions to fit the micro data results.

30

The code is written in MATLAB available on request from the authors and on http://www.stanford.edu/~nbloom/
The fixed costs of adjustment implies that firms always change O in discrete “chunks” and the cost of making any
given jump will always be greater for European firms because of their higher quadratic adjustment costs.
31

25

C. Extensions to the basic model

Multinationals - We now consider multinational companies who operate several establishments, at
least one of which is on foreign soil. We extend the modelling framework to consider an additional
cost in maintaining different organizational forms in different establishments. Multinationals
appear to operate globally similar management and organizational structures (e.g. Christopher
Bartlett and Sumantra Ghoshal, 1999) as this makes it much easier to integrate senior managers,
human resource systems, software, etc. At different ends of the skills spectrum both McKinsey and
McDonalds are recognizably similar in Cambridge, Massachusetts and Cambridge, England. To
formalize this we allow an additional quadratic adjustment cost which has to be born if there is a
difference between the organization of the establishment i (Oi) and its parent ( O PARENT ),

φ (Oi − O PARENT ) 2 ( PQ)i .
Consider the case of a US firm purchasing a European establishment (in the period after US firms
have started to decentralize). The purchased establishment will start to become more decentralized
than identical establishments owned by domestic firms (or European multinationals operating
solely in Europe). It will also start increasing IT intensity and labor productivity at a faster rate
than European owned establishments. The degree to which the establishment resembles its
American parent will depend on the size of
The larger is

φ relative to the adjustment cost differential ωEU/ωUS.

φ the more quickly the establishment will start to resemble its US parent32. Note that

the presence of adjustment costs, however, suggests that this change will not be immediate so after
an American firm takes over a European establishment the IT intensity and productivity will be,
for some periods, below that of longer-established US affiliates.
The middle line in Figure 7 shows the simulation results for a hypothetical British establishment
taken over by a US multinational in 2003. The calibration assumes φ =1. Under this scenario, the
taken over firm initially converges to within 0.1 point of the organizational structure of the US
parent company five years after the take over year.
32

This raises questions about the reasons for takeovers. Why should a US firm ever take over a European plant if it
has to bear greater adjustment costs than a European multinational? One reason is that the US parent may have higher
TFP from some firm-specific advantage that it can diffuse to the affiliate (such as better technology or management).
This is not modelled here for parsimony, but could easily be included.
26

The model now matches the qualitative features of the data. When US firms take over European
establishments we observe an increase in labor productivity and a higher coefficient on IT in the
production function that accounts for all of the US establishments’ productivity differential.
Furthermore, this process does not happen immediately as there are adjustment costs – this is what
we observed in the dynamic specifications when looking at takeovers (the last two columns of
Table 5)33.
Industry Heterogeneity - The fall in the price of IT has opened up the possibility of IT-enabled
innovations to a greater extent in some industries than others. George Baker and Thomas Hubbard
(2004) for example describe how on-board computers have altered business methods in the
trucking industry. In our model we can capture this by allowing a different degree of
complementarity between IT and organization in some industries than others (i.e. a higher σ).
Those sectors that we have labelled (following Kevin Stiroh, 2002) “IT intensive” would have a
higher σ and therefore follow the patterns analyzed above. Other sectors with low σ would not
follow these patterns and for these industries US and EU productivity experience should be similar
as both regions enjoy the benefits of faster productivity growth. This is what we find in the micro
data – the differences between US and EU firms are much stronger in the sectors than intensively
use IT.
Permanent Differences in Organizational/Management Quality - An alternative model to the one
we have presented could be one were US firms have always been better managed/organized than
European firms and that this better management is complementary with IT. This could be due to
tougher competition, culture, less family run firms, etc. Under this model “O” would enter as an
additional factor input in the production function with an exogenously lower price in the US than
in Europe. For example,
Q = A OχCα+σO Kβ -σO L1-α-β-χ
33

An alternative model close to that of Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe (2006) would be to consider
organizational capital based on learning about IT. If the US started learning first (again, possibly because of lower
adjustment costs) and organizational capital can be transferred across countries within the multinational this would
also generate the results we see in the data.
27

This set-up would rationalize most of the findings presented in the paper except one – that the
linear US multinational dummy was insignificantly different from zero once we have accounted
for the higher coefficient on IT capital for US firms (see Table 3 column (3) and Table 5 column
(4)). Thus, we conclude that the results on grounds of parsimony and consistency imply σ > 0 and
χ = 0.
Adjustment Costs for IT capital and TFP measurement - For simplicity we abstracted away from
adjustment costs in IT capital and other factors of production. Consider a simple extension of the
model where we also have quadratic adjustment costs in IT capital, but assume that these are the
same across countries. The implications of such a model are discussed formally in Appendix B.
Obviously this will slow down the change in IT and organization, O, but the qualitative findings
from the theory discussed above will still go through34. One difference, however, is that under this
model measured TFP will appear to grow as IT is accumulated, even though actual TFP growth is
stable. Under the baseline model the share of IT capital in revenue is still equal to ψ + λO in every
period so the “weight” on IT capital in the conventionally measured TFP formula will be correct.
Once we allow for adjustment costs in IT, by contrast, the empirical share of IT in revenues will be
below its steady state level. This will mean that measured TFP will exceed actual TFP (A). The
prediction from this extension to the basic model is that a regression of measured TFP growth on
IT capital growth will generate a positive coefficient on IT. We calculated measured TFP growth
as a residual using factor shares as weights and regressed this on the growth of IT capital stock,
ownership dummies, a multi-plant dummy, age and year dummies. The IT capital stock coefficient
was 0.0056 with a standard error of 0.0023. As with Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin Hitt (2003), the
coefficient on IT rose as we considered longer differenced specifications (e.g. it was 0.0105 for the
400 establishments where we could construct four year differences, approximately equal to the
share of IT in total revenues). So this is consistent with the extension to the model.
The model with IT adjustment costs also predicts that during the initial period when the US is
adjusting its organizations and rapidly accumulating IT, the correlation of measured TFP growth

28

and IT capital growth will be stronger for US firms than EU firms. In our TFP regressions
including an additional US interaction with IT growth was positive, but never significant at the 5%
level. This lack of significance may be because IT adjustment costs are also higher in the EU than
the US. If this is the case the “wedge” between production function parameters and IT factor share
could be larger in Europe, with the coefficient on the US interaction becoming ambiguous (see
Appendix B for more theoretical details).

D. A little “direct evidence” on the model

The attraction of our model is that it assumes fully rational behavior by firms, it is parsimonious
and it is able to match a range of the micro and macro stylized facts discussed in the paper.35 There
are other models that may also be able to do the same, however. So in this sub-section we consider
some more direct evidence that measures of institutional inflexibility that generate differential
adjustment costs (like labor market regulations) might be a key difference.
Christopher Gust and Jaime Marquez (2004) show that an employment protection index is
negatively correlated with country-wide IT expenditure as a share of GDP for thirteen OECD
countries. Our model suggests that these regulations are partially “exported” to the multinational’s
establishments in the UK (through the desire to keep a globally similar organization within the
multinational). To examine this idea we match in the World Bank’s measure of the flexibility of
labor regulation to the establishments in our dataset by country of ownership, which is shown in
Figure 8. So, for example, the Germany data point plots the labor regulation index in Germany
against the IT intensity for establishments owned by German multinationals. We find that the IT
intensity of multinational affiliates is higher in the UK when labor market flexibility is greater in
their home country (the correlation coefficient between IT intensity and labor market flexibility is
0.0579 and is significant at the 1% level)36.

34

For an analysis of mixed fixed and quadratic adjustment costs with two factors see Nick Bloom, Steven Bond and
John Van Reenen (2006) or Nick Bloom (2006).
35
Gustavo Crespi, Chiara Criscuolo and Jonathan Haskel (2006) and Laura Abramovsky and Rachel Griffith (2007)
present some other evidence related to our organization-based model
36

When we drop all the observations from US multinationals the correlation coefficient is 0.0351 (significant at the
10% level).
29

More ambitiously, Table 6 presents regressions based on the multinational-only sample where we
include interactions with labor market regulation of the multinational’s home country and the
establishment’s IT capital. The first column includes only the standard production function
controls (i.e. it drops the ownership variables) and includes the index of the flexibility of labor
regulation. The coefficient on the flexibility index is positive and significant suggesting higher
TFP for multinationals whose home country has more flexible labor markets. The next column
repeats the baseline specification of column (1) in Table 4 and shows that the standard results hold
on this sample. In particular, the interaction between the US dummy and IT capital is significantly
positive. In column (3) we include instead the interaction between labor regulation (in the
multinational’s home country) and IT. The coefficient on this interaction is also significantly
positive, consistent with the theory: lighter regulations in the establishment’s home country appear
to be associated with greater productivity of IT in the UK. We repeat the specifications of columns
(2) and (3) including fixed effects in columns (4) and (5) and show the robustness of the results.
Ideally, we would like to show that the US interaction is driven to insignificance by on the
interaction of IT with the labor regulation index. This is not the case; in column (6) when we
include both interactions these are positive but individually insignificant37.
Overall we take these results as supportive of our basic model. It appears to be the flexibility of the
US economy in adapting to the challenges of major changes (such as the IT revolution) that gives
it productivity advantage, not its permanent superiority in all states of the world.

V. Conclusions

Using a large and original establishment level panel dataset we find robust evidence that IT has a
positive and significant correlation with productivity even after controlling for many factors,
including establishment fixed effects. Our most novel result, however, is that we can account for
the US multinational advantage in productivity by the higher productivity of their IT capital.
Furthermore, the stronger association of IT with productivity for US firms is confined to the same
“IT using intensive” industries that largely accounted for the US “productivity miracle” since the
mid 1990s. These results were robust to examining establishments that were taken over by other

37

The interactions are jointly significant at the 10% level.
30

firms: US firms who took over establishments have significantly greater IT productivity relative to
non-US multinationals who took over statistically similar establishments.
US firms appear to obtain significantly higher productivity from their IT capital than other
multinational establishments (and domestic establishments), even in the context of a UK
environment. This suggests that part of the IT-related productivity gains underlying the recent US
“productivity miracle” may be related to US firm characteristics rather than simply the natural
advantage (geographical, institutional or otherwise) of being located in the US environment. We
rationalized the macro and micro stylized facts with a simple model that combines the importance
of internal organization and environmental factors. Firms in the US and Europe optimally choose
their organization and factor inputs like IT with identical production functions and face the same
rapid falls in IT prices. The lower adjustment costs for US firms (possibly due to more flexible
labor regulations) allows them to re-organize more swiftly to take advantage of the new IT enabled
innovations. Coupled with the idea that multinationals face costs of maintaining different
organizational forms in different countries this model delivers predictions consistent with our
results.
There are many outstanding issues and research questions. First, according to our model the US is
not always superior. Rather, it is the flexibility of the US economy in adapting to major changes
(such as the IT revolution) that gives it a temporary productivity advantage. This model predicts
that Europe will start to realize enhanced IT-enabled productivity growth over the next few years
and resume the catching up process with the US that was observed until the mid 1990s. There may
be some evidence of this occurring as Europe’s productivity growth in 2006 picked up as
America’s slowed slightly38. Of course, if the world economy has moved into a stage of
development where technology-related turbulence is inherently greater, then the more flexible US
will retain an edge over Europe for the foreseeable future.
Second, we would like to confront our model more directly with measures of organization and IT.
This paper has looked at the consequences of organizational change on “standard” observables

38

The Economist, April 14th 2007, Economic Focus “Making Less With More”
31

(although IT is also rarely observed at the micro level). A follow-up study to Nick Bloom and John
Van Reenen (2006) has collected data from several thousand firms on internal organization
structure, management and IT across eleven countries. We can use this data to directly examine
some of the model’s implications.
Thirdly, we would like to understand the determinants of decentralization and other organizational
design features of firms in much more detail. What are the other factors determining how and
when firms change their structure? Daron Acemoglu et al (2006) make a start in this direction.
Despite this need for further research we believe our paper has made some inroads into one of the
most puzzling episodes in the last decade: the explanation of the US “productivity miracle”.

32

REFERENCES
Abramovsky, Laura and Griffith, Rachel (2007) “ICT, Corporate Restructuring and
Productivity” mimeo. University College London
Acemoglu, Daron, Aghion, Philippe, Lelarge, Claire, Van Reenen, John and Zilibotti,
Fabrizio (2006) “Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the firm”, Center for
Economic Performance Discussion Paper no. 722, forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Arellano, Manuel and Bond, Steve (1991), “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte
Carlo evidence and an application to employment functions”, Review of Economic Studies, 58, pp.
277 – 297.
Atkeson, Andrew and Kehoe, Patrick (2006) “Modeling the Transition to a New Economy:
Lessons from Two Technological Revolutions” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff report
No. 296, forthcoming American Economic Review
Bartlett, Christopher and Ghoshal, Sumantra (1999) Managing Across Borders: The
Transnational Solution, Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Baker, George and Hubbard, Thomas (2004) “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On board
computers and governance in US trucking” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, pp. 1443-79.
Basu, Susanto, Fernald, John G., Oulton, Nicholas, Srinivasan, Sylaja (2003) “The Case of the
Missing Productivity Growth: Or, Does information technology explain why productivity
accelerated in the United States but not the United Kingdom?” NBER Macro-economics Annual
pp. 9-64.
Blanchard, Olivier (2004) “The Economic Future of Europe” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
18, pp. 3-26.
Blanchard, Olivier, Bailey, Martin, Gersbach, Hans, Schnitzer, Monika, Tirole, Jean (2002)
Reaching Higher Productivity Growth in France and Germany, Sector case: Retail Trade,
McKinsey Global Institute.
Bloom, Nick (2006) “The Impact of Uncertainty shocks: Firm level estimation and a 9/11
Simulation” Centre for Economic Performance Working Paper 718.
Bloom, Nick and Van Reenen, John (2006), “Measuring and explaining management practices
across firms and countries”, Center for Economic Performance Discussion Paper no. 716,
forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bloom, Nick, Bond, Steve and Van Reenen, John (2006) “Uncertainty and company investment
dynamics: Empirical Evidence for UK firms”, Center for Economic Performance Discussion Paper
no. 739, forthcoming Review of Economics Studies.

33

Blundell, Richard and Bond, Steve (1998) “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
dynamic panel data models” Journal of Econometrics, 88, pp. 115-143.
Botero, Juan, Djankov, Simeon, Porta, Rafael, Lopez-De-Silanes, Florencio and Schleifer,
Andrei, (2004) “The Regulation of Labor”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), pp. 13391382.
Bresnahan, Tim, Brynjolfsson, Erik and Hitt, Lorin (2002) “Information Technology,
Workplace Organization and the Demand for skilled labor” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117(1), pp. 339-376.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Hitt, Lorin (2000) “Beyond Computation: Information Technology,
Organisational Transformation and Business Performance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14
(4) pp. 23-48.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Hitt, Lorin (2003) “Computing Productivity: Firm Level Evidence”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 85 (4), pp. 793-808.
Caroli, Eve, and Van Reenen, John (2001) “Skill biased organizational change? Evidence from
British and French establishments" Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVI (4) pp. 1449-1492.
Crespi, Gustavo, Criscuolo, Chiara and Haskel, Jonathan (2006) “Information Technology,
Organizational Change and Growth: Evidence from UK firms”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6105.
Criscuolo, Chiara and Martin, Ralf (2004) “Multinationals and US Productivity Leadership:
Evidence from Great Britain”, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 672.
Doms, Mark, Dunn, William, Oliner, Steve, Sichel, Daniel (2004) “How Fast Do Personal
Computers Depreciate? Concepts and New Estimates”, NBER Working Paper No. 10521.
Doms, Mark and Jensen, Bradford (1998) “Comparing Wages, skills and productivity between
domestically owned manufacturing establishments in the United States” in Robert Baldwin,
Richard Lipsey and David Richardson (eds.) Geography and Ownership as bases for economic
accounting, pp. 235-258, Chicago: University of Chicago.
Fenestra, Robert and Knittel, Christopher (2004) “Re-assessing the US quality adjustment to
computer prices: The role of durability and changing software” NBER Working Paper 10857.
Gordon, Robert J. (2004) “Why was Europe left at the station when America’s Productivity
Locomotive departed?” NBER Working Paper No. 10661.
Gust, Christopher and Marquez, Jaime (2004) “International comparisons of productivity
growth: the role of information technology” Labor Economics, 11, pp. 33-58.

34

Haltiwanger, John, Jarmin, Ron and Schank, Thorsten (2003) “Productivity, Investment in
ICT and market experimentation: Micro evidence from Germany and the U.S” Center for
Economic Studies Discussion Paper 03-06.
Hunter, Larry, Bernhardt, Annette, Hughes, Katherine, and Skuratowicz, Eva (2000) “It’s
not just the ATMs: Technology, firm strategies, jobs and earnings in Retail Banking” Wharton
Financial Institutions Center Working Paper No. 00-31.
Jorgenson, Dale (2001) “Information technology and the U. S. economy”, American Economic
Review, 91(1), pp. 1-32.
Klette, Tor and Griliches, Zvi (1996) “The inconsistency of Common Scale estimators when
output prices are unobserved and endogenous” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11, pp. 343-361.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, Scarpetta, Stefano and Boyland, Olivier (2000) “Summary Indicators of
Product Market Competition with an extension to Employment Protection” OECD Working Paper
No. 226, OECD: Paris.
Oliner, Stephen and Sichel, Daniel (2000) “The resurgence of growth in the late 1990s: is
information technology the story?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(4), pp. 3-22.
Oliner, Stephen and Sichel, Daniel (2005) “The resurgence of growth in the late 1990s: Update”,
mimeo Federal Reserve Bank, Washington.
Olley, Steven and Pakes, Ariel (1996) “The Dynamics
Telecommunications Industry.” Econometrica 64 (6) pp. 1263-1297.

of

Productivity

in

the

O'Mahony, Mary and van Ark, Bart (2003), EU Productivity and Competitiveness: An Industry
Perspective Can Europe Resume the Catching-up Process? Office for Official Publications of the
European Communities, Luxembourg, 2003.
Stiroh, Kevin (2002), “Information Technology and the US Productivity Revival: What Do the
Industry Data Say?” American Economic Review, 92(5), pp. 1559-1576.
Stiroh, Kevin (2004) “Reassessing the Role of IT in the Production Function: A Meta analysis”,
mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Stokey, Nancy, Lucas, Robert and Prescott, Edward (1988) Recursive Methods in Economic
Dynamics, Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Timmer, Marcel, Ypma, Gerard and van Ark, Bart (2005) “IT in the European Union: Driving
Productivity Convergence?” Research Memorandum GD-67, Groningen Growth and Development
Centre.
Van Reenen, John (1996) “The Creation and Capture of Economic Rents: Wages and Innovation
in a Panel of UK Companies” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXI, 443, pp. 195-226.
35

APPENDIX A: DATA AND ADDITIONAL RESULTS
A1 ESTABLISHMENT DATASET: THE ANNUAL BUSINESS INQUIRY
The Annual Business Inquiry (ABI) is the major source of establishment level data in the UK. It underlies the
construction of aggregate output and investment in the national accounts and is conducted by the Office of National
Statistics (ONS) the UK equivalent of the US Census Bureau. The ABI is similar in structure and content to the US
Longitudinal Research Database except that it covers non-manufacturing as well as manufacturing. The recently
constructed US Longitudinal Business Database covers non-manufacturing but it does not have output or investment –
items that are necessary to estimate production functions.
The ABI is a stratified random sample: sampling probabilities are higher for large establishments (e.g. 100% for all
establishments with more than 250 employees). Each establishment has a unique “reporting unit reference number”
(RUREF) which does not change when an establishment is taken over by a new firm. Data on the production sector
(including manufacturing) is in the ABI which has a long time series element (from 1980 and before in some cases).
Data on the non-production sector (services) is available for a much shorter time period (from 1997 onwards). The
sample is large: in 1998 there are 28,765 plants in the production sector alone.
The questionnaire sent out on the ABI is extensive and covers all the variables needed to estimate basic production
functions. The response rates to the ABI are high because it is illegal not to return the forms to the Office of National
Statistics. The ABI includes data on gross output, value added, employment, the wage bill, investment and “total
materials” (this includes all intermediate inputs – energy, materials, etc.). Value added is constructed as the sum of
turnover, variation of total stocks, work of capital nature by own staff, insurance claims received minus purchases.
The construction of the IT and non-IT capital stocks are described in the next section. We condition on a sample that
has positive values of all the factor inputs, so we drop establishments that have zero IT capital stocks.
A2 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DATASETS
Working closely with statisticians and data collectors at ONS we combined five major IT surveys and matched this
into the ABI establishment data using the common establishment code (RUREF). The main IT surveys include the
Business Survey into Capitalized Items (BSCI), the Quarterly Inquiry into Capital Expenditure (QICE) and the Fixed
Asset Register (FAR). We used information on hardware from the BSCI, QICE and FAR in the main part of the paper,
one survey of computer use by workers (the E-Commerce Survey) and one software survey (ABI supplement). Of
these, only the software survey was designed to cover exactly the same establishments as contained in the ABI survey,
but because there is over-sampling of the larger establishments in all surveys the overlap is substantial, especially for
the larger establishments. These surveys are compiled at the reporting unit level, and contain information on the value
(in thousands of pounds) of software and hardware acquisitions and disposals. Once the stocks are built within each
different survey, we combine them across surveys and, for hardware and software separately, we build across-surveys
stocks.39 In the following paragraphs we first describe the different surveys; we then illustrate the details of the
Perpetual Inventory Method used for the construction of the capital stocks and the procedure followed to build acrosssurveys variables.
A2.1 Data Sources
Business Survey into Capitalized Items (BSCI). The BSCI asks for detail of acquisitions and disposals of capital in
more than 100 categories, including computer hardware and software. The survey is annual and runs between 1998
and 2003; we dropped the 1998 cross section due to concerns over reliability expressed by the data collectors. There is
a 100% sampling frame for businesses with more than 750 employees and a stratified random sample of businesses
with between 100 and 750 workers. The BSCI contributes about 1,500 to 2,000 observations for each year between
1999 and 2003. We use the SIC92 code 30020 defined as “Computers and other information processing equipment”.
Notes to this category specify “Microcomputers, printers, terminals, optical and magnetic readers (including operating
systems and software bundled with microcomputer purchase).”

39

We are careful to check for differences in coefficients due to the IT measures coming from different surveys. We
could not reject the assumption that there were no significant differences in the IT coefficients arising from the fact
that the IT stocks were built from different surveys.
36

Quarterly Inquiry into Capital Expenditure (QICE). The QICE provides information on hardware and software
investments from 2000Q1 until 2003Q4. The inquiry selects 32,000 establishments each quarter. Of these 32,000
companies, all establishments with over 300 employees are selected each quarter. Businesses with fewer employees
are selected for the inquiry randomly. Each quarter one fifth of the random sample is rotated out of the sample and a
new fifth is rotated in. The quarterly data have been annualized in several alternative ways and we checked the
robustness of the results across these methods. First, we extrapolated within year for establishments with missing
quarters40. As a second alternative, we constructed an indicator that gives the number of non-missing values that exist
for each year and establishment and included this as an additional control in the regressions. Third, we dropped
observations constructed from less than four full quarters. The results were robust across all three methods and the
tables report results based on the first method.
Fixed Asset Register (FAR). The FAR asks for the historic cost (gross book value) of the fixed assets held on the
firms’ asset register, broken down by the years of acquisition. The survey provides information on IT hardware assets
only, and covers the years 1995 up to 2000. The survey provides information for about 1,000 hardware observations.
E-Commerce Survey. The E-Commerce Survey was conducted in 2001, 2002 and 2003 with around 2,500
establishments in each cross section. Unfortunately these were random cross-sections so the overlap between years is
minimal (preventing us from performing serious panel data analysis). Plant managers were directly asked “What
proportion of your employees uses a computer, workstation or terminal”. To construct an estimate of the number of
employees using IT we multiplied this proportion by the number of workers in the establishment. Although this is
conceptually much cruder than the IT capital stock, it has the advantage that we do not have to rely so much on
assumptions concerning the initial conditions. In Table 4 we discuss the results from this measure, showing very
similar results to those obtained from using the IT capital measure.
Software questions in the Annual Business Inquiry (ABI). The ABI contains a question on software expenditures from
2000 onwards. There are approximately 20,000 non-zero returned values for software investments in each year. We
had some concerns about the accuracy of the establishment reports of software expenditure41 so we focus in the main
part of the paper on the IT hardware stocks.
A2.2 Estimation of IT capital stocks
We build stocks of IT capital applying the Perpetual Inventory Method (PIM) to the IT investment data (and the nonIT investment data) described above. The basic PIM equation is:

(

)

K ith = I ith + 1 − δ h K ith−1
where I

h
t

C

represents real investment of asset type h (e.g. computer hardware, I t ) and

δ th

is the asset specific

depreciation rate. To construct real investment we deflate nominal investments using the economy-wide (asset
specific) hedonic price indices for software and hardware provided by the National Institute of Economic and Social
Research (which are based on Jorgensen’s US price deflators). We rebased to the year 2000 for consistency with the
other PPI deflators (see below).
Zeros
Both the BSCI and the QICE code missing values as zeros. While in the BSCI we are able to identify actual zero
investments through a specific coding, for the QICE this is not possible. In the construction of the capital stocks we
treated the zero investments observations as actual absence of IT investments. In the regressions we drop observations
with zero IT capital stocks
Interpolations
In order to maximize the number of observations over which we could apply the PIM, we interpolated net investment
observations for a single year of data if we observed investment the year before and the year afterwards. This affected
only 2.8% of the observations in the regression sample and results are robust to dropping these observations.
Initial Conditions
40

The extrapolation was done by simple averaging, but we also tried more sophisticated quarterly models taking into
account the quarter surveyed. This made practically no difference.
41
For example, many software values are imputed and the coding for the imputation does not make it clear how the
imputation took place and for which establishments.
37

In order to apply the PIM methodology, we need to approximate a starting value to start the recursion. We apply a
similar methodology as the one devised by Martin (2005) to construct establishment level capital stocks in the ARD.
For each firm, we first build two digit industry-specific IT Investment/Capital ratios using the NISEC02 industry
level data-set provided by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, which contains separate time-series
data on IT capital stocks and runs up to 2001 (these are based on the input-output tables starting in 1975). We then use
the ratio of the establishment’s IT investment flow to the industry investment flow to impute the IT capital stock (i.e.
we are assuming that the establishment’s share of the IT capital stock in the industry is equal to the establishment’s
share of IT investment in the industry in the initial year). More precisely, we assume that for t = 0 only the initial
establishment level IT capital stock

C i 0 is: Ci 0 = ( I itC / I Cjt )C jt ∀ i ∈ j where j represents an industry so a j subC

script represents an industry total – i.e. I jt is total industry IT investment and

C jt is the total IT capital stock in time

t. We apply this approximation to determine our initial condition in the first year that the establishment appears in our
sample. For greenfield sites this is not an issue as their capital stock is zero. After the first year, we simply apply the
Perpetual Inventory Method.
Some of the establishments that we observe only for the first time may be investing systematically at a different rate
from the industry average. To check whether our results were driven by the methodology used to build the initial
conditions, we considered an alternative methodology based on employment weights to calculate the starting value,

Ci*0 : Ci*0 = ( Lit −1 / L jt −1 )C jt −1 (1 − δ ) + I itC . So this is assuming that the establishment’s share of the industry IT

stock in the initial period is equal to the establishment’s lagged share of employment.
Depreciation
For all IT capital we chose a depreciation rate of 36%. This choice is consistent with the analysis by methodology
followed by the BEA which, in turn, derives from the study by Doms, Dunn, Oliner and Sichel (2004). In this study,
the depreciation rate for PCs is estimated at approximately 50%, this value including both obsolescence and
revaluation effects. Since – as the BEA - we use real IT investments we have to use a lower depreciation rate to avoid
double counting of the revaluation effect, included in the price deflators. Basu et al (2003) argue that the true
geometric rate of depreciation should be, in fact, approximately 30%. The significance and the magnitude of the
coefficient obtained for IT capital is not affected by the exact choice of the alternative depreciation rate.
Across-Survey Stocks
Following the steps described above, we obtain hardware and software stocks within each different survey. We then
matched our constructed IT dataset with the ABI sample. In order to simplify the empirical analysis, we combined all
the information of the different the surveys constructing overall across-surveys IT stocks for both hardware and
software. Our strategy is to use the BSCI measure as the most reliable observation (as recommended by the data
collectors). We then build our synthetic measure using the QICE stocks if the BSCI observation is missing or equal to
zero and the QICE is different from zero. We finally use the FAR if both QICE and BSCI are missing and/or equal to
zero and the FAR is not.
In order to keep track of the possible measurement error introduced using this procedure, we introduce in all the IT
regressions a dummy that identifies the provenience of the observation for both the hardware and the software stocks.
These dummies and their interactions with the IT coefficients are not significantly different from zero. A small portion
of the firms included in our dataset responded to more than one survey. We use some of this overlapping sample to get
a better understanding of the measurement error in the data. By comparing the reports from the same establishments
we calculate that there is much more measurement error for software than for hardware, which is one reason why we
currently focus on hardware. We did not find any evidence that the measurement error for IT capital was different for
US firms than other firms.
A3 DEFINITION OF I.T. INTENSIVE USING INDUSTRIES
We focus on “IT intensive” sectors that are defined to be those that use IT intensively and are not producers of
information or communication technologies. The definitions of IT usage and IT producers are based on O’Mahony
and Van Ark (2003) who base their definitions on Kevin Stiroh (2002). They use US data to calculate the capital
service flows and define IT use intensity as the ratio of IT capital services to total capital services. IT intensive using

38

sectors are those where (a) the industries has above median IT capital service flows to total capital service flows and
(b) the industry is not an IT producing industry. All industries are based on ISIC Revision 3.
A4 CLEANING
We used standard procedures to clean the ABI and the IT data. First, we dropped all observations with negative value
added and/or capital stock. Secondly we dropped the top and bottom percentile of the distribution of the growth of
employment and gross value added. Thirdly, we dropped extreme values of total capital stock per employee and gross
value added per employee. This step of the cleaning procedure was performed on the overall ABI sample. We applied
a similar cleaning procedure also to our across surveys IT variables. We dropped the top and bottom percentiles of the
ratio of the IT capital (and expenditure) relative to gross value added42.
A5 DEFINITION OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP AND UK MULTINATIONALS
The country of ownership of a foreign firm operating in the UK is provided in the ABI and is based on information
from Dun and Bradstreet’s Global “Who Owns Whom" database. Dun and Bradstreet define the nationality of an
establishment by the country of residence of the global ultimate parent, i.e. the topmost company of a world-wide
hierarchical relationship identified “bottom-to-top” using any company which owns more than 50% of the control
(voting stock, ownership shares) of another business entity. UK Multinationals are identified via the matching of the
ABI with the Annual Foreign Direct Investment (AFDI) register made by Criscuolo and Martin (2004). The AFDI
identifies the population of UK firms which are engaging in or receiving foreign direct investment (FDI)43. Each
establishment in the ABI that is owned by a firm which appears in the AFDI register can consequently be defined as a
multinational. UK multinationals are thus UK-owned firms which appear in the AFDI.
A6 TAKEOVERS
The identification of takeovers consists of three basic steps. First, for all the available years (1980-2003 for
manufacturing and 1997-2003 for services) we use all the raw ABI data (including “non-selected” establishments
where we know employment but not output or capital). We thus create a register file that allows us to keep track of the
whole history of each firm, and exploit the uniqueness of the reporting unit reference number (RUREF) to correct for
obvious reporting problems (i.e. establishments that disappear in one year, and appear again after some time). Second,
for each establishment we keep track of changes in the foreign ownership information and the enterprise group
reference number (this is a collection of RUREFs owned by a single group) to identify foreign and domestic
takeovers44. Third, to control for measurement error in the takeover identification, we drop from the sample some
ambiguous establishment observations: (a) establishments that are subject to more than three takeovers during their
history; (b) for the establishments with two or three takeovers, we dropped observations where a time period could be
simultaneously as “pre” and “post” takeover. We use up to three years prior to the takeovers in the “pre-takeover”
regressions and up to three years after the takeover in the “post takeover” regressions. The year when the takeover
occurred is dropped because it is unclear when in the year the establishment switched.
A7 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Panel A of Table A2 gives some descriptive statistics for our key variables. Note that median employment in the
establishment is 238 which are larger than the ABI median because the IT surveys tend to focus on the larger
establishments. Average IT stock is just over £1m ($2m) and value added per worker is just under £40,000 ($80,000).
Labor accounts for 31% of revenues and materials 58% on average. IT capital is estimated at 1% of revenues (non-IT
capital is 10%).
Panel B of Table A3 breaks down mean values of the IT capital - output ratio and ln(IT capital) by ownership type and
whether or not the sector is IT intensive. Unsurprisingly, across all establishments the IT capital-output ratio is much
42

The results of the regression are qualitatively similar if the IT data are cleaned using the ratio of investments per
employee or stocks per employee.
43
The working definition of Foreign Direct Investment for this purpose is that the investment must give the investing
firm a significant amount of control over the recipient firm. The ONS considers this to be the case if the investment
gives the investor a share of at least ten per cent of the recipient firm's capital.
44
Foreign takeovers are observed if a firm experiences a change in the foreign ownership marker. Domestic takeovers
are observed if a UK firm changes its enterprise reference number. See Griffith et al (2004) for more details on the
methodology.
39

higher in the IT intensive industries compared to other sectors (3% compared to 2%). More interestingly, US
multinationals have a higher IT capital-output ratio than non-US multinationals only in the IT intensive sectors (4%
compared to 3%). In the other sectors US and non-US multinationals have a similar IT-output ratio (3% in each). The
levels of IT capital show much higher values for US establishments than non-US multinationals (especially in the IT
intensive sectors).
A8 ADDITIONAL RESULTS
Table A3 contains alternative econometric estimates of the production function allowing for endogenous factor inputs.
First, in column (1) we present results using the Blundell- Bond (1998) system GMM estimator. We have to restrict
the sample to firms where we have at least four continuous years of information on all variables which, given our short
time series and sampling frame, severely reduces the sample size (this is also the reason why we use all sectors, not
just the IT intensive sectors). Even on this sub-sample we are still able to identify a significant interaction effect
between IT capital and the US dummy variable. The coefficient on IT for US firms is significantly different from the
IT coefficient on non-US firms at the 10% level. The structural model of firm behaviour underlying the Olley-Pakes
(1996) approach is not consistent with simply including interactions, so instead we estimate the production function
separately for the three ownership types separately: US multinationals in column (2), non-US multinationals in
column (3) and UK domestic firms in column (4). The IT coefficient is twice as large for US multinationals as it is for
non-US multinationals, which is consistent with our earlier findings. The standard errors are also large, however, due
to the smaller sample size, so we are not able to reject the null that the coefficients are the same.
Table A4 estimates takeover regressions as a function of lagged covariates. The sample is of those establishments who
were at some point taken over by another firm. In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is equal to one if the
establishment was taken over by a US multinational and zero otherwise (i.e. if it was taken over by a non-US multinational or a domestic UK firm). In columns (3) and (4) we drop the takeovers by UK domestic firms so that the
dependent variable is equal to one if the establishment was taken over by a US multinational and zero otherwise (i.e. if
it was taken over by a non-US multinational). Columns (1) and (3) examine whether more IT intensive establishments
were more likely to be taken over by a US multinational. Columns (2) and (4) examine whether establishments which
were growing more IT intensive were more likely to be taken over by a US multinational. There seems to be no
significant correlation between lagged IT levels or growth and the probability of being taken over by a US firm.

40

APPENDIX B: TFP DYNAMICS AND ADJUSTMENT COSTS FOR IT CAPITAL
In this Appendix we consider the extension to the model where we allow adjustment costs in IT capital and discuss the
implied dynamics of measured TFP. Note that all the main implications from the basic model go through in terms of
the implications for labor productivity so we do not repeat these again. In particular, the production function is the
same so we expect a larger coefficient on IT for US firms in the production function. The difference in the theory
predictions when allowing for IT adjustment costs lies in the analysis of measured TFP growth.
B1. MODEL BASICS
Figure B1 shows there are five distinct regimes defined by how organizations are changing. The exact years will differ
from the baseline model because IT adjustment costs slow down adjustment, but the qualitative features remain the
same. In Regimes 1 and 5 neither the EU nor the US is adjusting O, so that O = 0 in the earliest regime (1) and O = 1
in the last regime (5). The interesting changes are the three "transition" regimes (2 through 4). In Regime 2 US firms
are adjusting their organizations EU firms are not. In Regime 3 both EU and US are adjusting and in Regime 4 only
the EU is adjusting.
If we consider the growth of the IT stock (∆c, noting that c = log(C)) this will depend on the target level of c and on
the adjustment costs in c, which we now assume to be twice-differentiable, minimized at zero and convex (for
example quadratic). EU growth of c will be slower as growth of O is slower. As a result in Regime 2 US ∆c will be
faster. In Regimes 3 and 4 US ∆c will initially be faster, but at some point there will be a "crossing point" when ∆c is
equal between the US and the EU. In Regime 5 EU ∆c will be faster as it catches up with the US.
B2. TFP MEASUREMENT
We can defined the change in measured TFP (∆TFPM) as

∆TFP M = ∆y - s c ∆c - s k ∆k - s l ∆l
= ∆a + (α c ∆c + α k ∆k + α l ∆l ) - ( s c ∆c + s k ∆k + s l ∆l )

(B1)

= ∆a + (α c − s c )∆c - (α k − s k )∆k - (α l − s l )∆l
where αx is the elasticity of revenue with respect to factor x, sx is the share of factor x in revenues, Y is revenue (PQ)
and ∆a is actual TFP growth. So using the results of Section IV αc = ψ + λO, αk= µ - λO and αl = γ (we are ignoring
time subscripts). Measured TFP will differ from actual TFP if the shares are different from the revenue function
"coefficients". In all our models we assume that actual TFP growth is zero ( ∆a = 0). In the basic model with only
organizational adjustment costs ∆TFPM = 0 as all revenue function coefficients equal their factor shares (e.g. αc = sc).
If we introduce IT adjustment costs into the model this equality still holds for non-IT capital and labor as they have no
adjustment costs. But for IT the factor share will not longer equal the revenue function coefficient. Furthermore, since
in the model IT is always rising as an input share, actual levels of IT will always be below the target levels of IT, so
that αc > sc. Thus, with the addition of IT adjustment costs we obtain the “wedge” between actual and measured TFP:

∆TFPM = (α c − sc )∆c

(B2)

We can characterize the magnitude of the bias if we place more structure on the problem.45 Assume IT adjustment
costs take the form G(Ct,Ct-1) = θCCt-1(Ct/Ct-1 - 1)², i.e. standard homogeneous quadratic adjustment costs ignoring
depreciation. Then C is also a state variable, so that the Bellman equation is

⎧Y(C t , O t , L t ,K t ) - ρ tC C t - WL t - ρ K K t
⎫
⎪
⎪
V(C t -1 , O t -1 , ρ ) = max ⎨
⎬
1
2
2
C
C t , O t , L t , K t ⎪- θ C C t -1 (C t / C t -1 − 1) − ω m ( ∆O t ) +
V(C t , O t , ρ t +1 )⎪
1+ r
⎩
⎭
C
t

45

For simplicity we abstract away from the fixed adjustment costs for O.

41

(B3)

The first order condition for C is:

αc

Yt
1 ∂Vt
- ρ tC - 2θ C (C t / C t -1 − 1) +
=0
Ct
1 + r ∂C t

(B4)

Now if C is always increasing then αcYt/Ct - ρCt > 0, i.e. the instantaneous returns to C are positive as the firm has too
little C from a current state perspective. Rearranging equation (B4) thus implies:

αc -

ρ tC C t
Yt

=

Ct
Yt

⎛
1 ∂Vt
⎜⎜ 2θ C ∆c t −
1 + r ∂C t
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

>0

(B5)

The right hand side of equation (B5) is positive and gives the magnitude of the "wedge" between the production
function parameters and the observed factor shares. The size of the wedge will determine the observed TFP growth.
B3. EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS
We can now derive a set of empirical implications for TFP dynamics. We consider a time-series regression46 of
measured TFP growth on the change in all factor inputs, but in particular on IT capital growth.
(1) In all periods the coefficient on the change in labor and capital will be zero. In all periods we will obtain a positive
coefficient on the growth of the IT stock, ∆c, from equation (B2).
(2) The size of the coefficient on ∆c will vary by ownership type over time. First, consider the early period (Regime 1)
before either the US or EU started adjusting O, during which time the gap between actual and desired IT will be equal
for the EU and the US. Consequently the interaction with IT growth and ownership in the TFP regression will be zero.
Next, consider the initial period of adjustment in O by the US firms (Regime 2) when US firms begin adjusting O
upwards and European firms are not changing O. Over this period the "wedge" between αc and the observed factors
share, sc, will be higher for US firms (∆c is higher), so that their IT coefficient in the measured TFP equation will be
higher than the European coefficient. Thirdly, consider the final period of adjustment (Regime 5) when the US has
completely changed organizational form (O = 1) while Europe is still changing. Over this period European firms will
be increasing their IT stocks faster than US firms, so that now the EU wedge, and therefore EU coefficient on ∆c in
equation (B2), will be higher. In the middle periods (Regimes 3 and 4) the prediction is ambiguous as the size of the
wedge depends on the growth of the IT stock and level of ∂V/∂C, which could be higher or lower in the EU.
(3) Finally, relax the assumption that the adjustment costs in IT capital are the same in the US and EU. Imagine that
these adjustment costs are higher in the EU47 (our baseline model assumed that organizational adjustment costs were
higher in the EU but everything else was the same). In this case the relationship between US "wedge" ( α C

US

and the EU "wedge" ( α C

EU

− sCUS )

− sCEU ) will be ambiguous. The US will be adjusting its level of IT faster than the EU (at

least until the start of Regime 3) implying a larger US wedge between actual and desired IT input shares. But the EU
will have higher adjustment costs for any given change of IT implying a higher EU wedge. Which effect dominates
will depend on the relative magnitudes of the IT and organizational adjustment costs and the period of adjustment.
Hence, allowing for asymmetric IT and organizational adjustment costs makes the coefficient on the interaction of IT
and ownership in the TFP regression ambiguous even in Regime 2. This may be the reason why the interaction of ∆c
and US ownership in the TFP growth equation is insignificant (although positive) in our data.

46
By "time series regression" we mean data generated from observations of "representative" EU and US firms (or the economywide aggregates). In the actual data we use there will also be some idiosyncratic shocks causing heterogeneity around these
averages that we are not considering for now.
47
We can think of the non-organizational adjustment costs for IT as things like the absolute change in firm size (holding
organizational structure constant), the physical adjustment of buildings and equipment, and the resale of loss of old-IT etc.

42

TABLE 1 - DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS BROKEN DOWN BY MULTINATIONAL STATUS
(Normalized to 100 for the three digit industry-year average)
Employment

Value
added per
Employee

Gross
output
per
Employee

Non IT
Capital
per
Employee

Materials
per
Employee

IT
Capital
per
Employee

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

162.26
297.58
569

127.96
163.17
569

123.63
104.81
569

129.61
133.91
569

123.81
123.35
569

152.13
234.41
569

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

148.58
246.35
2,119

113.71
107.87
2,119

115.22
86.50
2,119

120.65
126.83
2,119

116.02
107.63
2,119

119.58
180.34
2,119

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

68.78
137.72
4,433

89.86
104.50
4,433

89.69
102.09
4,433

86.33
127.16
4,433

89.29
129.37
4,433

83.95
188.30
4,433

US
Multinationals

Other
Multinationals

UK domestic

Notes: These are 2001 values from our sample of 7,121 establishments.

TABLE 2 – DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES
Labor Productivity in establishments owned by US multinationals and by non-US multinationals
High IT intensity
Establishments
3.893
(0.742)
1,076

Low IT intensity
Establishments
3.557
(0.698)
729

Other Multinationals

3.711
(0.756)
4,014

3.473
(0.664)
2,827

Diff

0.182***
(0.036)

0.084**
(0.037)

US Multinationals

Diff in Diffs

Diff
0.336***
(0.043)

0.238***
(0.022)

0.098**
(0.048)

Notes: Productivity is measured as ln(Value Added per Employee). “High IT intensity establishments” are
observations where the ratio of IT capital to employment (demeaned by the three-digit industry and year average) is
greater than the median. 8,646 Observations; only multinationals considered. Standard errors are clustered by
establishment.

43

TABLE 3 – ESTIMATES OF THE PRODUCTION FUNCTION ALLOWING THE I.T. COEFFICIENT TO DIFFER BY OWNERSHIP STATUS

(1)
ln(Q)

(2)
ln(Q)

(3)
ln(Q)

(4)
ln(Q)

(5)
ln(Q)

(6)
ln(Q)

(7)
ln(Q)

(8)
ln(Q)

All Sectors

All Sectors

All Sectors

IT Using
Intensive
Sectors

Other Sectors

All Sectors

IT Using
Intensive
Sectors

Other Sectors

NO

NO

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

-

-

0.0086*
(0.0048)

0.0196**
(0.0078)

0.0033
(0.0061)

0.0049
(0.0064)

0.0278***
(0.0105)

-0.0085
(0.0071)

-

-

0.0001
(0.0030)

-0.0030
(0.0041)

0.0037
(0.0042)

0.0042
(0.0034)

0.0055
(0.0052)

0.0034
(0.0044)

-

0.0457***
(0.0024)

0.0449***
(0.0026)

0.0399***
(0.0036)

0.0472***
(0.0035)

0.0146***
(0.0028)

0.0114**
(0.0047)

0.0150***
(0.0034)

0.5575***
(0.0084)

0.5474***
(0.0083)

0.5475***
(0.0083)

0.6212***
(0.0142)

0.5065***
(0.0104)

0.4032***
(0.0178)

0.5020***
(0.0280)

0.3605***
(0.0209)

0.1388***
(0.0071)

0.1268***
(0.0068)

0.1268***
(0.0068)

0.1108***
(0.0094)

0.1458***
(0.0092)

0.0902***
(0.0159)

0.1064***
(0.0229)

0.0664***
(0.0209)

0.2985***
(0.0062)

0.2690***
(0.0062)

0.2688***
(0.0062)

0.2179***
(0.0102)

0.2869***
(0.0076)

0.2917***
(0.0173)

0.2475***
(0.0326)

0.3108***
(0.0195)

0.0712***
(0.0140)

0.0642***
(0.0135)

0.0151
(0.0277)

-0.0824*
(0.0438)

0.0641*
(0.0354)

-0.0110
(0.0424)

-0.1355*
(0.0768)

0.0472
(0.0405)

0.0392***
(0.0079)

0.0339***
(0.0078)

0.0338**
(0.0161)

0.0325
(0.0241)

0.0194
(0.0214)

-0.0162
(0.0198)

-0.0160
(0.0327)

-0.0204
(0.0254)

Observations

21,746

21,746

21,746

7,784

13,962

21,746

7,784

13,962

Test USA*ln(C)=MNE*ln(C), p-value
Test USA=MNE, p-value

0.0206

0.0203

0.0944
0.5198

0.0048
0.0108

0.9614
0.2296

0.9208
0.9072

0.0403
0.1227

0.1340
0.9665

Dependent variable: ln(Output)
Sectors
Fixed effects
USA*ln(C)
USA ownership*IT capital

MNE*ln(C)
Non-US multinational *IT capital

Ln(C)
IT capital

Ln(M)
Materials

Ln(K)
Non-IT Capital

Ln(L)
Labor

USA
USA Ownership

MNE
Non-US multinational

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the log of gross output. The time period is 1995-2003. The
estimation method in all columns is OLS. Columns (6) to (8) include establishment level fixed effects. Standard errors in brackets under coefficients in all columns are clustered by
establishment (i.e. robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of unknown form). All columns include a full set of three digit industry dummies interacted with a full set of time
dummies and as additional controls: dummies for establishment age (interacted with a manufacturing dummy), region, multi-establishment group (interacted with ownership type)
and IT survey. See Appendix Table A1 for definition of IT using intensive sectors. “Test USA*ln(C)=MNE*ln(C)” is test of whether the coefficient on USA*ln(C) is significantly
different from the coefficient on MNE*ln(C), etc.
44

TABLE 4 – ROBUSTNESS TESTS OF THE PRODUCTION FUNCTION
Experiment

Dependent var: ln(Output)
USA*ln(C)
USA ownership*IT capital

MNE*ln(C)
Non-US multinational*IT capital

Ln(C)
IT capital

Ln(M)
Materials

Ln(K)
Non-IT Capital

Ln(L)
Labor

USA
USA Ownership

MNE
Non-US multinational

USA*ln(M)

(1)
Baseline
Specification

(2)
Value
Added

(3)
All Inputs
Interacted
with US
and MNE
ln(Q)

(4)
Alternative
IT measure

(5)
Full
“Translog”
interactions

(6)
% USA in
4 digit
industry

(7)
Wages as a
proxy for
skills

(8)
EU and
Non EU
MNEs

ln(Q)

ln(VA)

ln(Q)

Ln(Q)

ln(Q)

ln(Q)

ln(Q)

0.0278***
(0.0105)
0.0055
(0.0052)
0.0114**
(0.0047)
0.5020***
(0.0280)
0.1064***
(0.0229)
0.2475***
(0.0326)
-0.1355*
(0.0768)
-0.0160
(0.0327)
-

0.0604**
(0.0245)
-0.0070
(0.0142)
0.0263**
(0.0106)
-

0.0711**
(0.0294)
0.0056
(0.0131)
0.0285***
(0.0083)
0.6390***
(0.0195)
0.1390***
(0.0170)
0.2171***
(0.0140)
-0.0125
(0.1113)
-0.0087
(0.0758)
-

0.0268***
(0.0102)
0.0028
(0.0050)
0.0327
(0.0463)
0.2779
(0.2225)
0.2686**
(0.1255)
0.3002
(0.2095)
-0.1419**
(0.0683)
-0.0112
(0.0322)
-

0.0270**
(0.0105)
0.0050
(0.0054)
0.0090*
(0.0048)
0.5017***
(0.0279)
0.1070***
(0.0230)
0.2472***
(0.0329)
-0.1323*
(0.0763)
-0.0148
(0.0334)
-

0.0208**
(0.0096)
0.0021
(0.0047)
-0.0227
(0.0163)
0.4455***
(0.0296)
0.0767***
(0.0216)
0.3958***
(0.0361)
-0.0967
(0.0739)
-0.0010
(0.0309)
-

0.0283***
(0.0105)
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.0328**
(0.0141)
0.0002
(0.0065)
0.0126**
(0.0050)
0.4925***
(0.0312)
0.1075***
(0.0228)
0.2530***
(0.0343)
-0.2734
(0.2578)
-0.0489
(0.1687)
0.0335
(0.0376)
0.0080
(0.0235)
0.0242
(0.0368)
-0.0142
(0.0134)
-0.0767
(0.0497)
0.0193
(0.0239)
-

0.2157***
(0.0546)
0.4835***
(0.0571)
-0.3552**
(0.1492)
0.0733
(0.0855)
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.9194
(2.3378)
0.3607
(0.4119)

-

-

-

USA ownership*materials

MNE*ln(M)
Non-US multinational *materials

USA*ln(K)
USA ownership*Non IT capital

MNE*ln(K)
Non-US multinational *Non IT capital

USA*ln(L)
USA ownership*Employment

MNE*ln(L)
Non-US multinational *Employment

USA_IND
[% of US Multinationals in industry]

USA_IND*ln(C)
[% of US Multinationals in
industry]*IT capital

45

0.0114**
(0.0047)
0.5023***
(0.0278)
0.1063***
(0.0229)
0.2472***
(0.0325)
-0.1374*
(0.0769)
-

(1)
-

(2)
-

(3)
-

(4)
-

(5)
-

(6)
-

ln(Wage)*ln(C)
Average Wage*IT capital

-

-

-

-

-

-

EU MNE

-

-

-

-

-

-

(7)
0.2137***
(0.0407)
0.0109*
(0.0056)
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

ln(Wage)
Average wage

EU ownership

NON-EU MNE
Non EU-NON USA Ownership

EU MNE*ln(C)
EU ownership*IT Capital

NON EU MNE*ln(C)
Non EU-NON USA Ownership*IT
capital
Observations
Test USA*ln(C)=MNE*ln(C), p-value
Test USA=MNE, p-value
Test on joint significance of all the
interaction terms, excluding IT
interactions (p-value)
Test on joint significance of all the US
interaction terms, excluding IT (pvalue}
Test on all the other MNE's
interaction terms, excluding IT (pvalue)
Test on additional “translog” terms, pvalue
Test USA=EU, p-value
Test USA=NON EU, p-value
Test USA*ln(C)=EU*ln(C), p-value
Test USA*ln(C)=NON EU*ln(C), pvalue

(8)
-0.0328
(0.0354)
-0.0066
(0.0910)
0.0065
(0.0051)
-0.0079
(0.0158)

7,784

7,784

7,784

2,196

7,784

7,784

7,780

7,784

0.0403
0.1227

0.0122
0.007

0.0224
0.3618

0.0122
0.007

0.0244
0.0602

0.0288
0.1288

0.0575
0.1982

-

-

-

0.3288

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.4837

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.3838

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.0000
-

-

-

0.2072
0.2500
0.0457

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.0511

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the log of gross output. All columns are for the sectors that use IT
intensively only. The time period is 1995-2003. The estimation method in all columns is OLS. All columns except (4) include establishment level fixed effects. Standard errors in
brackets under coefficients in all columns are clustered by establishment (i.e. robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of unknown form). All columns include a full set of
three digit industry dummies interacted with a full set of time dummies and as additional controls: dummies for establishment age (interacted with a manufacturing dummy), region,
multi-establishment group (interacted with ownership type) and IT survey (except column (4)). The IT measure in column (4) is the log(number of people using computers). We also
include interactions of the US dummy (and the MNE dummy) with ln(labor) in this column. Column (5) includes all the pair-wise interactions of materials, labor, IT capital, and
non-IT capital and the square of each of these factors. Column (6) includes the percentage of non-US multinationals in the establishment’s four digit industry. “Test
USA*ln(C)=MNE*ln(C)” is test of whether the coefficient on USA*ln(C) is significantly different from the coefficient on MNE*ln(C), etc.

46

TABLE 5 - PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS BEFORE AND AFTER TAKEOVERS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Before
takeover

Before
takeover

After
takeover

After
takeover

After
takeover

ln(Q)
-

ln(Q)
-0.0322
(0.0277)
-0.0159
(0.0118)

ln(Q)
-

ln(Q)
0.0224**
(0.0102)
0.0031
(0.0079)

ln(Q)
-

After
takeover
(drop UK
domestic
acquirers)
ln(Q)
-

-

-

-0.0031
(0.0335)

0.1634
(0.1357)

0.0827***
(0.0227)

-0.0345
(0.0550)

-

-

-0.0221
(0.0226)
-

0.0572
(0.0598)
-

0.0539***
(0.0188)
-

0.0412
(0.0380)
-

-

-

USA*ln(C) two and
three years after takeover

-

-

-

-

MNE*ln(C)

-

-

-

-

-0.0103
(0.0176)
0.0315*
(0.0170)
-

-

-

-

-

0.0582***
(0.0092)
0.4949***
(0.0308)
0.1592***
(0.0256)
0.2723***
(0.0184)
-

0.0593***
(0.0097)
0.4950***
(0.0306)
0.1591***
(0.0254)
0.2727***
(0.0185)
-

0.0495***
(0.0061)
0.5276***
(0.0212)
0.1145***
(0.0162)
0.2927***
(0.0146)
-

0.0460***
(0.0067)
0.5286***
(0.0211)
0.1145***
(0.0162)
0.2918***
(0.0146)
-

USA two and three
years after takeover

-

-

-

-

MNE one year
after takeover

-

-

-

-

MNE two and three
Years after takeover

-

-

-

-

1,422

1,422

3,466

3,466

0.0095
(0.0149)
0.0274**
(0.0115)
0.0003
(0.0109)
0.0041
(0.0085)
0.0459***
(0.0067)
0.5287***
(0.0210)
0.1142***
(0.0161)
0.2924***
(0.0145)
0.0591
(0.0720)
-0.0713
(0.0641)
0.0230
(0.0534)
0.0489
(0.0418)
3,466

Sample

Dependent Variable: ln(Output)
USA*ln(C)
USA Takeover*IT capital

-

MNE*ln(C)
Non-US multinational Takeover*IT capital

USA
USA Takeover

MNE
Non-US multinational Takeover

USA*ln(C) one year

-

after takeover

one year

After takeover

MNE*ln(C) two and
three years after takeover
Ln(C)
IT capital

Ln(M)
Materials

Ln(K)
Non-IT Capital

Ln(L)
Labor

USA one year
after takeover

Observations

0.0806***
(0.0169)
0.5913***
(0.0448)
0.0311
(0.0333)
0.2480***
(0.0367)
0.0466
(0.1007)
-0.1507
(0.0951)
692

0.5564
0.0880
Test USA*ln(C) = MNE*ln(C), p-value
0.5900
0.4430
0.2216
0.2104
Test USA = MNE, p-value
0.6743
Test USA one year = MNE one year, p-value
0.0894
Test USA two plus years =
MNE two plus years, p-value
Test (USA one year)*ln(C) =
0.6044
(MNE one year)*ln(C), p-value
Test (USA two plus years)*ln(C) =
0.0691
(MNE two plus years)*ln(C), p-value
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The sample is of all establishments who were
taken over at some point (the omitted base is “domestic takeovers” - UK firms taking over other UK firms). The dependent
variable in all columns is the log of gross output. The time period is 1995-2003. The estimation method is OLS. Standard
errors in brackets under coefficients are clustered by establishment. A takeover is defined as a change in the establishment
foreign ownership marker or - for UK domestic establishment - as a change in the enterprise group marker. The "before"
period is defined as the interval between one and three years before the takeover takes place. The "after" period is defined
as the interval between one and three years after the takeover takes place. The year in which the takeover takes place is
excluded from the sample. All columns include a full set of three digit industry dummies interacted with time trends and as
additional controls: age, region dummies, a multi-establishment group dummy and an IT survey dummy. “Test
USA*ln(C)=MNE*ln(C)” is test of whether the coefficient on USA*ln(C) is significantly different from the coefficient on
MNE*ln(C) , etc.
47

TABLE 6 - IT AND LABOR MARKET REGULATION

Fixed Effects
Sample
Dependent Variable
USA*ln(C)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

NO

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

All MNE's

All MNE's

All MNE's

All MNE's

All MNE's

All MNE's

ln(Q)
-

ln(Q)
0.0230***
(0.0081)
-0.1186***
(0.0453)

ln(Q)
-

ln(Q)
0.0287*
(0.0161)
-0.1483
(0.0988)

ln(Q)
-

ln(Q)

-

0.0439**
(0.0193)

-

0.0702**
(0.0358)

0.0295
(0.0332)

0.0968**
(0.0434)

-

-0.1410
(0.0998)

-

-0.3651
(0.2700)

-0.0666
(0.2451)

0.0488***
(0.0056)
0.6347***
(0.0147)
0.0995***
(0.0134)
0.2046***
(0.0140)
3,144

0.0439***
(0.0055)

0.0134
(0.0158)

0.0152**
(0.0073)

-0.0339
(0.0270)

-0.0041
(0.0254)

0.6354***
(0.0147)

0.6352***
(0.0147)

0.5353***
(0.0340)

0.5375***
(0.0351)

0.5063***
(0.0296)

0.0972***
(0.0134)

0.0987***
(0.0135)

0.0733*
(0.0402)

0.0738*
(0.0409)

0.0923**
(0.0395)

0.2062***
(0.0140)

0.2042***
(0.0140)

0.2529***
(0.0486)

0.2514***
(0.0485)

0.2457***
(0.0396)

3,144

3,144

3,144

3,144

3,144

USA ownership*IT capital

USA
USA Ownership

Labor Regulation*ln( C )

-

World Bank Labor Regulation Index*IT
capital

Labor Regulation
World Bank Labor Regulation Index

Ln(C)
IT capital

Ln(M)
Materials

Ln(K)
Non-IT Capital

Ln(L)
Labor

Observations

-

-

0.0161
(0.0154)
-0.1600
(0.1058)

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the
log of gross output. The time period is 1995-2003. The estimation method in all columns is OLS. The sample includes
only multinationals. Columns (4), (5) and (6) include establishment level fixed effects. The labor regulation index is
based on the “Rigidity of Employment” index, drawn from the World Bank “Doing Business” report. The index is
transformed so that higher values imply more flexible systems. The transformation applied is y = (1-x) (so 0=inflexible,
1=most flexible). All columns include a full set of three digit industry dummies interacted with a full set of time
dummies and as additional controls: dummies for establishment age (interacted with a manufacturing dummy), region,
multi-establishment group (interacted with ownership type) and IT survey. Standard errors in brackets under
coefficients in all columns are clustered by establishment (i.e. robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of
unknown form). The sample is IT using intensive sectors only. See Appendix A1 for definition of IT using intensive
sectors.

48

TABLE A1 – BREAKDOWN OF THE INDUSTRIAL SECTORS BY IT USAGE
IT Intensive Sectors
Manufacturing
18 Wearing apparel, dressing and dying of fur
22 Printing and publishing
29 Machinery and equipment
31 Manufacture of Electrical Machinery and Apparatus
n.e.c. excludes 313 (insulated wire)
33 Precision and optical instruments, excluding 331
(scientific instruments)
351 Building and repairing of ships and boats
353 Aircraft and spacecraft
352+359 Railroad equipment and transport equipment
36-37 miscellaneous manufacturing and recycling

Services
51 Wholesale trades
52 Retail trade
71 Renting of machinery and equipment
73 Research and development

Other Sectors
Manufacturing
15-16 Food drink and tobacco

IT
producing
sector?
No

17 Textiles
19 Leather and footwear
20 Wood
21 Pulp and paper
23 Mineral oil refining, coke and nuclear

No
No
No
No
No

24 Chemicals
25 Rubber and plastics
26 Non-metallic mineral products
27 Basic metals
28 Fabricated metal products
30 Office machinery
313 Insulated wire
321 Electronic valves and tubes
322 Telecom equipment
323 Radio and TV receivers
331 Scientific instruments
34 Motor vehicles

No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Services
50 Sale, maintenance and repair of motor
vehicles
55 Hotels and catering
60 Inland transport
61 Water transport
62 Air transport
63 Supporting transport services, travel
agencies
64 Communications
70 Real estate
72 Computer services and related activity
741-743 Professional business services
749 Other business activities n.e.c.
Other sectors
10-14 Mining and quarrying
50-41 Utilities
45 Construction

IT
producing
sector?
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Notes: See text for definitions. IT intensive sectors are those that have above median IT capital flows as a proportion of
total capital flows and are not IT producing sectors.

49

TABLE A2 - DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Panel A: All Establishments
Variable

Frequency

Mean

Median

Employment

7,121

811.10

238.00

Standard
Deviation
4,052.77

Gross Output

7,121

87,966.38

20,916.48

456,896.10

Value Added

7,121

29,787.61

7,052.00

167,798.70

IT Capital

7,121

1,030.60

77.44

10,820.69

ln(IT Capital)

7,121

4.46

4.35

2.03

Value Added per worker

7,121

40.43

29.53

55.19

Gross Output per worker

7,121

124.74

86.03

136.55

Materials per worker

7,121

82.38

47.23

103.52

Non-IT Capital per worker

7,121

85.28

48.56

112.54

IT Capital per worker

7,121

0.96

0.34

2.08

IT expenditure per worker

7,121

0.41

0.14

0.89

Material costs as a share of revenues

7,121

0.57

0.60

0.23

Employment costs as a share of revenues
Non-IT Capital as a share of revenues
IT Capital as a share of revenues

7,121
7,121
7,121

0.83
0.30
0.010

0.64
0.26
0.004

0.86
0.20
0.018

Age
Multigroup dummy (i.e. is establishment part of larger
group?)

7,121

8.38

5.00

6.74

7,121

0.53

1.00

0.50

Panel B: Breakdown by Ownership Status and Sector

Ln(IT Capital)

IT Capital over gross output (C/Q)
IT Using
Intensive
Sectors
0.03
0.04
2,703

Other
Sectors
0.02
0.04
4,418

All
sectors
4.46
2.03
7,121

IT Using
Intensive
Sectors
4.78
2.06
2,703

Other
Sectors
4.27
1.99
4,418

All firms

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

All
sectors
0.03
0.04
7,121

US Multinationals

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

0.04
0.05
569

0.04
0.05
260

0.03
0.04
309

5.57
2.00
569

5.69
1.94
260

5.46
2.05
309

Other Multinationals

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

0.03
0.04
2,119

0.03
0.04
853

0.03
0.04
1,266

5.18
1.96
2,119

5.34
1.99
853

5.07
1.93
1,266

UK domestic

Mean
St. Deviation
Observations

0.02
0.04
4,433

0.03
0.04
1,590

0.02
0.03
2,843

3.98
1.91
4,433

4.33
1.99
1,590

3.79
1.83
2,843

Notes: All monetary amounts are in sterling in year 2001 prices. Total stocks are constructed as described in the
Appendix. All variables in units of 1,000s except ratios and employment.

50

TABLE A3 – GMM AND OLLEY PAKES RESULTS

Sample
Estimation Method
Sectors

(1)
All
establishments
GMM
All sectors

Dependent Variable

Ln(Q)

US multinationals
Olley Pakes
IT Using Intensive
Sectors
ln(Q)

(3)
Other
multinationals
Olley Pakes
IT Using Intensive
Sectors
ln(Q)

(4)
Domestic UK
establishments
Olley Pakes
IT Using Intensive
Sectors
ln(Q)

0.1176*
(0.0642)

-

-

-

0.0092
(0.0418)

-

-

-

Ln(C)
IT capital

0.0793***
(0.0382)

0.0758**
(0.0383)

0.0343**
(0.0171)

0.0468***
(0.0116)

Ln(M)
Materials

0.4641***
(0.0560)

0.5874***
(0.0312)

0.6514***
(0.0187)

0.6293***
(0.0267)

Ln(K)
Non-IT Capital

0.2052***
(0.0532)

0.0713
(0.0674)

0.1017***
(0.0285)

0.1110***
(0.0270)

Ln(L)
Labor

0.2264***
(0.0728)

0.1843***
(0.0337)

0.2046***
(0.0139)

0.2145***
(0.0173)

1,074
0.0100
0.3480
0.4570

615
-

2,022
-

3,692
-

-

-

-

USA*ln(C)
USA ownership*IT capital

MNE*ln(C)
Non-US multinational *IT capital

Observations
First order serial correlation, p value
Second order serial correlation, p value
Sargan-Hansen, p-value

(2)

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is the
log of gross output. The time period is 1995-2003. All variables are expressed in deviations from the year-specific three
digit industry mean. Column (1) is estimated using System-GMM (Blundell and Bond, 1998). One step GMM results
reported. In column (1) instruments are all establishment level factor inputs lagged t-2 and before (when available) in
the differenced equation (i.e. mt-2, lt-2 ,kt-2,ct-2, qt-2, USAt-2, MNEt-2, (USA*c)t-2, (MNE*c) t-2,qt-2,) and lagged differences in
the levels equation (∆mt-1, ∆lt-1 , ∆kt-1, ∆ct-1, ∆USAt-1, ∆MNEt-1, ∆(USA*c)t-1, ∆(MNE*c)t-1,). Serial correlation tests are
LM tests of the first differenced residuals (see Arellano and Bond, 1991). Sargan-Hansen Test of instrument validity is
a test of the over-identification. “Test USA*ln(C)=MNE*ln(C)” is test of whether the coefficient on USA*ln(C) is
significantly different from the coefficient on MNE*ln(C), etc. Columns (2)-(4) are estimated using Olley Pakes (1996).
We use a fourth order series expansion to approximate the phi function. Standard errors in Olley-Pakes are bootstrapped
(clustered at the establishment level) with 200 replications. All columns include age, region dummies and a dummy
taking value one if the establishment belongs to a multi-firm enterprise group as additional controls.

51

TABLE A4 - NON RANDOM SELECTION OF US TAKEOVERS COMPARED TO OTHER TAKEOVERS?
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

US
Takeover=1

US
Takeover=1

US
Takeover=1

US
Takeover=1

All
takeovers

All
takeovers

All except
domestic
takeovers

All except
domestic
takeovers

ln(C/L)t-1

0.0029
(0.0095)

-

-0.0003
(0.0365)

-

∆ln(C)t-1

-

-0.0236
(0.0246)

-

-0.0876
(0.0714)

ln(L)t-1

0.0140
(0.0106)

0.0108
(0.0111)

-0.0183
(0.0377)

-0.0222
(0.0379)

ln(K/L)t-1

0.0108
(0.0209)

0.0109
(0.0204)

-0.0174
(0.0645)

-0.0346
(0.0650)

ln(Q/L)t-1

0.0236
(0.0269)

0.0270
(0.0263)

0.0333
(0.0860)

0.0580
(0.0843)

Age

-0.0014
(0.0038)

-0.0017
(0.0039)

-0.0003
(0.0085)

-0.0014
(0.0087)

563

563

190

190

Dependent Variable = 1 if establishment taken over by
US firm, = 0 for all other takeovers

Sample

Observations

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dependent variable in all columns is a
dummy taking value 1 if the establishment is taken over by a US Multinational and zero otherwise. Takeovers by UK
firms (“domestics”) are excluded in columns (3)-(4). The time period is 1995-2003. All columns include two digit
industry dummies, region and year dummies. The estimation method in all columns is by a linear probability model.
Standard errors in brackets under coefficients are robust to heteroskedasticity.

52

Output per hour worked, 2005 US$
30
35
40
45
50

Figure 1: Output per hour in Europe and the US, 1980-2005
US

25

Europe

Notes: Productivity measured by GDP per hour in
2005 US $ PPPs. The countries included in the “EU
15” group are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, UK, Greece, Italy, Ireland,
Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and
Netherlands. Labor productivity per hour worked in
2005 US$. Source: The Conference Board and
Groningen Growth and Development Centre, Total
Economy Database.

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

year

IT Capital Stock per Hours Worked, 2000 US$
0
2
4
6
8

Figure 2: IT capital per hour in Europe and the US, 1980-2005
IT Capital Stock per Hours Worked

US

Europe

1980

1985

1990

1995
year

2000

2005

Notes: IT capital stock (in unit dollars) per hour
worked. IT capital stock measured using perpetual
inventory method and common assumptions on
hedonics and depreciation. 2005 US $ PPPs The
countries included in the “EU 15” group are: Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, UK,
Greece, Italy, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden and the Netherlands. Labour productivity
per hour worked in 2005 US$ using PPPs. Source:
Marcel P. Timmer, Gerard Ypma and Bart van Ark,
“IT in the European Union: Driving Productivity
Convergence?”, Research Memorandum GD-67,
Groningen Growth and Development Centre,
October 2003, Appendix Tables, updated June
2005.

Figure 3a: Organizational devolvement,
firms by country of location

Figure 3c: Organizational change in the
UK during 1981-1990

European Firms

Domestic Firms

4.13

US Firms

4.93

0.40

Non-US Multinationals

0.44

US Multinationals

Figure 3b: Organizational devolvement,
firms by country of ownership
Domestic Firms, in Europe

Non-US Multinational
subsidiaries, in Europe
US Multinational
subsidiaries, in Europe

4.11

Figure 3d: Organizational change in the
UK during 1998-2000
Domestic Firms

3.67

Non-US Multinationals

4.87

0.52

US Multinationals

0.56

0.66

0.77

Notes: In Figures 3a and 3b the “Organizational devolvement” score is the average score for the 2 organizational questions for 548 firms in the US (219),
UK (98) and France and Germany (231). The questions are taken exactly from Bresnahan et al. (2002) covering “Task allocation” and “Pace setting” where
a higher scores indicate greater worker autonomy. Full survey details in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). In Figure 3c the source is the WIRS data (1984 and
1990) which plots the proportion of establishments experiencing organizational change in previous 3 years (all establishments in the UK). US MNEs
(N=190), Non-US MNEs (N=147), Domestic (N=2848). Senior manager is asked “whether there has been any change in work organization not involving
new plant/equipment in the past three years”. In Figure 3d the source is the CIS data: we plot the proportion of establishments experiencing organizational
or managerial change in previous 3 years. The firm is asked “Did your enterprise make major changes in the following areas of business structure and
practices during the three year period 1998-2001?” with answers to either “Advanced Management techniques” or “Major changes in organizational
structure” recorded as an organizational change.

Figure 4: Decentralization (O) by US and
European firms, model results

US

Figure 5: IT per unit of labor, log(C/L), in
US and European firms, model results

US

Europe

Europe

Notes: Results from the numerical simulation of the theoretical model 1980-2015 (the full simulation was run 1970-2025). See text for details.
Decentralization is the value of O (between 0 for full centralization and 1 for full decentralization).

Figure 6: Labor productivity, log(Q/L), in
US and European firms, model results

US

Figure 7: Decentralization (O) by plants
taken over by US multinationals:
model results

US

Europe
US takeover of
European plant

Europe

Notes: Results from the numerical simulation of the theoretical model 1980-2015 (the full simulation was run 1970-2025). See text for details.
Productivity is output per worker. Decentralization is the value of O (between 0 for full centralization and 1 for full decentralization).

IT capital per employee relative to industry average
.5
1
1.5

Figure 8: IT Intensity vs. Flexibility of Employment Index

Belgium (17)
Japan (153)
USA (781)
Switzerland (87)
UK (1344)
France (202)

Germany (254)

Denmark (22)

Australia (16)
Canada (27)

Netherlands (218)
Sweden (51)
Finland (15)

0

South Africa (12)

.4

.6
.8
1
World Bank Flexibility of Employment Index
(0=Most Strict Labour Regulations; 1=Most Flexible Labour Regulations)

Notes: The sample includes only establishments of multinationals in IT using sectors. Each point
represents average IT intensity (IT capital divided by employment normalized by the three digit
industry average) by country. Each country average is based on at least ten observations and three
digit industries with fewer than 10 observations are excluded. The labour regulation index is the
“Rigidity of Employment” index, drawn from the World Bank “Doing Business” report.

Figure B1: Organizational change over time in the US and EU
ORG
1

US

Europe

0
c.1985

Regime:
Wedge:

1

c.2006

2

US=Europe US>Europe

c.2012

Year

c.2020+

3

4

5

?

?

US<Europe

Notes: This figure illustrates the theoretical predictions of the model when we allow for adjustment costs in IT (see Appendix B for details).
Note that these are analytic results rather than numerically simulated so the years are approximate. The “wedge” is the difference between
actual and measured TFP (see equation (B2)). Regime 1 is where neither the EU nor US have begun adjusting organization (so O = 0).
Regime 5 is where both the EU and US have fully adjusted their organization (so O = 1). In Regime 2 the US has started adjusting, but the
EU has not, in Regime 3 both regions are adjusting and in Region 4 the US has fully adjusted and the EU is still adjusting.

