                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PRODUCTIVITY AND TAXES AS DRIVERS OF FDI

                                             Assaf Razin
                                            Efraim Sadka

                                        Working Paper 13094
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13094


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Productivity and Taxes as Drivers of FDI
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 13094
May 2007
JEL No. F2,F21,F23,F3

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop a framework in which the host country productivity has a positive effect on the intensive
margin (the size of FDI flows), but only an ambiguous effect on the extensive margin (the likelihood
of FDI flows to occur). The source-country productivity has a negative effect on the extensive margin.
An increase in the host-country corporate tax rate reduces the actual FDI flows the likelihood of such
flows to occur. An increase in the source-country corporate tax rate reduces the likelihood of FDI
flows. These predictions are confronted with Data on FDI flows, drawn from the International Direct
Investment dataset (Source OECD), covering the bilateral FDI flows among 18 OECD countries over
the period 1987 to 2003. We find some support for the main predictions of the model.

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il
1. Introduction


Foreign direct investment (FDI) is a form of international capital flows. It plays an

important role in the general allocation of world capital across countries. It is often

pictured, together with other forms of capital flows, as shifting capital from rich, capital-

abundant economies to poor, capital-scarce economies, so as to close the gap between the

rates of return to capital and enhance the efficiency of the worldwide stock of capital.

This general portrayal of international capital flows may indeed pertain to FDI flows

from developed countries to developing countries. The latter are almost all net recipients

of FDI.

           However, this portrayal of international capital flow is hardly reminiscent of the

FDI flows among developed countries, which are much larger than those from developed

to developing countries. Although net aggregate FDI flows from, or to, a developed

country are typically small, the gross flows are quite large.

           In this paper we indeed focus on bilateral FDI flows among OECD countries. We

study the effects of two sets of driving forces that affect FDI: productivity and taxation.

Specifically, we attempt to shed some light on some key mechanisms though which these

sets affect FDI flows.1

           An important feature of our FDI model (which distinguishes FDI flows from

portfolio flows) is fixed setup costs of new investments. This introduces two margins of


1
    Some macroeconomic studies emphasize the effect of FDI on long-run economic growth and cyclical
fluctuations. A comprehensive study by Bosworth and Collins (1999) studies a somewhat related effect:
that of FDI on growth. They provide evidence on the effect of capital inflows on domestic investment for
58 developed countries during 1978-1995.



2
FDI decisions. There is an intensive margin of determining the magnitude of the flows of

FDI, according to standard marginal productivity conditions, and also an extensive

margin of determining whether at all to make a new investment. Crucially, productivity

and taxes may affect these two margins in different, possibly conflicting, ways. The

magnitude of the setup costs can well be industry-specific, thereby giving rise to two-way

rich-rich, as well as rich-poor FDI flows.

       Threshold barriers play also an important role in determining the extent of trade-

based foreign direct investment; see, for instance, Zhang and Markusen (1999), Carr,

Markusen and Maskus (2001), and Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004). The trade-based

literature typically focuses on issues such as the interdependence of FDI and trade in

goods and the ensuing industrial structure. For instance, they attempt to explain how a

source country can export both FDI and goods to the same host country. The explanation

essentially rests on productivity heterogeneity within the source country, and differences

in setup costs associated with FDI and export of goods. The trade-based literature on FDI

is based on a framework of heterogeneous firms, such as in Melitz (2003). Thus, the

empirical approach in this literature is geared toward firm-level decisions on exports and

FDI in the source country. Our approach is geared toward an analysis of aggregate

bilateral FDI. Thus, trade-based empirical applications typically use micro-dataset,

whereas we utilize countrywide datasets. Note that micro-cross-country panel datasets are

not available, so that micro-based empirical studies typically have to be confined to a

single source or host country and to extremely short time spans. In contrast, we employ

here data for 19 OECD countries over a large interval of time (1987-2003).




3
       We first study the role of source and host productivities on the two-fold FDI

decisions. Specifically, we develop a framework in which the host country productivity

has a positive effect on the intensive margin (the size of FDI flows), but an ambiguous

effect on the extensive margin (the likelihood of FDI flows to occur). The source-country

productivity has a negative effect on the extensive margin. These predictions are

confronted with the data.

       We then study the effects of corporate taxation on FDI. Earlier studies (e.g. Gropp

and Kostial (2000) and Benassy-Quere, Fontagae and Laahreche-Révil (2000)) suggest

that FDI is sensitive to tax rate differences. Our contribution is that the host and source

tax rates may have differential effects on the two margins of FDI decisions. Therefore,

the sensitivity of FDI to tax rate differentials may be blurred.

       The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents an analytical

framework with productivity as a driving force of FDI. Section 3 extends this framework

to include corporate taxation as an additional driving force. Section 4 describes our

econometric approach. Section 5 describes the data. The estimations results are presented

in section 6. Section 7 concludes.




2. A Stripped-Down Model of FDI


       Datasets of source-host FDI flows typically include many observations with zero

flows. This may be indicative of the existence of fixed setup costs of establishing new

FDI, thereby generating two margins for FDI decisions - an extensive margin about



4
whether to invest all, and an intensive margin of about how much to invest.

         We present in this section a simple, stripped-down model of FDI with fixed setup

costs. Consider a pair of countries, "host" and "source", in a world of free capital mobility

which fixes the world rate of interest, denoted by r . We will now describe the host-

country, whose economic variables will be subscripted by " H ". The description of the

source-country is similar with a subscript " S ". Variables with neither subscript are

identical for the two countries. There is a representative industry whose product serves

for both consumption and investment. Firms last for two periods. In the First period there

is a continuum of N H firms which differ from each other by an idiosyncratic productivity

factor ε . The number N H of firms (or entrepreneurs) is fixed. We refer to a firm which

has a productivity factor of ε as an ε -firm. The cumulative distribution function of ε is

denoted by G ( ⋅ ) with a density function g ( ⋅ ) . That is, the number of ε -firms is

N H g (ε ) .

         We assume for simplicity that the initial net capital stock of each firm is the same

and denote it by K H0 . If an ε -firm invests I in the first period, it augments its capital

stock to K = K H0 + I , and its gross output in the second period will be AH F ( K , L)(1 + ε ) ,

where L is the labor input, F ( ⋅ ) is the production function, and AH is a country ( H ) -

specific aggregate productivity parameter. Note that ε is firm-specific, whereas AH is

country-specific.

         We assume that there is a fixed setup cost of investment, CH , which is the same

for all firms (that is, independent of ε ). We assume that the fixed cost has two

components. One component (denoted by CSH ) is borne by the FDI investor in her



5
source-country. This may involve, for instance, management time and other expenses at

the home headquarter of a multinational. The second component is a standard

“adjustment cost” carried out in the host country. We assume that this cost involves labor

input LCH only. Thus,

                                                CH = CSH + wH LCH ,                                            (1)

where wH is the host-country wage rate. We assume that, due to some (suppressed) fixed

factor, F is strictly concave, exhibiting diminishing returns to scale, and diminishing

marginal products of labor and capital. Note that the average cost curve of the firm is U-

shaped, so that perfect competition, which we assume, can prevail.2 Consider an ε -firm

that invests in the first period an amount I = K − K H0 in order to augment its stock of

capital to K . Its present value becomes V + ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) − CH , where

                                                   A F ( K , L )(1 + ε ) − wL + (1 − δ ) K                
            V + ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) = max  H                                            − ( K − K H0 ) 
                                         ( K , L)
                                                                    1+ r                                  
                                                                                                               (2)

where δ is the rate of physical depreciation and r is the world (fixed) rate of interest.

           The demands of such a firm for K and L are denoted by K + ( AH , ε , wH ) and

L+ ( AH , ε , wH ) . They are given by the marginal productivity conditions

                                           AH FK ( K , L)(1 + ε ) = r + δ
                                                                                                               (3)
and

                                            AH FL ( K , L)(1 + ε ) = wH ,
                                                                                                               (4)


2
    With constant returns to scale, the fixed cost will entail diminishing average cost curve, in which case
perfect competition cannot be sustained, Were we to assume that entry is free, one could have constant
returns to scale at the industry level.



6
where FK and FL denote the partial derivatives of F with respect to K and L ,

respectively. Naturally, ε is the bounded from below by -1, so that output is always

nonnegative. We denote by ε the upper bound of the productivity factor, that is

G (ε ) = 1 .

         Note, however, that an ε -firm may choose not to invest at all (that is, to stick to

its existing stock of capital, K H0 ) and avoid the lumpy setup cost CH . Naturally, a firm

with a low ε may not find it worthwhile to incur the setup cost CH . In this case, its

present value is

                 −                          AH F ( K H0 , L)(1 + ε ) − wH L + (1 − δ ) K H0 
               V ( AH , K , ε , wH ) = max 
                          0
                                                                                             .
                                                                  1+ r
                          H
                                        L
                                                                                            
                                                                                                  (5)

The labor demand of such a firm, denoted by L− ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) , is defines by

                                         AH FL ( K H0 , L)(1 + ε ) = wH .
                                                                                                  (6)

A firm will choose to make a new investment if its present value with the investment

exceeds its present value without the investment. Naturally, a higher productivity firm

(namely, a firm with a higher ε ) benefits more from investment; that is, the gap between

V + and V − increases with ε (a formal proof is available in Razin and Sadka (2007) ).

Therefore, there exists a cutoff level of ε , denoted by ε 0 , such that an ε -firm will make

a new investment if, and only if, ε > ε 0 . This cutoff level of ε depends on AH , CH , K H0 ,

and wH . We write the cutoff ε as ε 0 ( AH , CH , K H0 , wH ) . It is defined implicitly by

                          V + ( AH , K H0 , ε 0 , wH ) − CH = V − ( AH , K H0 , ε 0 , wH ) .
                                                                                                  (7)



7
That is, the cutoff productivity level is the level at which the firm is just indifferent

between making a new investment, incurring the setup cost, and sticking to its existing

capital stock, avoiding the setup cost.

        The wage rate wH is determined in equilibrium by a clearance in the labor

market. We assume that labor is confined within national borders. Denoting the country’s

                            0
endowment of labor by L H , we have the following labor market-clearing equation:

                            ε 0 ( AH ,CH , K H0 , wH )

                       NH
                                        −1
                                          ∫                L− ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) g (ε )d ε

                                {
                       + N H 1 − G ε 0 ( AH , CH , K H0 , wH )  LCH           }
                                               ε
                                                                                                     0
                       +NH                     ∫             L+ ( AH , ε , wH ) g (ε )d ε = L H .
                                ε 0 ( AH ,CH , K H0 , wH )




Dividing the latter equation through by N H yields

                          ε 0 ( AH ,CH , K H0 , wH )

                                      ∫
                                      −1
                                                       L− ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) g (ε )d ε

                              {
                          + 1 − G ε 0 ( AH , CH , K H0 , wH )  LCH          }
                                           ε
                                                                                                 0
                          +                ∫               L+ ( AH , ε , wH ) g (ε )d ε = L H
                              ε 0 ( AH ,CH , K H0 , wH )

                                                                                                         (9)

where L0H ≡ L H N H is the amount of labor per firm. (Note that there are N H [1 − G (ε 0 ) ]
               0




firms that make new investments, employing an extra fixed input of LCH .)

        Note that no similar marker-clearing equation is specified for capital, because we

assume that capital is freely mobile internationally and its rate of return ( n ) is equalized

internationally. The same description with the subscript S replacing H holds for the

source-country.


8
           Note that differences in labor abundance between the two countries are

manifested in the wage differences. To see this, suppose that the two countries are

identical, except that effective labor per firm is more abundant in the host-country than in

the source-country, that is L0H > L0S . Note also that the number of firms in the economy is

also a measure of the abundance of entrepreneurship. Thus, the abundance (respectively,

scarcity) of labor is also relative to the scarcity (respectively, abundance) of

entrepreneurship. If wages were equal in the two countries, then labor demand per firm

would be equal and the market-clearing condition (equation (8)) could not hold for both

countries. Because of the diminishing marginal product of labor, it follows that the wage

in the relatively labor-abundant country is lower than in the relatively labor-scarce

country, that is wH < wS .3 Thus, equal returns to capital (through capital mobility) coexist

with unequal wages.4




2.1 M&A FDI

           One may think of FDI as the investment of source-country entrepreneurs in the

acquisition of host-country existing firms (whose number is fixed - N H ). We indeed deal

initially with this kind of FDI through mergers and acquisitions (M&A). Suppose that the


3
    The equilibrium wage gap implies that the host-country employs more workers per firm than the source-
country. Thus, even though the productivity distribution across firms is assumed equal, the source-country
is effectively more productive in equilibrium.
4
    See also Amiti (2005) who studies the effect of agglomeration on cross-regional wage differences. See
also Melitz (2003) for the role of fixed costs in intra-industry reallocations in reaction to industry-specific
productivity shocks.



9
source-country entrepreneurs are endowed with some "intangible" capital, or know-how,

stemming from their specialization or expertise in the industry at hand. We model this

comparative advantage by assuming that the setup cost of investment in the host-country,

when investment is done by source- country entrepreneurs (FDI investors) is only
                     ∗
CH∗ = CSH
       ∗
          + wH LCH , which is below CH (the setup cost of investment when carried out by

the host-country direct investors). This cost advantage implies that the foreign investors

can bid up the direct investors of the host-country in the purchase of the investing firms

in the host-country. Each such firm (that is, each firm whose ε is above

ε 0 ( AH , CH∗ , K H0 , wH ) ) is purchased at its market value, which is V + ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) − CH∗ .

This essentially assumes that competition among the foreign direct investors shifts all the

gains from their lower setup cost to the host-country original owners of the firm. The new

owners also invest an amount K + ( AH , ε , wH ) − K H0 in the firm.

        Thus, the amount of foreign direct investment made in an ε -firm (where ε > ε 0 )

is

                     ∗
         FDI ( AH , CSH , K H0 , ε , wH ) = V + ( AH , K H0 , ε , wH ) − CSH
                                                                          ∗
                                                                             + K + ( AH , ε , wH ) − K H0 .
                                                                                                                           ( 10 )
                                                                         ∗                   ∗
Note that the acquisition price is V + − CSH
                                          ∗
                                             − wH LCH , but wH LCH constitutes part of FDI;

                ∗
therefore only CSH is subtracted in equation ( 10 ).

        Aggregate notional FDI is given by

                                                              ε
     FDI N ( AH , CH∗ , CSH                                   ∫
                         ∗                                                                  ∗
                            , K H0 , wH ) = N H                                 FDI ( AH , CSH , K H0 , wH , ε ) g (ε )d ε .
                                                  ε 0 ( AH ,CH∗ , K H0 , wH )

                                                                                                                           ( 11 )




10
Note that FDI N , as defined in equation ( 11 ), would be the actual flow of FDI, when

ε 0 ( AH , CH∗ , K H0 , wH ) is below ε . That is, FDI N is the actual FDI only if

                                        ε 0 ( AH , CH∗ , K H0 , wH ) ≤ ε .
                                                                                                        ( 12 )

Otherwise, the actual FDI would be zero. For this reason we refer to FDI N as the

notional FDI. The actual FDI, denoted by FDI A , is therefore defined by:

                                               FDI N ( AH , CH∗ , CSH
                                                                    ∗
                                                                       , K H0 , wH )   if (12 ) holds
                                              
       FDI A ( AH , CH∗ , CSH
                           ∗
                              , K H0 , wH ) = 
                                              0                                           otherwise
                                              
                                                                                                        ( 13 )

We refer to ( 12 ) as the selection-condition equation. It specifies when there will by any

FDI flow to the host-country. Equation ( 11 ) is referred to as the flow equation which

describes the actual FDI flow only if the selection-condition equation is satisfied.



2.2 Aggregate Productivity Shock: Flow and Selection

        Note that the parameter AH is a host-country specific productivity factor that

applies to all firms in this country. We examine how a shock to this factor affects the

aggregate level of FDI flowing to the host-country. Suppose first that the domestic wage

rate ( wH ) is fixed. A positive productivity shock has three positive effects on the notional

FDI (namely, FDI N ), as specified in equation ( 11 ). First, it raises the marginal

productivity of capital, thereby increasing the amount of investment that is made by each

investing firm (which is acquired by FDI investors). Second, it raises the value of such

firms and, consequently, their acquisition price which constitutes a part of the notional


11
FDI flows. Third, it increases the number of firms purchased by FDI investors (by

lowering the threshold productivity level ε 0 ). 5,6

           Turning to the selection-condition equation ( 13 ), note that a positive aggregate

productivity shock (while still maintaining the wage rate wH constant) increases the

profitability of investments and, consequently, reduces the likelihood that no firm will

make any investment. Formally, a rise in AH reduces the likelihood that the threshold

idiosyncratic productivity ε 0 exceeds the upper bound on the idiosyncratic productivity

ε . That is, a positive aggregate productivity shock raises the likelihood of satisfying the

selection condition, so that the notional FDI turns to be realized.

           Thus, a positive aggregate productivity shock, keeping wH fixed, raises the actual

FDI (both through the flow and selection-condition equation).

           Now, we drop the supposition that the wage rate wH is fixed. When wages are not

fixed (but are rather determined by the labor-market clearing equation ( 9 ) ), then the

increase in the demand for labor raises the wage rate ( wH ) in the host-country (and the

fixed setup cost wH LCH ), thereby countering the above three effects on the notional FDI.

With a unique equilibrium, the initial effects of the increase in AH are likely to dominate

the subsequent counter-effects of the rise in wH , so that the notional FDI still rises. Thus,

an increase in the host-country’s aggregate productivity factor ( AH ) raises the volume of



5
    For a formal derivation of the results see Razin and Sadka (2007).
6
    We assume plausibly that the third effect which represents the marginal investing firm is rather small
relative to the margin of investment of all investing firms (the first effect). We ignore the third effect in the
empirical investigation.



12
the notional FDI flows from country S to country H that is governed by the flow

equation.

       Next, consider the effect of an aggregate productivity shock on the selection

condition equation. A rise in AH increases the value of the domestic component of the

setup cost, wH LCH . This effect by itself weakens the advantage of carrying out positive

FDI flows from country S to country H at all. In other words, as wH rises, ε 0 rises,

thereby reducing the likelihood of satisfying the selection-condition equation. The

follow-up effect that is triggered by a positive aggregate productivity shock works in the

opposite direction of the initial effect (holding wH constant), and may dominate it.

       To sum up, a positive aggregate productivity shock in the host-country raises the

observed notional FDI flows in the flow equation and, at the same time, may lower the

likelihood of observing positive FDI flows at all. Indeed, this possibility is demonstrated

in Razin and Sadka (2007).

       Note also that the source-country aggregate productivity factor ( AS ) does not

affect the flows of M&A FDI from country S to country H. This is because we assumed

free international mobility of portfolio capital which set a common rate of interest (r)

worldwide.




2.3 Greenfield FDI

       So far, FDI has taken the form of mergers or acquisitions of the N H existing

firms. Consider now the possibility of establishing a new firm (that is, a greenfield FDI,


13
where K H0 = 0 ). Suppose that the newcomer entrepreneur does not know in advance the

productivity factor ( ε ) of the potential firm. The entrepreneur therefore takes G ( ⋅ ) as the

cumulative probability distribution of the idiosyncratic productivity factor of the new

firm. However, we assume that ε is revealed to the entrepreneur, before she decides

whether or not to make new investment. The expected value of the new firm is therefore:

                                    ε
                          ∗
                  V ( A, CnH , w) = ∫ max{V + ( AH ,0, ε , wH ) − CnH , 0}g (ε )d ε ,
                                    −1
                                                                                          ( 14 )

where CnH is the setup cost of greenfield investment. Note that when K H0 is equal to

zero, only the firms with ε high enough to justify a greenfield investment have a positive

value. This explains the max operator in equation ( 14 ).



        Suppose that greenfield entrepreneurship is in limited capacity. Thus, an

entrepreneur in a source country (and there are a limited number of them) may have to

decide whether to establish a new firm at home (the source country) or abroad (the host

country), but not in both. Her decision is naturally determined by where V ( ⋅ ) , as defined

in equation ( 14 ), is higher. She will invest in the host-country rather than in the source-

country if, and only if,

                                              ∗                     ∗
                                    V ( AH , CnH , wH ) > V ( AS , CnS , wS ) .
                                                                                          ( 15 )

(We continue to maintain the assumption that the source-country entrepreneurs have a

cutting-edge advantage over their counterparts in the host-country in establishing

greenfield investments.)




14
          This is a selection-condition equation for greenfield FDI. In contrast to the M&A

case, there is a role played here by the aggregate productivity factor in the source-country

( AS ). A positive shock to AS increases the likelihood of the source-country entrepreneurs

of staying at home, thereby reducing the likelihood of greenfield FDI flows from country

S to H.

          Note that in a many-country world, an entrepreneur from source country S

chooses to invest in host country H, if the latter offers the most profitable investment.

Also, she may need to outbid competitors from other source countries (for instance, in the

case of acquiring a concession from the host-country government to operate something ).

                        ∗
In this case, V ( AH , CnH , wH ) in the selection-condition equation ( 15 ) must be the

                            ∗
maximum over all V ( AH ', CnH ', wH ') for potential other host countries:

                         ∗                              ∗
               V ( AH , CnH , wH ) = arg max V ( AH ', CnH ', wH ') > V ( AS , CS∗ , wS ) ,
                                          H '∈D

                                                                                                   ( 15’ )

where D is the set of potential host countries in which the entrepreneurs of source-

country S can outbid all competing entrepreneurs from other potential source countries.7

          Each entrepreneur in the source country, who decides to actually make a

greenfield FDI in host-country H, invests according to the marginal productivity

conditions. Aggregation over these entrepreneurs from source-country S provides a flow

equation of greenfield FDI from S to H.

          As we have seen, the host-country aggregate productivity factor ( AH ) affects

positively the notional FDI flows from source countries in the case of M&A flows;



7
 Eaton and Kortum (2002) applied the probability theory of extremes to provide a tractable form for a
selection-condition equation in a similar context.


15
whereas the source-country aggregate productivity factor ( AS ) has no effect on these

flows. At the same time, a positive shock to AH may reduce the likelihood of having

M&A FDI flows to the host-country H (because of general equilibrium effects on wages

in the host-country); again, AS has no effects on these flows. In the case of greenfield

FDI, a positive shock to AH has positive effects both on the notional FDI flows to host-

country H and on the likelihood of these flows to actually materialize. A positive shock to

AS does not affect the notional flows to host-country H, but it reduces the likelihood of

such flows to occur at all. Note also that the likelihood of having greenfield FDI flows

from country S to country H is negatively affected by positive productivity shocks in all

other potential host countries ( AH ' ).8




3. Source and Host Corporate Taxation

         The economic literature has dealt extensively with the effects of taxation on

investment, going back to the well-known works of Harbeger (1962) and Hall and

Jorgenson (1967). Of particular interest are the effects of international differences in tax

rates on foreign direct investment; see, for instance, Auerbach and Hassett (1993), Hines

(1999), Desai and Hines (2001), De Mooij and Ederveen (2001), and Devereux and

Hubbard (2003).

         In this section we attempt to provide a new look at the mechanisms through which

corporate tax rates influence aggregate FDI flows in the setup adopted here of twofold

8
 A comprehensive study of the latter effects ( AH ' ) is not available. We ignore these effects in the
empirical investigation.


16
investment decisions in the presence of threshold barriers. In this context, the source and

host tax rates may have different effects on these two decisions (the flow and selection-

condition equations).

           Consider for concreteness the case of a parent firm that weighs the development

of a new product line. We can think of the fixed setup cost as the outlays of developing

this product line. The firm may choose to make the development at home and then carry

the production at a subsidiary abroad. This choice may be determined by some "genuine"

economic considerations such as source and host aggregate productivity factors, as

discussed in the preceding section, and by tax considerations.

           In this context there arises the issue of double taxation. The income of a foreign

affiliate is typically taxed by the host country. If the source country taxes this income too,

then the combined (double) tax rate may be very high, and even exceeds 100%.9 This

double taxation is typically relieved at the source country by either exempting foreign-

source income altogether or granting tax credits.10 In the former case, foreign-source

income is subject to the tax levied by the host country only. When the source country

taxes its residents on their world-wide income and grants full credit for foreign taxes

(residence taxation), then in principle the foreign-source income is taxed at the source-

country tax rate, so that the host-country tax rate becomes irrelevant for investment

decisions the source-country residents. But, in practice, foreign-source income is far from

being taxed at the source-country rate. First, there are various reduced tax rates for

foreign-source income. Second, foreign-source income is usually taxed only upon


9
    For a succinct review of this issue see, for example, Hines (2001).
10
     This is also the recommendation of the OECD model tax treaty (OECD, 1997). A similar
recommendation is made also by the United Nations model tax treaty (UN 1980).



17
repatriation, thereby effectively reducing the present value of the tax. Thus, in practice,

the host country tax rate is much relevant for investment decisions of the parent firm at

the source country. The relevance of the host-country tax rate intensifies through transfer

pricing.11

           Note that one of the major elements through which corporate taxation affects

investment decision is the treatment of depreciation.12 Denote the true rate of

depreciation in host country H by δ H , and the rate allowed for tax purposes by δ H' .

Concentrating, for simplicity, on M&A FDI, equation ( 2 ) becomes in this case

                                           [ A F ( K , L)(1 + ε ) − wH L](1 − τ H ) + τ H δ H' K + (1 − δ H ) K                 
V + ( AH , K H0 ,τ H , ε , wH ) = max  H                                                                         − ( K − K H0 )  ,
                                  ( K , L)
                                                                     1 + (1 − τ H )r                                            
                                                                                                                 ( 16 )

where τ H is the host-country corporate tax rate. Note that in the presence of taxation, the

discount rate is the after-tax rate −(1 − τ H )r . (This specification assumes that the

subsidiary uses debt in the host country to finance the new investment.) Employing the

envelope theorem, it follows from equation ( 16 ) that ∂V + / ∂τ H < 0 . That is, the present

value of the cash flow falls when the corporate-tax rate in the host country rises, as is

indeed expected. Furthermore, the amount of new investment depends negatively on τ H .

The first-order condition for the stock of capital (equation ( 3 )) now becomes

                                                                    δ H − δ H' τ H
                                    AH FK ( K , L)(1 + ε ) = r +                   .
                                                                       1 −τ H
                                                                                                                ( 17 )



11
     The 2005 Jobs Creation Act in the U.S. allows U.S. companies to pay merely a tax of 5.25% on their
foreign-source income.
12
     See, for instance, Auerbach (1983).



18
This latter equation defines (implicitly) an equation for the flow of FDI. As δ H' is

typically smaller than δ H , it follows that the flow of FDI declines in τ H .

        The source-country parent firm will indulge into the project if, and only if,
                             ∗
                                           ∗
                      wH LCH (1 − τ H ) + CHS (1 − τ S ) < V + ( AH , K H0 ,τ H , ε , wH ) ,
                                                                                                    ( 18 )
                                                                                               ∗
                                                                                   ∗
where τ S is the corporate tax rate in the source country. Recall that wH LCH and CHS are,

respectively, the host-country and source-country components of the fixed cost CH∗ .

        To sum up: as is evident from condition ( 18 ), the tax rate in the source country,

τ S , affects positively the decision by a parent firm in country S whether to carry out a

foreign direct investment in country H; the tax rate in the host country, τ H , has a negative

effect on this decision. The tax rate in the source country, τ S , is irrelevant for the

determination of the magnitude of FDI flows; the latter are negatively affected by τ H .

        As before, there is a cutoff productivity level, denoted by
                ∗
                       ∗
ε 0 ( AH , CH , LCH , CHS , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , wH ) , such that all firms with a firm-specific productivity

level above ε 0 will make new investment and be acquired by FDI investors. All other

firms will make no new investments and remain under domestic ownership. The cutoff

level of ε 0 is defined implicitly by ( 18 ) with the inequality sign is replaced by an

equality sign. It follows from equation ( 18 ) that an increase in the source-country

corporate tax rate ( τ S ) reduces ε 0 , so that more firms are purchased by FDI investors.

The reason for this is that a rise in τ S reduces the after-tax source-country component of

the fixed cost. Note that V + declines in τ H . But a rise in τ H reduces also the after-tax,




19
                                                                                           ∗
host-country component of the fixed cost (namely, wH LCH (1 − τ H ) ). However, if the first

effect dominates the second, which is plausible, then an increase in τ H raises ε 0 ; that is,

an increase in the host-country corporate-tax rate reduces the number of investing firms

(which are also purchased by FDI investors).

       As before, aggregate notional FDI is given by
                                           ∗
                                 ∗
          FDI N ( AH , wH LCH , CSH , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , wH ) =
                                ε
                                                                                    ∗

                                ∫
                                                                       ∗
                                                           FDI ( AH , CSH , wH LCH , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , ε , wH ) g (ε )d ε ,
                          ∗   ∗
          ε 0 ( AH , wH LCH ,CSH , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , wH )

                                                                                                                             ( 19 )

where, as before,
                                                            ∗
                              ∗
                  FDI ( AH , CSH , wH LCH , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , ε , wH ) =
                 V + ( AH , K H0 ,τ H , ε , wH ) − CSH
                                                    ∗
                                                       (1 −τ S ) + K + ( AH ,τ H , ε , wH ) − K H0 ,
                                                                                                                             ( 20 )

and where K + is implicitly defined by equation ( 17 ).

       The actual FDI will be equal to the notional FDI only when ε 0 is below ε :


                                                                  ∗
                                                               ∗
                                          ε 0 ( AH , wH LCH , CHS , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , wH ) ≤ ε .
                                                                                                                             ( 21 )

The latter in the selection-condition equation. The actual flow of FDI ( FDI H ) is thus

                                               ∗
                                   ∗
            FDI A ( AH , wH LCH , CSH , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , wH ) =
              FDI N ( AH , wH LCH , CSH
                                                     ∗
                                      ∗
                                         , K H0 ,τ H ,τ S , wH ) if condition ( 21) holds
             
            =
             0                                                  otherwise
             
                                                                                                                             ( 22 )




20
           Note that an increase in the host-country corporate tax rate ( τ H ) reduces the

actual FDI flows from S to H and the likelihood of such flows to occur. An increase in

the source-country corporate tax rate ( τ S ) reduces the likelihood of FDI flows from S to

H to occur.13




4. Econometric Approach


The twofold nature of FDI decision gives rise to many cases of zero actual FDI flows.

With n countries in a sample, there are potentially n(n-1) pairs of source-host (s,h)

countries. In fact, the actual number of (s,h) pairs with observed flows is typically much

smaller. Therefore, the selection of the actual number of (s,h) pairs, which is naturally

endogenous, cannot be ignored; that is, this selection cannot be taken as exogenous. This

feature of FDI decisions lends itself naturally to the application of the Heckman selection

model (1974, 1979). This selection bias method is adopted to jointly estimate the

likelihood of surpassing a certain threshold (the selection-condition equation) and the

magnitude of the FDI flow (the flow equation), provided that the threshold is indeed

surpassed.

           Failing to take into account the selection-condition equation, by either dropping

out observations with zero flows or by treating such observations as literally indicating

zero flows, results in biased estimates of the coefficients of the flow equation. In

addition, the selection-condition equation per se provides meaningful economic

13
     As before, we ignore the extensive margin effect of τ S in the flow equation.


21
information about the determinants of FDI flows through the likelihood of having such

flows at all. For a more detailed analysis – see Razin and Sadka (2007, chapter 7).

           Figure 1 explains the intuition for the cause of the bias. Suppose, for instance, that

xijt is an explanatory variable which measures the productivity differential between the

i-th source country and the potential j-th host country in period t, holding all other

explanatory variables constant. Our theory predicts that the parameter β x is positive. This

is shown by the upward sloping line AB. Note that the slope is an estimate of the "true"

marginal effect of xijt on Yijt∗ , the latent variable denoting the flow of notional FDI from

the source country i to host country j in period t. But recall that flows could also be equal

to zero, if the setup costs are sufficiently high. A threshold, which is derived from the

setup costs, is shown as the curve TT’ in Figure 1. However, if we discard observations

with zero actual FDI flows, the remaining sub-sample is no longer random.

           To illustrate, suppose that for high values of xijt (say, x H in Figure 1), (i, j) pair-

wise FDI flows are all positive. That is, for all pairs of countries in the sub-sample the

threshold is surpassed and the observed average of notional FDI flows for xijt = x H is also

equal to the conditional population average for FDI flows, point R on line AB. However,

suppose that this does not hold for low values of xijt (say, x L ). For these (i, j)-pairs, we

observe positive values of Yi , j ,t , the observed actual flow of FDI, only for a subset of

country pairs in the population.14 Point S is, for instance, excluded from the sub-sample

of positive FDI flows. Consequently, for low xijt ’s, we observe only flows between


14
     This will be indeed the case when the residuals in the flow and selection equations are positively
correlated. An opposite bias occurs in the case of a negative correlation.



22
country pairs with low setup costs. As a result, the observed average of the FDI flows is

at point M’, whereas the "true" average is at point M. As seen in Figure 1, the OLS

regression line for the sub-sample is therefore the A’B’ line, which underestimates the

effect of productivity differentials on bilateral FDI flows.

       If we do not discard the zero FDI flow observations, the OLS estimates of β are

still biased, because they are based on observations on Y, the actual FDI, rather than on

Y*, the notional FDI.




5. Data and Descriptive Statistics


We consider several potential explanatory variables of the twofold decisions on FDI

flows. As in Razin and Sadka (2007), these variables include standard "mass" variables

(the source and host population sizes); "distance" variables (physical distance between

the source and the host countries and whether or not the two countries share a common

language); and "economic" variables (source and host real GDP per capita, source-host

differences in average years of schooling, and source and host financial risk rating). We

also control for country and time fixed effects. The dependent variable in the flow

equation is the log of the FDI flows. (The flow equation is also known as the “gravity”

equation.)

       The main variables are grouped as follows: (1) standard country characteristics

such as real GDP per-capita, population size, educational attainment (as measured by

average years of schooling), and financial sound rating (the inverse of financial risk




23
rating); (2) (s,h) source-host characteristics, such as (s,h) FDI flows, geographical

distance, common language (zero-one variable); (3) productivity; and (4) corporate tax

rates. Productivity is approximated by labor productivity, that is, output per worker, as

measured by PPP-adjusted real GDP per worker. This variable is at times instrumented

by the capital/labor ratio and years of schooling. Corporate taxes are measured by the

statutory rates or by the “effective” average rates, as compiled y Devereux, Griffith and

Klemm (2002). The effective rates are at times instrumented by the statutory corporate

tax rates and GDP per capita.

       Table 1 summarizes the data sources. Table 1A in the appendix describes the list

of the countries in the sample and indicates for each host-source pair the (time) average

of FDI flows as percentages of the host and source GDP. Some source countries do not

interact with more than with few host countries. We do not smooth the data by taking

multi-year averages, but rather employ unfiltered annual data. This enables us to

investigate the effects of the explanatory variables over the business cycle. In the text we

present in Table 2 some aggregate statistics of the detailed country-pair data of Table 2A.

Specifically, we consider all the EU countries, except the U.K. and Ireland, as one block

of countries. We then present (time) average flows among this block, the U.K., the

U.S., Ireland, and Japan as percentages of the host and source country/block GDP. This

underscores the prominence of the U.S. as a source of FDI and the U.K., Ireland and

Japan as recipients of FDI. Note that the EU (excluding the U.K. and Ireland) plays a

relatively small role either as a source or host of FDI.

       Data on FDI flows are drawn from the International Direct Investment dataset

(Source OECD), covering the bilateral FDI flows among 18 OECD countries over the




24
period 1987 to 2003.15 The source OECD dataset reports FDI flows from OECD

countries to OECD and non-OECD countries, as well as FDI flows from non-OECD

countries to OECD countries. However, it does not report FDI flows from non-OECD to

non-OECD countries. This is why we employ in our sample OECD countries only. The

Source OECD provides data on FDI flows in U.S. dollars, and we deflate them by the

U.S. CPI for urban consumers.




6. Empirical Evidence

As was mentioned before, productivity is taken as one of the drivers of FDI. Note that

productivity is measured here by labor productivity. However, because both the latter and

FDI flows are affected by other variables which are not controlled in the regression, such

as business-cycle variables (e.g. interest rates, unemployment rate), we present in our

results alternatives. In the first we simply employ labor productivity. In the second we

instrument the labor productivity variable by the capital-labor ratio, years of schooling

and country fixed effects.

           As for the tax variables we employ first the statutory tax rates. Another alternative

is the effective tax rates as compiled by Devereux, Griffith and Klemm (2002). These

rates measure the gap between the cost of capital in the corporate sector (that is, the

required rate of return on an investment) and the tax-free interest rate. For the same

reasons as in the case of productivity, we also use the statutory corporate tax rates, GDP


15
     Razin and Sadka (2007) use also samples containing both OECD and non-OECD countries.


25
per capita and country-fixed effects as instruments to generate fitted values for the

effective tax rates.

        Table 2A in the appendix presents the instrumented productivity and tax

equations. As expected, the coefficients of the capital-labor ratio and years of schooling

are positive and significant in the instrumented productivity equation. Similarly, the

statutory tax rate and GDP per capita are positive and significant in the instrumented tax

equation. R 2 is very high, close to one, in both equations.

        Consider first productivity as a driver of FDI flows. The estimation results are

described in Table 3. Panel (1) refers to the uninstrumented productivities, whereas panel

(2) considers fitted productivities. The coefficients of the variables other than the

productivity and tax variables are presented “below the line” in this table. Source GDP

per capita has a positive and significant effect on the flows of FDI in both panels. Host

GDP per capita has a positive and significant effect on the flow of FDI in panel (2) only.

Neither host nor source GDP per capita is significant in the selection equation. In

contrast, the host population size has a negative and significant effect in the selection

equation only. The source population follows a similar pattern but only in panel (2). As

expected, the physical distance variable has a negative and significant effect in both

equations and in both panels. Common language has a positive and significant effect in

both panels, but only in the flow equation. Turning to the financial sound rating variable

– it is only the source variable which has a negative (as expected) and significant effect,

and the flow equation of panel (1) only. The source-host schooling gap is not significant

throughout. The existence of previous FDI (a dummy variable) may be indicative of low




26
setup costs. We therefore employ it as an exclusion restriction variable in the selection

equation. Indeed, its coefficient is found to be significant and positive.

       We turn now to the variables "above the line" which are at the focus of the

investigation: the host and source productivity factors, as approximated by outputs per

worker. In Panel (1) of Table 3 the host output per worker has a positive effect in both the

flow and selection equations, but it is significant only in the flow equation. Source-

country output per worker has a negative and significant effect on the selection

mechanism. This result is consistent with the analytical framework developed earlier.

Noteworthy, the source-country output per worker has also a negative and significant

effect on the flow of FDI. In Panel (2) of Table 3, with the productivity variables

instrumented by capital per worker and education attainment, the host productivity is

positive and significant in both equations. The source productivity has a negative and

significant affect both in the flow and selection equations.

       All in all, the estimation results are consistent with the prediction of our theory

that the source productivity has a negative effect on the likelihood of the occurrence of

FDI, but that the host productivity has an ambiguous effect on this likelihood.

       The effect of productivity on the flow and selection of FDI are depicted in Figures

2 and 3. Figure 2 depicts the effect of productivity in five host countries (the U.K.,

Ireland, France, Germany and Japan) on the flow of FDI from the U.S.. Throughout, all

the explanatory variables, except the productivities in these host countries, are held

constant, at their sample averages. The estimated coefficient of the host productivity

(which is positive) is used to draw the graphs. The shaded boxes describe the frequencies

of the productivities in all of these five host countries in the sample. The U.K. exhibits a




27
high sensitivity of the FDI flows from the U.S. to its productivity, relative to the other EU

countries and Japan in the "relevant" range (where the sample observations are

concentrated).

        In figure 3 we depict the effect of U.S. productivity on the likelihood of

generating FDI from U.S. to each one of the aforementioned five host countries. This

effect is negative, but relatively weak in the relevant range.



        Consider next the tax variables. The estimation results are presented in the first

three panels of Table 4. The first panel refers to the statutory tax rate; the second – to the

effective tax rates; and the third – to the fitted effective tax rates. As expected, and as

predicted also by our theory, the host tax rate has a negative and significant effect on the

flow of FDI in the flow equation in all of these panels. This negative effect rises in

magnitude when moving from the statutory, to the effective and to the fitted effective tax

rate. Noteworthy, the source tax rate follows exactly the same pattern: it has a negative

and significant effect in the flow equation, with the magnitude of the effect rising when

moving from the statutory, to the effective, and to the fitted effective rate. This result may

allude to the existence of source residence taxation in the source countries: as the

source country taxes its residents on their income in the host country, the source country

tax has a depressing effect on their investment abroad. The source tax rate has a positive

and significant effect on the selection mechanism, as predicted by our theory, only in

Panel (1). However, this effect intensifies and becomes even more significant, when we

consider in Panel (4) a larger set of countries (for which we had data on the statutory

rates only).




28
       The effect of the statutory tax rates on the flow and selection of FDI are depicted

in Figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 depicts the effect of corporate taxes in aforementioned five

host countries on the flow of FDI from the U.S.. Throughout, all the explanatory

variables, except the tax rates in these host countries, are held constant, at their sample

averages. The estimated coefficient of the host tax (which is negative) is used to draw the

graphs. As before, the shaded boxes describe the frequencies of the productivities in all of

these five host countries in the sample. The U.K. exhibits a high sensitivity of the FDI

flows from the U.S. to its tax rate, relative to the other EU countries and Japan, in the

"relevant" range (where the sample observations are concentrated.

       In figure 5 we depict the effect of the U.S. tax rate on the likelihood of generating

FDI from U.S. to each one of the aforementioned host countries. This effect is positive

and relatively strong for Ireland and Japan.

       Apparently, when we look at the two sets of drivers (productivity and taxation)

together, there arise some multicolinearity problems. As a result, the estimated results do

not change much in sign but their statistical significance weakens. We present these

results in Table 3A in the appendix.




7. Concluding Remarks

       We study the role of productivity and corporate taxation as driving forces of FDI

among OECD countries in the presence of threshold barriers, which generate two

margins for FDI decisions.




29
       Some simulations, based on the estimation results, suggest that there are marked

differences in the sensitivity of FDI flows from the U.S. to productivity and taxes in

OECD countries. The sensitivity of these flows to productivity in the U.K. is positive and

high, relative to other EU countries and Japan. Similarly, the sensitivity of these flows to

taxes in the U.K is negative and high, relative to other EU countries and Japan.




30
       References



Amiti, Mary (2005), "Location of Vertically Linked Industries: Agglomeration versus
  Comparative Advantage", European Economic Review, 49(4), 809-832.

Auerbach, Alan (1983), "Corporate Taxation in the U.S.", Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, 2, 1451-1505

Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin Hassett (1993), "Taxation and Foreign direct Investment in
   the United States: A Reconsideration of the Evidence", in: Alberto Giovannini, R.
   Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod (eds.) Studies in International Taxation, University
   of Chicago Press, 119-144.

Benassy Query – Quere, A., L. Fontagne, and A. Lahreche – Revil (2000), “Foreign
   Direct Investment and the Prospects for Tax Co-Ordination in Europe", CEPII
   Working Paper No. 2000-06.

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan Collins (1999), “Capital Flows to Developing Economies:
   Implications for Saving and Investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
   143-69.

Carr, David L., James R. Markusen and Keith E. Maskus (2001), Estimating the
   Knowledge-Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise," American Economic
   Review, 91(3), 693-708.

De Mooij, R. A., and S. Ederveen (2001), "Taxation and Foreign Direct Investment: A
   Synthesis of Empirical Research", CESifoWorking Paper No. 588.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines (2001), "Foreign Direct Investment in a World of
   Multiple Taxes", University of Michigan.

Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith (2003), "Evaluating Tax Policy for Location
   Decisions", International Tax and Public Finance, 10(2), 107-126.

Devereux, Michael, Rachel Griffith and Alexander Klemm (2002), "Corporate Income
   Tax: Reforms and Tax Competition", Economic Policy.

Devereux, Michael P. and R. Glenn Hubbard (2003), "Taxing Multinationals",
   International Tax and Public Finance, 10(4), 469-488.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002), "Technology, Geography, and Trade",
   Econometrica, 70.




31
Gropp, R. and K. Kostial (2000), "The Disappearing Tax Base: Is Foreign Direct
   Investment Eroding Corporate Income Taxes?" European Central Bank Working
   Paper Series.

Heckman, James. J. (1979), "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error",
   Econometrica, 42, 153-168.

-------- (1974), "Shadow Prices, Market Wages and Labor Supply", Economtrica, 47,
     153-161.

Helpman, Elhanan, Mark Melitz, and Steve Yeaple (2004), “Exports vs FDI”, American
   Economic Review.

Hines, James R. (1999), "Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International Taxation",
   National Tax Journal, 53, 305-22.

-------- (2001), "Corporate Taxation", in Neil J. Smelser and Paul B. Balts (eds.),
     International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, Elsevier.

Melitz, Marc, J. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
   Aggregate Industry Productivity," Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

OECD (1997), Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital, OECD Committee on
  fiscal Affairs.

Razin, Assaf and Effraim Sadka (2007), Foreign Direct Investment: Analysis of
   Aggregate Flows, Princeton University Press, forthcoming.


U.N. (1980), "U.N. Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and
   Developing Countries", U.N. Document # ST/ESA/102.

Zhang, Kevin H. and James R. Markusen (1999), “Vertical Multinationals and Host-
   Country Characteristics”, Journal of Development Economics, 59 (2).




32
Yijt

                                                                 Y*=βXX               B
                                                                                      B'
                                                        R            Y=bXOLSX
       M'
 A'


 A               M

 T                                                                               T'
             S


            XL                                              XH            Xijt



                 Figure 1: Biased OLS Estimates of the Flow Equation




33
34
35
36
37
                                      Productivity Shocks



                                        Table 1
                                      Data Sources

Variables                        Source

FDI Flows                        International Direct Investment Database (OECD)
GDP                              World Economic Indicators
Population                       World Economic Indicators
Number of Workers                World Economic Indicators
Distance                         Andrew Rose website: www.haas.berkeley.edu/~arose
Common Language                  Andrew Rose website: www.haas.berkeley.edu/~arose
Education Attainment             Barro-Le Dataset, www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee/
ICRG Index of Financial          PRS Group
  Sound Rating (the inverse of
  Financial Risk Rating)
Capital Stock                    Francesco Caselli website:
                                   http://personal.lse.ac.uk/casellif
Effective Tax Rates              Devereux, Giffith and Klemm (2002)




38
       Table 2: Time Average of FDI Flows
        (as percentage of the source and host countries' GDP)




                                                                                      Source
                             11 EU members^           United States    United Kingdom           Japan                    Ireland            Australia
                             source   host          source     host   source     host     source      host          source      host    source     host
      11 EU members^                               0.312869 0.17889 2.376682 0.212644 0.144592 0.043268             3.054325 0.016687    0.13403 0.00359
      United States          0.256095   0.447895                      2.113071 0.330653 0.436291 0.228337           2.287701 0.021859   0.627204 0.02938
      United Kingdom         0.158893   1.775918     0.22806 1.457443                     0.135544 0.453339         0.801327 0.048932   0.428621 0.128307
 Host
      Japan                  0.015865   0.053016   0.045511 0.086959 0.060505 0.01809                               0.189286 0.003456   0.016369 0.001465
      Ireland                 0.03258   5.963265   0.042012 4.396814 0.12974 2.124668 0.007071 0.387289                                 0.018591 0.091136
      Australia              0.012581   0.469737   0.033767 0.720863 0.134444 0.449123 0.044343 0.495434            0.065708 0.013404




Note:
^ The countries are: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Portugal.




39
     Table 3 - Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations:
     Productivity Effect


                                                  1                            2
                                         Flow         Selection      Flow          Selection
     Productivity-source                -0.066          -0.059
                                      (0.018)**       (0.024)*
     Productivity-host                  0.042           0.014
                                       (0.018)*        (0.028)
     Instrumented productivity-
     source                                                         -0.080           -0.136
                                                                   (0.033)*        (0.052)**
     Instrumented productivity-
     host                                                           -0.012           0.047
                                                                    (0.036)         (0.046)

     GDP per capita - source^           5.812           2.150        3.515           0.996
                                      (0.837)**        (1.124)     (0.621)**        (0.667)

     GDP per capita - host^              1.437           -1.532      3.955           -1.452
                                        (0.853)         (1.204)    (0.607)**        (0.797)
     Schooling difference                0.093           -0.053      0.002            0.022
                                        (0.063)         (0.069)     (0.070)         (0.081)
     Common language                     0.516           -0.179      0.497           -0.089
                                      (0.090)**         (0.118)    (0.106)**        (0.148)
     Distance^                           -1.013         -0.305       -1.081          -0.388
                                      (0.044)**       (0.074)**    (0.048)**       (0.088)**
     Population-source^                  0.754           -3.889      -1.363          -7.880
                                        (1.739)         (2.554)     (2.081)        (2.972)**
     Population-host^                    -2.764          -5.529      -0.217          -9.043
                                        (1.463)        (2.597)*     (1.683)        (3.040)**
     Financial risk-source               -0.030           0.023      -0.017           0.009
                                       (0.012)*         (0.019)     (0.014)         (0.025)
     Financial risk-host                 -0.015          -0.029      -0.019          -0.016
                                        (0.011)         (0.017)     (0.013)         (0.020)
     Previous FDI dummy (1 if
     yes)                                               1.538                        1.500
                                                      (0.085)**                    (0.093)**
     Observations                        4702           4702         3833            3833




     Note:
     ^ In logs;
     Country and time fixed effects are accounted for; Robust standard errors in parentheses;
     * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


40
Table 4 - Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations: Tax Effect

                                                      Panel A                                          Panel B^^
                            Flow   Selection       Flow   Selection        Flow      Selection      Flow     Selection
Tax rate-s                 1.795     1.656                                                         -0.131     2.418
                         (0.579)** (0.759)*                                                       (0.652) (0.904)**
Tax rate-h                 -2.955   -0.504                                                         -1.963     -1.063
                         (0.621)** (0.694)                                                       (0.734)** (0.900)
Effective tax rate-s                               2.383       1.331
                                                 (0.790)**    (1.051)
Effective tax rate-h                               -3.096      0.124
                                                 (0.841)**    (1.031)
Instrumented effective
                                                                          2.400       2.047
tax rate-s
                                                                         (0.912)**    (1.193)
Instrumented effective
                                                                          -4.536      -0.778
tax rate-h
                                                                         (0.974)** (1.093)
GDP per capita-s^            2.961     -0.498        2.928      -0.443       2.841    -0.581        1.867    -0.053
                         (0.490)**     (0.505)   (0.494)**     (0.511)   (0.507)** (0.524)       (0.519)** (0.543)
GDP per capita-h^            3.235     -0.798        3.186      -0.860       3.493    -0.747        1.814    -0.701
                         (0.460)**     (0.580)   (0.460)**     (0.588)   (0.470)** (0.595)       (0.495)** (0.603)
Schooling difference         0.197     -0.045        0.174      -0.075       0.185    -0.054       -0.068    -0.151
                         (0.065)**     (0.070)   (0.065)**     (0.069)   (0.065)** (0.069)        (0.070)   (0.078)
Common language             0.516      -0.192        0.518      -0.189       0.517    -0.192        0.609    0.088
                         (0.087)**     (0.114)   (0.087)**     (0.114)   (0.087)** (0.114)       (0.103)** (0.130)
Distance^                   -1.005     -0.248      -1.003       -0.246      -1.004    -0.248       -0.970    -0.457
                         (0.043)**   (0.070)**   (0.043)**   (0.070)**   (0.043)** (0.070)**     (0.046)** (0.071)**
Population-s^               -0.114     -4.395       -0.563      -5.064      -0.060    -4.433       -1.364    -1.312
                           (1.588)    (2.220)*     (1.604)    (2.276)*     (1.594)  (2.223)*      (1.599)   (1.813)
Population-h^               -2.032     -2.845       -1.662      -2.922      -1.906    -2.822       -1.940    -0.466
                           (1.315)     (2.323)     (1.348)     (2.366)     (1.320)   (2.324)      (1.232)   (1.721)
Financial risk-s            -0.022      0.023       -0.023      0.025       -0.023    0.023         0.002    0.019
                          (0.011)*     (0.018)    (0.011)*     (0.018)    (0.011)*   (0.018)      (0.013)   (0.014)
Financial risk-h            -0.015     -0.031       -0.017      -0.032      -0.015    -0.032       -0.008    -0.021
                           (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.011)    (0.016)*     (0.011)  (0.016)*      (0.011)   (0.015)
Previous FDI dummy
(1 if yes)                             1.622                   1.626                   1.624                  0.860
                                     (0.083)**               (0.083)**               (0.083)**              (0.108)**
Observations               4974        4974        4974        4974        4974        4974        3210       3210

Note:
^ In logs;
^^This panel relates to corporate tax rate (without local taxes) for additional 5 OECD countries:
Denmark, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand and Turkey. Observations are smoothed over 2-3 years period;
Country and time fixed effects are accounted for; Robust standard errors in parentheses;
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



     41
     Table A.1: Time Average of FDI Flows (as percentage of the source and host countries' GDP)

                                      United States     United Kingdom          Austria            Belgium
           Source
                                   source       host    source     host    source      host    source      host
           United States                                2.1131    0.3307   0.0503     0.0013   0.1445     0.0043   111
           United Kingdom          0.2281      1.4574                      0.0927     0.0147                       112
           Austria                 0.0055      0.2196   0.0220    0.1385                                           122
           Belgium                 0.0239      0.8078                                                              124
           France                  0.0338      0.1940   0.2495    0.2242   0.0268    0.0038                        132
           Germany                 0.0520      0.2055   1.0118    0.6259   0.1957    0.0192                        134
           Italy                   0.0257      0.1779   0.0494    0.0535   0.0415    0.0071                        136
           Netherlands             0.1082     11.3238   0.5877    9.6242   0.0610    0.1589                        138
           Norway                  0.0089      0.4769   0.0504    0.4230   0.0023    0.0030    0.3661     0.5807   142
      Host Sweden                  0.0361      0.0361   0.2852    0.0446   0.0286    0.0007                        144
           Switzerland             0.0615      1.8512   0.2500    1.1770   0.0554    0.0415    0.2872     0.2558   146
           Canada                  0.1084      1.3516   0.1219    0.2378   0.0122    0.0038    0.1877     0.0693   156
           Japan                   0.0455      0.0870   0.0605    0.0181   0.0018    0.0001    0.1545     0.0087   158
           Finland                 0.0020      0.1291   0.0158    0.1573   0.0032    0.0050                        172
           Greece                  0.0008      0.0571   0.0252    0.2841   0.0023    0.0040                        174
           Ireland                 0.0420      4.3968   0.1297    2.1247   0.0237    0.0616                        178
           Portugal                0.0032      0.2551   0.0281    0.3522   0.0084    0.0167                        182
           Spain                   0.0217      0.3015   0.1019    0.2216   0.0192    0.0067                        184
           Australia               0.0338      0.7209   0.1344    0.4491   0.0266    0.0141    0.0737     0.0466   193




42
                                 France            Germany             Italy             Netherlands
          Source
                           source      host    source    host    source      host    source       host
          United States    0.6661     0.1160   0.6503   0.1645   0.0721     0.0104   10.5764     0.1011
          United Kingdom   0.5726     0.6370   0.3348   0.5412   0.0892     0.0824    4.3388     0.2649
          Austria          0.0133     0.0931   0.0830   0.8442   0.0069     0.0400    0.4940     0.1898
          Belgium
          France                               0.1645   0.2390   0.0850    0.0706    2.3512     0.1291
          Germany          0.3326     0.2289                     0.0397    0.0227    2.8226     0.1066
          Italy            0.1155     0.1391   0.0617   0.1081                       0.8949     0.0592
          Netherlands      0.2632     4.7957   0.1077   2.8523   0.1717    2.5967
          Norway           0.0196     0.1824   0.0056   0.0757   0.0007    0.0055    0.1956     0.1001
     Host Sweden           0.0378     0.0066   0.0581   0.0147   0.0046    0.0007    0.7326     0.0070
          Switzerland      0.1070     0.5603   0.0572   0.4354   0.0231    0.1004    1.7004     0.4889
          Canada           0.1582     0.3433   0.0236   0.0743   0.0041    0.0073    0.6300     0.0751
          Japan            0.0537     0.0179   0.0288   0.0139   0.0084    0.0023    0.2918     0.0053
          Finland          0.0041     0.0455   0.0091   0.1457   0.0012    0.0112    0.2061     0.1250
          Greece           0.0058     0.0722   0.0077   0.1395   0.0036    0.0373    0.3343     0.2297
          Ireland          0.0588     1.0710   0.0669   1.7706   0.0266    0.4026    1.3414     1.3414
          Portugal         0.0174     0.2429   0.0143   0.2889   0.0082    0.0943    0.2017     0.1542
          Spain            0.1129     0.2731   0.0563   0.1978   0.0339    0.0681    1.3620     0.1809
          Australia        0.0225     0.0836   0.0196   0.1056   0.0046    0.0142    0.7249     0.1479




43
                                Norway             Sweden           Switzerland           Canada
          Source
                           source     host    source     host    source      host    source      host
          United States    0.2470    0.0046   0.0226    0.0226   1.8723     0.0622   1.2120    0.0972
          United Kingdom   0.3060    0.0365   0.0184    0.1177   0.8926     0.1896   0.2792    0.1431
          Austria          0.0304    0.0228   0.0004    0.0162   0.0988     0.1320   0.0034    0.0108
          Belgium          0.4630    0.2918                      0.3193     0.3584
          France           0.0928    0.0100   0.0089    0.0512   0.2122     0.0405   0.0837    0.0386
          Germany          0.3041    0.0224   0.0137    0.0543   0.5071     0.0666   0.0289    0.0092
          Italy            0.0237    0.0031   0.0052    0.0359   0.3404     0.0783   0.0083    0.0046
          Netherlands      0.1770    0.3457   0.0158    1.6565   0.3684     1.2814   0.2184    1.8333
          Norway                              0.0128    0.6853   0.0980     0.1746   0.0016    0.0070
     Host Sweden           0.4273    0.0080                      0.1303     0.0043   0.0287    0.0023
          Switzerland      0.0111    0.0062   0.0035    0.1050                       0.0867    0.2093
          Canada           0.0939    0.0218   0.0012    0.0153   0.1250    0.0518
          Japan            0.0019    0.0001   0.0004    0.0007   0.0876    0.0056    0.1048    0.0161
          Finland          0.0725    0.0859   0.0308    1.9554   0.0305    0.0644    0.0024    0.0122
          Greece           0.0027    0.0036   0.0000    0.0022   0.0439    0.1050    0.0024    0.0138
          Ireland          0.1090    0.2128   0.0086    0.8952   0.1486    0.5169    0.0086    0.0723
          Portugal         0.0058    0.0087   0.0005    0.0366   0.0654    0.1738    0.0218    0.1401
          Spain            0.0594    0.0154   0.0017    0.0237   0.1786    0.0825    0.0239    0.0266
          Australia        0.0102    0.0040   0.0005    0.0108   0.1026    0.0728    0.0783    0.1341




44
                                    Japan             Finland             Greece             Ireland
          Source
                           source        host    source      host    source     host    source       host
          United States    0.4363       0.2283   0.7384     0.0116   0.0517    0.0007   2.2877      0.0219
          United Kingdom   0.1355       0.4533   0.2971     0.0299   0.0912    0.0081   0.8013      0.0489
          Austria          0.0009       0.0197   0.0273     0.0173   0.0009    0.0005   0.0022      0.0008
          Belgium          0.0115       0.2039
          France           0.0246       0.0739   0.2059    0.0186    0.0063    0.0005   0.4087     0.0224
          Germany          0.0168       0.0348   0.6342    0.0395    0.0153    0.0008   0.5556     0.0210
          Italy            0.0038       0.0136   0.0683    0.0074    0.0023    0.0002   0.1225     0.0081
          Netherlands      0.0775       4.2425   0.8166    1.3470    0.0071    0.0104   1.3921     1.3921
          Norway           0.0024       0.0663   0.4541    0.3836    0.0004    0.0003   0.0083     0.0042
     Host Sweden           0.0018       0.0010   1.6341    0.0258    0.0015    0.0000   0.0285     0.0003
          Switzerland      0.0049       0.0765   0.5742    0.2723    0.0040    0.0017
          Canada           0.0180       0.1174   0.0888    0.0175    0.0048    0.0008
          Japan                                  0.0384    0.0012    0.0006    0.0000   0.1893     0.0035
          Finland          0.0013       0.0424                       0.0004    0.0004   0.0570     0.0346
          Greece           0.0000       0.0012   0.0045    0.0051                       0.0035     0.0024
          Ireland          0.0071       0.3873   0.0765    0.1262    0.0100    0.0145
          Portugal         0.0006       0.0242   0.0190    0.0239    0.0043    0.0048   0.0906     0.0693
          Spain            0.0058       0.0422   0.0457    0.0100    0.0044    0.0009   0.3936     0.0523
          Australia        0.0443       0.4954   0.0376    0.0127    0.0008    0.0002   0.0657     0.0134




45
                                Portugal            Spain             Australia
          Source
                           source      host    source     host    source      host
          United States    0.0387     0.0005   0.2079    0.0150   0.6272    0.0294
          United Kingdom   0.0714     0.0057   0.1613    0.0742   0.4286    0.1283
          Austria          0.0210     0.0106   0.0133    0.0385   0.0003    0.0006
          Belgium                                                 0.0144    0.0228
          France           0.0497     0.0036   0.0977    0.0404   0.0100    0.0027
          Germany          0.0150     0.0007   0.2154    0.0613   0.0168    0.0031
          Italy            0.0321     0.0028   0.0896    0.0446   0.0128    0.0041
          Netherlands      0.5102     0.6675   0.1753    1.3203   0.0747    0.3660
          Norway           0.0001     0.0001   0.0035    0.0135   0.0004    0.0010
     Host Sweden           0.0003     0.0000   0.0101    0.0007   0.0023    0.0001
          Switzerland      0.0092     0.0035   0.1071    0.2319   0.0048    0.0067
          Canada           0.0038     0.0006   0.0135    0.0121   0.0524    0.0306
          Japan            0.0000     0.0000   0.0208    0.0029   0.0164    0.0015
          Finland          0.0000     0.0000   0.0046    0.0211   0.0003    0.0008
          Greece           0.0059     0.0053   0.0087    0.0448   0.0000    0.0000
          Ireland          0.0653     0.0854   0.0259    0.1947   0.0186    0.0911
          Portugal                             0.1373    0.7905   0.0001    0.0002
          Spain            0.6530     0.1135                      0.0025    0.0016
          Australia        0.0007     0.0002   0.0220    0.0339




46
 Table A.2: The Instrumented Equations For Productivity and Effective Tax Rates




                                                   1                2
                                                            Effective tax
                                             productivity
                                                                rate
                   Capital-Labor ratio        1.808E-04
                                             (6.09e-06)**
                   Years of schooling            1.262
                                               (0.092)**
                   Tax rate                                         0.642
                                                                 (0.005)**
                   GDP per capita                                 3.19e-06
                                                                (1.5e-07)**
                   Observations                  4279               5414
                   R-squared                     0.958              0.962

                   Note:
                   Standard errors in parentheses;
                   * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%;




47
 Table A.3: Bilateral FDI Flows and Selection Equations: Productivity
                            and Tax Effects
                                                            1                        2
                                                      Flow    Selection     Flow         Selection
     Productivity - source                           -0.060     -0.051
                                                   (0.020)** (0.026)
     Productivity - host                             0.018      0.006
                                                    (0.018)    (0.031)
     Instrumented productivity - source                                     -0.089   -0.135
                                                                          (0.033)** (0.054)*
     Instrumented productivity - host                                       -0.039    0.040
                                                                           (0.036)   (0.046)
     Tax rate - source                               1.036      1.212
                                                    (0.652)    (0.826)
     Tax rate - host                                 -2.747     -0.612
                                                   (0.655)**   (0.787)
     Instrumented effective tax rate - source                               1.473         0.924

                                                                           (1.036)        (1.375)

     Instrumented effective tax rate - host                                -5.388         -1.489

                                                                       (1.115)** (1.244)
     GDP per capita - source^                         5.419    1.666     3.383     0.895
                                                   (0.949)** (1.222) (0.657)** (0.725)
     GDP per capita - host^                           2.766    -1.152    4.890     -1.192
                                                   (0.878)** (1.342) (0.624)** (0.834)
     Schooling difference                             0.174    -0.019    0.104     0.053
                                                   (0.066)** (0.073)    (0.074)   (0.083)
     Common language                                  0.513    -0.182    0.495     -0.094
                                                   (0.090)** (0.118) (0.106)** (0.148)
     Distance^                                        -1.015   -0.306    -1.082    -0.393
                                                   (0.044)** (0.074)** (0.048)** (0.089)**
     Population - source^                             0.712    -3.860    -1.006    -7.596
                                                     (1.788)  (2.556)   (2.058) (2.986)*
     Population - host^                               -1.738   -5.398    -0.081    -8.931
                                                     (1.493) (2.633)* (1.689) (3.023)**
     Financial risk - source                          -0.026   0.023     -0.012    0.011
                                                    (0.012)* (0.019)    (0.014)   (0.025)
     Financial risk - host                            -0.020   -0.027    -0.029    -0.015
                                                     (0.011)  (0.017) (0.013)* (0.020)
     Previous FDI dummy (1 if yes)                             1.534               1.501
                                                             (0.085)**           (0.093)**
     Observations                                      4702     4702      3833      3833

     Note:
     ^ In logs;
     Country and time fixed effects are accounted for; Robust standard errors in parentheses;
     * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

48
