NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EARNINGS ANNOUNCEMENT PREMIUM AND TRADING VOLUME
Owen Lamont
Andrea Frazzini
Working Paper 13090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13090

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

We thank Malcolm Baker, Gur Huberman, Jeffrey Wurgler, Wei Xiong, seminar participants at Barclays
Global Investors, the Chicago Quantitative Alliance, University of Chicago, NBER, NYU, University
of Illinois, The Stockholm Institute for Financial Research, Yale, and especially Nicholas Barberis
and Jeremy Stein for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Owen Lamont and Andrea Frazzini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Earnings Announcement Premium and Trading Volume
Owen Lamont and Andrea Frazzini
NBER Working Paper No. 13090
May 2007
JEL No. G11,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
On average, stock prices rise around scheduled earnings announcement dates. We show that this earnings
announcement premium is large, robust, and strongly related to the fact that volume surges around
announcement dates. Stocks with high past announcement period volume earn the highest announcement
premium, suggesting some common underlying cause for both volume and the premium. We show
that high premium stocks experience the highest levels of imputed small investor buying, suggesting
that the premium is driven by buying by small investors when the announcement catches their attention.
Owen Lamont
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
owen.lamont@yale.edu
Andrea Frazzini
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
andrea.frazzini@chicagogsb.edu

The relation between trading volume and prices in asset markets is not well understood.
In the purest neoclassical model with homogenous agents, prices adjust with no trading at all.
Risk-based rational asset pricing models attempt to explain expected returns without attempting
to explain volume. In this paper, we study the connection between volume and prices by
studying regularly scheduled quarterly earnings announcements made by firms. As is well
known, these announcements cause both substantial price volatility and substantial increases in
volume. In addition, stock prices on average rise in the days around earnings announcements.
This earnings announcement premium has been known at least since Beaver (1968) and has since
been studied by Chari et al (1988), Ball and Kothari (1991), and Cohen et al (2005).
In this paper, we make two contributions. First, we provide evidence on the magnitude
and robustness of the earnings announcement premium. We show that the premium is a
substantial anomaly: we find monthly strategies earning excess returns of between 7% and 18%
per year, with Sharpe ratios larger than other popular anomalies. The premium is strong in large
capitalization stocks, is not only confined to the three-day window around the announcement,
and appears consistently since 1927. Second, we provide an explanation for the premium. We
hypothesize that the predictable rise in stock price is driven by the predictable rise in volume
around earnings announcements. We test this volume hypothesis and show that the premium is
strongly related to the concentration of past trading activity around earnings announcement
dates. In particular, stocks with high volume around earnings announcements have subsequently
both high premiums and high imputed buying by individual investors. This finding suggests that
for some stocks, prices are pushed higher around announcement dates by buying pressure from
individuals.
On average, as noted in Karpoff (1987) among others, stock returns and trading volume

Earnings announcement premium – Page 1

tend to be positively correlated. Stocks tend to rise on high volume and decline on low volume.
One can see the earnings announcement premium as a special case of this pattern: when volume
is (predictably) high, returns are (predictably) high. There are now many theories to explain why
high volume should lead to high prices. Many of these theories involve short-sale constraints
(although often these models are static and cannot address time-varying levels of volume).
Under short sale constraints, differences of opinion lead to overpricing (see Miller (1977) and
Harrison and Kreps (1978)). To the extent that greater differences of opinion lead to more
trading volume, higher volume indicates greater overpricing (Scheinkman and Xiong (2003),
Mei, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2005)). One explanation for the high volume around earnings
announcements is differences of opinion about the meaning of the announcements (see Kandel
and Pearson (1995)). Thus one possible story for the earnings announcement premium is that
differences of opinion increase around earnings announcements, leading to a rise in price. One
could imagine building a model to explain the premium using rational investors with timevarying disagreement.
Another strand of explanations for the correlation of volume and returns involves
irrational or random traders. In Baker and Stein (2004), high trading volume indicates the
presence of irrational traders who push up prices (their model also involves short sale
constraints). In Hong and Yu (2006), high volume indicates the presence of noise traders, and
risk-averse rational traders demand a risk premium to compensate for the sentiment risk. Our
paper is related to Hong and Yu (2006) in that they study aggregate seasonal patterns in stock
market volume and returns, while we study stock-specific seasonal patterns due to earnings
announcements. Heston and Sadka (2005) also look at stock-specific seasonals in prices and
volume, although they show their results are not driven by earnings announcements.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 2

A specific story involving irrational or cognitively constrained investors is the "attentiongrabbing" hypothesis of Lee (1992) and Barber and Odean (2004). According to this hypothesis,
individual investors both have limited attention, and rarely sell short. When a stock which they
currently do not own grabs their attention, these individual investors are more likely to buy the
stock (compared to a stock which does not grab their attention). Institutional investors are less
attention constrained. Thus the attention-grabbing hypothesis predicts that individual investors
are likely to be net buyers of any stock in the news, whether the news is good or bad. Barber and
Odean (2004) show that stocks in the news have both high volume and high net buying by
individuals. Further, they show that these stocks subsequently underperform, suggesting that
individual investors pushed up prices too high (or prevented prices from falling sufficiently) in
response to the news (see also Seasholes and Wu (2005)). The attention-grabbing hypothesis
explains why high volume is associated with high returns. Gervais et al (2001) have a similar
explanation for the relation between high volume today and high returns over the near future.
Thus there are many theories, not mutually exclusive, explaining why volume and returns
might be contemporaneously correlated. The benefit of using earnings announcements is that
they are frequent events, exogenously occurring, generating substantial volume, and scheduled at
known intervals. Thus they provide a good laboratory for testing whether volume drives returns,
and specifically whether predictable volume generates predictable returns.
We focus on testing the attention-grabbing hypothesis. Consistent with the hypothesis,
Lee (1992), Hirshleifer et al. (2004), and Dey and Radhakrishna (2006) show that individual
investors trade heavily and are net buyers on earnings announcements, no matter whether the
news is good or bad. Similarly, Kandel and Pearson (1995) show that volume rises on earnings
announcements for good news, bad news, and also in cases where prices don't move much (no

Earnings announcement premium – Page 3

news). The attention-grabbing hypothesis predicts that around earnings announcements, prices
rise too much (or fall too little) in response to information released, due to buying by individual
investors.
When presented with any anomaly, there are two questions one should ask. First, what is
causing the anomaly? Second, why haven't arbitrageurs eliminated the anomaly? In this paper,
we attempt to answer the first question, but not the second (see Cohen et al. (2005) for an
investigation of the second question). We can however make two comments on this issue. First,
there are some obvious limits to arbitrage. Frequent trading is required, thus incurring
substantial trading costs. There is high idiosyncratic volatility around earnings announcements,
which could deter traders who for some reason are unable to sufficiently diversify. As we will
show, one type of explanation we certainly can rule out is systematic risk as traditionally
defined. If idiosyncratic risk is somehow preventing arbitrage activity, then in this limited sense
one can say the premium is reward for bearing risk.
Second, we present evidence suggesting that arbitrageurs are trading to eliminate the
premium. We show that prior to the announcement there are high imputed buys from large
investors. One interpretation is that arbitrageurs are aware of the anomaly, are trading on it, but
have not yet completely eliminated it (see also Baker, Litov, and Wurgler (2004) for evidence of
sophisticated investor trading around earnings announcements).
This paper is organized as follows. In section I, we provide a description of earnings
announcements and data. In section , we show the magnitude and robustness of the earnings
announcement premium. In section III, we document the connection between volume and the
premium. In section IV, we examine in more detail the attention-grabbing hypothesis and look
at variables measuring retail investor trading. Section V presents conclusions.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 4

I. Earnings announcements
A. Announcement dates
Publicly traded US firms are required to file quarterly earnings reports at legally specified
intervals. Filing deadlines depend on the fiscal year-end of the company. Our source for
earnings announcements dates is Compustat, which claims to report the date that the earnings
report appears in the Wall Street Journal or newswire services. The first earnings announcement
available on Compustat is December 1970. Since coverage is incomplete in the early years, we
start in 1972. Our final sample includes all common stocks traded in CRSP between January
1972 and December 2004. In what follows, we will usually require a previous year of
announcements in order to predict the announcement date for this year. Thus we will look at
returns in the period 1973 to 2004 (and for NASDAQ firms, we will start in 1974 since 1973 is
the first full year of NASDAQ in CRSP/Compustat merged database).
Compustat's data on earnings announcement is incomplete, especially for small firms in
the early part of the sample. Panel A of Table I shows the coverage for 1973 (our first year),
1974 (the first year including NASDAQ), 2004 (our last year), and the entire sample. Over the
full sample, only 68% of all firm-years contain the required four announcements. The coverage
of earnings announcement rises from 50% in 1974 to 95% in the final year. In the last three
columns we show coverage of earnings announcements for smaller and larger firms as well as
the percentage of market capitalization of firms with exactly four announcements in the calendar
year.
The coverage is often incomplete for small stocks, especially in the early years. We
conjecture that this is due the fact that news sources are more likely to report earnings
announcements for big stocks. In most of the empirical analysis we require stocks to have at

Earnings announcement premium – Page 5

least 4 announcements in the previous year, hence after this filter is applied our basic sample
includes 68% of CRSP common stocks or 96% in terms of market capitalization.
Panel B shows the distribution of announcements and fiscal year-ends by calendar month.
Most firms (62%) have December fiscal year-ends, and many others have March, June, and
September year ends. These seasonalities in fiscal years produce seasonalities in earnings
announcements, since announcement deadlines are linked to fiscal year-ends. Most of the
announcing activity is concentrated in the months of January, February, April, July and October
(these months account for about 66% of announcements). Nevertheless each month has a
sufficiently large number of earnings announcements such that when we later form portfolios
based on scheduled announcements, we will have sufficiently diversified portfolios in each
month.
B. Actual dates versus expected dates
In order to test whether firms earn a predictable premium around their announcement
dates, it is necessary to use only public information known in real time. Although precise
scheduled announcement dates are often known in advance by market participants, sometimes
announcements are early, late, or cancelled. This timing can contain information (for example, a
delayed announcement date might convey bad news). Thus one cannot use actual announcement
dates, but rather must construct a proxy for expected announcements dates (a point emphasized
by Cohen et al (2005)).
Prior accounting literature has used various models for forecasting earnings
announcement dates focusing mainly on a three-day widow around the announcement (Givoly
and Palmon (1982), Chambers and Penman (1984), Begley and Fisher (1998), Cohen et al.
(2005)). For the purpose of our analysis we are not interested in generating high frequency

Earnings announcement premium – Page 6

expected announcement dates; instead, we use monthly data and expected announcement months
(we explain our focus on monthly, not daily, portfolios in the next section).
We use two simple algorithms to forecast announcement months. The first method is
based on historical announcement months: we simply use the previous year's announcement
month. For example, if firm XYZ had an announcement in March 1997, we expect it to have an
announcement in March 1998.
The second algorithm is based on the firm’s fiscal year end. As seen in Table I, there are
obvious seasonalities in the timing of the announcement related to a firm’s fiscal year end. We
use the historical distribution of announcement months and fiscal year-ends to construct expected
announcement months based on the firm’s fiscal year end. For example, firms with fiscal year
ending in October tend to announce in February, May, June and December: therefore, if firm
ZYX has a fiscal year ending in October, we expected it to announce its earnings in February,
May, June and December. We report a detailed explanation of the algorithm in the appendix.
This second approach has the methodological advantage that one can construct reasonably
accurate proxies for announcement months by looking just at the month end of the fiscal year of
the company. This variable changes rarely and is thus much easier to collect than precise
announcement dates, which are only available in COMPUSTAT over the period 1971-2004.
Thus using this algorithm allows us to make inference based a longer sample period, producing
more reliable estimates.
In Table II we summarize the performance of the two forecasting algorithms by reporting
the fraction of earnings announcements that are released on expected months. We require firms
to have at least 12 months of prior return data from CRSP to be included in the table. In the top
panel we report results for the full sample while in the bottom panel we show results by firm

Earnings announcement premium – Page 7

size.1 Overall, the results show that we can predict with a high degree of accuracy the
announcement month. In our entire sample, using last year's announcement months as a proxy,
80% of the announcements are in the expected announcement month; looking at the universe of
firms with at least 4 earnings announcements in the previous calendar year raises the accuracy of
the algorithm to 93%. For the fiscal year method, this number is 73%, lower but still
respectable. Panel B shows that the accuracy of predicted announcements months increases in
firm size.
To summarize, a highly accurate way of predicting announcement months is to use last
year's announcement month and restrict the sample to firms with four announcements in the
previous year. Less accurate, but still informative, is simply using the firm's fiscal year end to
predict announcement months.
II. The earnings announcement premium
In this paper we focus on portfolio returns in calendar months. Thus the strategy we
explore is as follows. On the last trading day of month t-1, buy every stock expected to
announce earnings in month t, and short every stock not expected to announce. Hold this
portfolio until the last day of month t, then form a new portfolio for the next month.
We focus on monthly returns for four reasons. First, since our interest is in expected
announcement returns, it is convenient to have a wide window around the specific day to
increase the chance that we are buying before the announcement and selling after the
announcement. This wide window also helps avoid the inaccuracies of Compustat data. Since
the Compustat date sometimes comes from the Wall Street Journal (appearing the day after the
announcement) and sometimes from newswires (appearing the day of the announcement), and
since announcements can occur before, during, or after trading hours, pinning down the precise

Earnings announcement premium – Page 8

date is difficult. Second, we wish to calculate returns that do not reflect short-term asymmetric
information and changes in liquidity around announcement dates. By using monthly returns, we
are using a strategy that on average buys two weeks before the expected announcement and sells
two weeks after, thus avoiding issues of liquidity on the exact announcement day. Third,
monthly returns are a familiar unit for financial economists and allow easy comparison to
existing patterns. Fourth, as we show later, looking at a 3-day window around the announcement
date misses much of the premium. Prior to the announcement day, there is a substantial preevent run-up, as well as a positive drift after the announcement. Thus a 20-day window is more
informative than a 3-day window.
A. Average premium, 1973-2004
Table III summarize the earnings premium. We form calendar time portfolios based on
whether or not a firm is expected to have an announcement this month, using last year's
announcement month as the method for forecasting announcement dates. We examine monthly
returns of the value weighted portfolio of firms expected to announce as well as returns on the
value weighted portfolio on firms not expected to announce. Thus we are testing for the
existence of an unconditional announcement effect: we are asking whether all firms tend to go up
in expected announcement months. We also form a long-short portfolio, where every firm in the
sample goes into the long portfolio four months out of the year and into the short portfolio eight
months out of the year. We restrict the sample to firms which have had exactly 4 earnings
announcements in the previous 12 calendar months. For comparison, we also show the value
weighted market portfolio for this sample of firms.
Table III shows that there is large and significant announcement premium. In months in
which stocks are expected to announce earnings, stock returns are higher than in months in

Earnings announcement premium – Page 9

which no announcement is scheduled. The long-short portfolio generates returns of 61 basis
points per month (or about 7% per year) with a t-statistic over 5. One can immediately see from
Table III that the CAPM cannot explain the announcement premium (see also Ball and Kothari
(1991)). The CAPM predicts the market portfolio has the highest possible Sharpe ratio. Table
III shows that a portfolio of expected announcers has a Sharpe ratio 60% higher than the market
and 170% higher than a portfolio of expected non-announcers. The long-short portfolio (which
hedges out market risk) has a Sharpe ratio 136% higher than the market. The portfolio of
expected announcers has a much higher mean than the market, but only slightly higher variance.
Announcement month volatility is largely idiosyncratic and diversifies away in portfolios
holding many stocks (the portfolio of expected announcers always contains at least 161 firms in
each month up to a maximum of 2945 firms). Table III also shows that the portfolio of expected
announcers does not look especially risky measured by skewness or kurtosis.
Table IV further examines systematic risk factors. Since every firm is going in and out of
the long portfolio every four months, risks that are associated with characteristics of stocks are
unlikely to explain the premium. For example, it is unlikely that the long portfolio overweights
value stocks or high beta stocks, since every stock rotates in and out of the portfolio every
quarter. Thus, not surprisingly, Table IV shows the earnings announcement return is essentially
unrelated to market risk or to any of the other factors commonly used in asset pricing. We
regress the calendar time portfolio return on the earnings announcement strategy on the market,
the value factor, the size factor, and the momentum factor (all from Ken French's web page);
none have any effect on the abnormal returns.
Comparing the earnings announcement premium to these other factors, the earnings
announcement strategy has an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.94, while for value, size, momentum, and

Earnings announcement premium – Page 10

the market, the highest Sharpe ratio over the same period is 0.70 for momentum (not shown in
the table). Thus the earnings announcement premium is statistically stronger and (before
considering trading costs) economically more attractive than any other individual factor.
Panel A of Table IV also shows other ways of classifying announcement months. Using
our simple algorithm based on fiscal year end over the period 1973– 2004, expected announcers
earn a premium of 72 basis points. The third row of Panel A shows the premium using actual (as
opposed to expected) announcers. This row is not an implementable strategy, and we show it
simply for comparison. It turns out that the results are very similar using actual announcement
dates.
Panel B looks across subperiods in the 1973-2004 period. The premium is large and
highly statistically significant across the entire sample period, delivering between 40 and 92
basis points a month. Despite the fact each sub-sample contains only 10 year worth of monthly
data, we are able to safely reject the null hypothesis of a zero premium in each of the sub-periods
between 1973 and 2004.
In summary, using various different methods to predict announcement months produces
large and statistically strong earnings announcement premia. The premium is associated with a
sizeable Sharpe ratio and is stable over different periods.
B. Premium using only fiscal year end
In panel C of Table IV, we perform a test over the period 1926 – 1973. As noted above,
it is possible to construct a reasonable proxy of expected announcement months by only looking
at fiscal year ends. This allows us to extend the sample to the period before earnings
announcement dates are available on Compustat. Fiscal year end dates are available on
Compustat starting in 1950. To compute fiscal year end date for the period 1927–1949 we use

Earnings announcement premium – Page 11

the firm’s first non missing fiscal year as a proxy. For example, if firm XYZ started trading in
1927 and reported a December fiscal year end in 1950, we assume it had a December fiscal year
end between 1927 and 1949. Although firms very rarely change their fiscal year, this
assumption obviously introduces an additional source of forecast error.
Is it reasonable to assume that firms the seasonal patterns observed subsequent to 1973 is
a reliable proxy for the pattern of announcement month over the period 1927-1972? Obviously
there are many factors influencing the distribution of announcing months that are likely to vary
over time. Leftwich, Watts, and Zimmerman (1981) report that in 1931, 63% percent of NYSE
firms were publishing quarterly earnings. By 1939, the NYSE required firms to report quarterly
earnings, with some exceptions allowed. The SEC imposed semiannual reporting requirements
in 1955 and quarterly requirements in 1970. Thus it appears that the patterns of reporting
frequency observed post-1970 are likely to be noisy indicators of pre-1970 behavior, because of
regulatory changes. As a result, we view our expected announcement dates pre-1970 as
informative but imperfect. The various sources of forecast error will reduce the accuracy of our
predictions and presumably make it more difficult to reject the null hypothesis.
Panel B of Table IV shows monthly returns on the earnings announcement strategy.
Despite the fact that we are using a noisy proxy for expected announcement months, there is
clear evidence of a large premium. Over the period 1926-1972, expected announcers have
returns that are 38 basis points per month higher than expected non-announcers. Figure 1 plots
the annual returns of the long-short portfolio over the complete sample period from 1927 to
2004. Although, like everything else, the announcement strategy was quite volatile in the 1930's,
it has consistently earned positive returns over the whole period.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 12

C. The premium and firm size
In Table V we report the announcement premium by firm size. Every month we sort
stocks using the market value of equity at the end of the previous month and assign them to ten
deciles portfolios using NYSE breakpoints, restricting the sample to firms with exactly four
announcements in the previous year (thus discarding many small firms). We report returns on
the announcement strategy for these size deciles. The results show that the earnings premium is
not concentrated in small stocks. Using the fiscal year method, it appears uniformly spread
across size classes. Using the previous year method, it is stronger in larger stocks. In either
case, it is clear that large cap stocks earn a large and significant premium.
This fact that the premium does not appear larger for small firms is surprising for several
reasons. It is contrary to the explanation that higher trading costs allow a higher premium, and
also contrary to the idea that earnings announcement generate larger volatility for small firms
than for large firms due to lesser information about small firms. This result contrasts with
previous findings that the earnings premium is larger for small firms, although some of these
results come from studies using actual (instead of expected) dates and narrow daily windows
instead of wide monthly windows (Chari et al. (1988) and Ball and Kothari (1991)).
It is unclear precisely what the attention-grabbing hypothesis would predict about small
vs. large firms. On the one hand, if there is less news in general about small stocks, than those
rare days when news does occur should attract more attention. On the other hand, many of these
small stocks have earnings announcements that never get mentioned in the Wall Street Journal at
all (thus leading to Compustat's low coverage of these announcements). It is hard to grab the
attention of an individual investor if your announcement is not reported.
Due the erratic coverage of small firm announcement dates in Compustat, it is difficult to

Earnings announcement premium – Page 13

draw any strong inferences about the difference between large and small firms, so we don't want
to overemphasize our results on size. It could be our results reflect poor data quality for small
firms. What we can say for sure is that for large firms, where data quality is high, and where our
algorithms to forecast earnings announcement dates perform well, there is a sizeable earnings
announcement premium.
D. The persistence of the premium
So far we have shown that all firms tend to go up around announcement dates. We now
turn to the question of whether one can identify firms with a higher ex ante premium. We start
by sorting firms based on their past premium, and asking whether past premia predict future
premia. For every stock, we compute the average monthly return in announcement months
minus the average monthly returns in non-announcements month over the previous four years.
To be included in the portfolio, we require stocks to have a complete history of 16
announcements over the past 48 months. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are
ranked in order of their average announcement premium over the previous four years. We assign
stocks to one of five value weighted portfolios every month. Within each portfolio, we report the
returns of the (value weighted) strategy that is long stocks expected to announce and short stocks
not expected to announce
The results in Table VI show that stocks with high past premia tend to have high
subsequent premia. The first row shows that this month's premium is 0.44 percent per month for
low past premium stocks, but a whopping 1.37 percent for high past premium stocks. The
forecastable difference in premium between these two groups is about 93 basis points per month.
The rest of the rows in Panel A show that this predictability is very persistent. While the first
row shows returns in month t based on the past premium as of month t-1, the rows below use

Earnings announcement premium – Page 14

information as of month t-j for various values of j. Even if we discard all information from the
past three years when sorting firms into quintiles (so that we are using past premia calculated
from four to six years ago) we still get a sizable difference between the top and bottom quintile.
Thus, whatever is causing differences in the premium is a slowly changing phenomenon.
One possible complicating issue is the stock-specific seasonal of Heston and Sadka
(2005). They show that stocks that go up this month tend to go up twelve months later. So, for
example, some stocks tend to have high returns in June and some tend to have low returns in
June. Like us, they find a highly persistent seasonal lasting many years. To ensure that this
particular effect is not driving our results, in Panel B of Table VI we calculate the premium for
month t by discarding all information from prior years from that same calendar month. Thus our
calculation of the premium uses 44 prior months of data (instead of 48 as in Panel A). Panel B
shows this adjustment produces little change in the results.
To summarize, the earnings announcement premium varies across stocks. Some stocks
have a very high premium in expected announcement months, and it is easy to identify these
stocks based on their past announcement premium. This cross-sectional difference in premium is
very persistent and it lasts many years.
III. The volume hypothesis
We now turn to test the hypothesis that the predictable rise in stock price is driven by the
predictable rise in trading activity around earnings announcements. According to the volume
hypothesis, some variable - disagreement, sentiment, or net buying pressure from attentionconstrained individuals - causes both volume and prices to rise around earnings announcements.
In this section we start by looking at the average pattern of volume and returns. We then turn to
differences across different stocks in these patterns. Last, we consider alternative explanations.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 15

A. Returns and volume around announcements
Figure 2 gives a graphical depiction of the monthly patterns of returns and volume. We
show the average return and average abnormal volume in month t+k of a portfolio that is long
month t announcers and short month t non-announcers. Our measure of trading activity is scaled
volume (SV), defined as the ratio of share volume for firm j today to firm j's average monthly
share volume over the previous 12 months:
SVt j =

VOLtj
1 −1
∑ VOLlt + s
12 s =−13

(1.1)

Abnormal volume (AV) is defined as scaled volume minus the equal weight average of
scaled volume that month:
AVt j = SVt j −

1 n
∑ SVt j
n j =1

(1.2)

Thus, under the null hypothesis of no announcement effect, both abnormal volume and
abnormal returns should be on average zero. Looking at prices and trading activity subsequent to
an earning announcement, it is clear that both return and volume exhibit a strong seasonal
component. In the initial announcement month (month 0), announcing stocks earn a premium of
60 basis points and abnormal volume of announcing firms, expressed a percent of average
monthly volume, is 6.5% higher than abnormal volume of non announcers. Subsequent to initial
announcement, prices rise on higher than average volume on announcing months and revert back
on lower than average volume in non-announcing months, generating seasonal variation in
expected returns.
We now turn from monthly calendar time to daily event time. Figure 3 and Table VII show
event time volume and stock returns in the 20 trading day window around announcement dates.
Earnings announcement premium – Page 16

To analyze high frequency trading activity around announcement dates, we use the actual
announcement day recorded by Compustat. Since Compustat announcement dates are based on
press reports, the trading day in which the news is released to investors could be anywhere from
day -1 to day +1.2 Since announcement coverage is erratic for smaller firms, we restrict the
sample to stocks with market capitalization above CRSP median. We calculate abnormal returns
as the firm's stock return today minus the return on an equal weighted portfolio of nonannouncing stocks
ARt j = RETt j −

1
n no ann

∑

i∈no ann

RETt i

(1.3)

To get abnormal volume, we calculate daily (instead of monthly) versions of equations
(1.1) and (1.2). For these calculations, non-announcers are defined as firms not announcing
within a 20 day window around the announcement. We cumulate returns and volume by trading
days. Note that since Figure 3 is drawn in event time and uses the actual announcement date, it
does not reflect a tradable strategy.
The cumulative abnormal return in Figure 3 and Table VII show the timing of the
earnings announcement premium. Most of the premium is not earned in the three-day window
surrounding the announcement. Instead, there is a pre-announcement run-up of about 25 basis
points in the 10 trading days prior to the announcement, then another 21 basis points earned in
the three days around the announcement, and finally an additional 30 basis points earned in the
days subsequent the announcement (as shown in Table VII, these three mean estimates all
separately have t-statistics above 7). This pattern helps motivate our use of monthly, rather than
daily, returns in the previous analysis.
Cumulative abnormal volume displays slightly a different pattern from cumulative
abnormal returns. Rather than rising prior to the announcement, volume is below average before

Earnings announcement premium – Page 17

announcements (as noted in Chae (2005)). Volume dramatically surges right at the
announcement, and remains above average for the next 10 trading days. As one can see from the
figure and from table VIII, volume on day 0 is more than 50% higher than average. Thus
increases in volume around announcements are quite substantial. Since volume and returns
move together during and after the announcement, the volume hypothesis can explain both the
event-day returns and the post-event drift in returns. It has a harder time explaining the preevent price run-up, a subject we return to later.
B. Cross-sectional differences in volume and return
Looking at Figure 3 it is clear that on average, volume and returns are both quite elevated
on announcement dates. A different question is whether those firms with predictably high
announcement period volume also tend to have high announcement period returns. Table VIII
directly tests this cross-sectional volume hypothesis. In order to test for return predictability
around scheduled announcements induced by volume predictability, we sort stocks in different
classes for which scheduled announcement are more likely to induce the largest increase in
trading activity, and construct a long-short portfolio as before. The volume hypothesis predicts
that a cross-sectional variable that forecasts differences in trading volume in announcement
months should forecast differences in subsequent announcement premia.
Our sorting variable is, for each stock, the volume concentration ratio defined as the percent
of total share volume over the previous four years that occurred in (actual) announcement
months. Thus we are not sorting on generic high turnover; rather we are sorting on whether
trading activity tends to be concentrated in a specific four month period out of the year. For
example: suppose that the total share volume of stock XYZ in the past 4 years was 10,000 shares
and the total number of shares traded over the past 16 announcement months was 7,500 shares,

Earnings announcement premium – Page 18

then the volume concentration ratio is given by 7,500 / 10,000 = 75%. To avoid the price
dynamics associated with high frequency changes in volume (as in Gervais et al. (2001)), we lag
the volume concentration ratio by 3 months when forming portfolios based on this measure.
We sort stocks based on past increases in volume in earnings announcement months, and test
whether portfolios with predictably higher volume around earning announcements have
predictably higher returns. According to the volume hypothesis, firms whose volume is
concentrated in specific dates should also have returns concentrated in those dates. Panel A of
Table VIII shows first that past volume concentration in announcement months does a good job
forecasting subsequent abnormal volume in expected announcement months. We use equation
(1.1) to calculate abnormal volume, measured in units of this month's volume as a fraction of
prior average monthly volume.
Looking at the difference between high volume concentration and low volume concentration
stocks, it is striking that high volume concentration today predicts higher subsequent abnormal
volume on announcing months and lower subsequent volume in non-announcing months. For
stocks whose past volume is mostly concentrated in announcement months (high volume
concentration ratio stocks), volume is about 9% higher than average in expected announcement
months. For stocks whose past volume is not concentrated in earnings announcement months
(low volume concentration ratio stocks), there is no statistically significant increase in volume in
expected announcement months. Thus some firms have trading activity concentrated around
earnings releases; these stocks have persistently high announcement-related volume, and other
stocks do not.
Panels C and D show that the predictable increase in volume does indeed lead to
predictable return. For the high volume concentration stocks, the monthly strategy of going long

Earnings announcement premium – Page 19

expected announcers and short a portfolio of expected non-announcers earns 153 basis points per
month with a t-statistic of 6. For the low volume concentration stocks, the announcement
premium is 39 basis points per month and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Thus,
consistent with the volume hypothesis, high volume concentration ratio stocks experience
predictably high volume and high returns in expected announcement months, generating an
announcement premium around 18% per year.
In expected non-announcement months, low volume concentration stocks earn excess
returns of 74 basis points while high volume concentration stocks earn only 39 basis points. This
statistically significant difference of 35 basis points suggests that the high returns on
announcement months tend to reverse in subsequent months. High premium stocks tend to "give
back" their premium in non-announcement months. Thus the high returns generated by high
announcement volume seem to have no permanent effect. Instead, at least in this specific
context, high volume creates temporary components in stock prices.
Figure 4 shows the timing of the earnings announcement premium for the two different
groups of stocks. As for Figure 3, we use actual announcements and restrict the sample to firms
above the CRSP median to produce daily plots in event time. The daily pattern in Figure 4
confirms that the monthly pattern in Table VIII is not concentrated on a small window around
announcement dates. Figure 4 shows that stocks with high past volume concentration have a
surge in volume right around the announcement date, while the low volume concentration group
has a much smaller increase in volume. Stocks with high prior volume concentration also have a
much higher cumulative abnormal returns, starting (as in Figure 3) several days before the
announcement (around 60 basis points) and continuing after (earning an additional 60 basis
points). The surge in volume in high concentration stocks persists for the two week period

Earnings announcement premium – Page 20

subsequent to the announcement, inducing the large post announcement drift. Conversely,
subsequent to the announcement low concentration stocks show a smaller increase in volume and
post event premium.
To summarize, the evidence is consistent with high volume causing high returns, or at
least some third variable causing both volume and returns. Stocks without predictably high
announcement volume have a small earnings announcement premium that is insignificantly
different from zero. Stocks with predictably high announcement volume have a premium of
1.5% per month, allowing us to construct a long/short portfolio generating 18% per year.
C. Idiosyncratic volatility
As discussed already, standard measures of systematic risk do not explain the premium.
Another hypothesis is that the earnings announcement premium reflects compensation for
idiosyncratic risk. In Table VIII, we display one measure of idiosyncratic risk in the different
months. For each portfolio and month, we calculate the cross-sectional standard deviation of raw
returns for the stocks in that portfolio in that month. We then average across all months, 19732004, and report the time-series average of this cross-sectional number as our measure of
idiosyncratic risk.
Idiosyncratic risk is indeed higher in announcement months. Across all stocks with
exactly four earnings announcements in the prior calendar year, the monthly standard deviation
of returns rises from about 13.7% in expected non-announcement months to about 14.7% in
expected announcement months (not reported in the table). Panel B in Table VIII shows that
high volume concentration stocks have higher idiosyncratic volatility increases in announcement
months than low volume concentration stocks. Thus there is some evidence that higher premium
stocks have higher earnings-related idiosyncratic risk.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 21

However, it seems unlikely that a story where all types of idiosyncratic risk earn a
premium can explain the magnitudes observed in Tables VIII. The high volume group has
excess returns that are 1.9% on expected announcement months and 0.4% per month on other
months. Volatility is 14.5% in expected announcement months and 12.6% in other months. It
seems unlikely that such large differences in return could be explained by such small differences
in volatility.
One possible theory is that announcement period returns reflect fundamental/permanent
innovations in prices, while non-announcement returns reflect sentiment/noise/temporary
innovations in prices. In the framework of Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Campbell and
Vuolteenaho (2004), perhaps earnings announcement returns reflect cash flow news while nonannouncement returns reflect future return news. If fundamental idiosyncratic risk earns a
premium while non-fundamental idiosyncratic risk does not, then that would explain high
average returns around expected announcement dates (of course, one would need to develop
models where idiosyncratic risk is priced). While this explanation is appealing and may well
contain some truth, it fails to generate predictions about volume, and as we have shown, volume
is a key element of the story.
A different story about idiosyncratic risk is that it is a limit to arbitrage that prevents
sophisticated investors from eliminating the earnings premium. If for some reason arbitrageurs
are unable to sufficiently diversify, then the high risk around announcements would deter
attempts to eliminate the anomaly. While this explanation is undoubtedly true, it fails to explain
the sign of the premium: it explain why rational arbitragers may fail to smooth prices but it does
not explain why the premium arises in the first place.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 22

D. Other explanations for the premium
We here consider other non-volume explanations for the earnings announcement
premium. One explanation for the premium is based on analyst forecast bias. There is evidence
that firms and analysts cooperate to produce analyst earnings forecasts for the upcoming quarters
that are biased downward (Richardson et al. (2004)). Analyst set earnings forecasts such that
the firm rarely falls short and frequently exceeds consensus earnings estimates. If naive
investors fail to realize this downward bias in forecasts, then these naive investors will tend to be
consistently positively surprised by the actual earnings announcement. If these investors affect
market prices, they will consistently push up prices on earnings announcements because they
perceive most announcements to be good news.
A related explanation reflects naive anchoring. Perhaps investors compare this quarters
earnings to historical earnings. In an economy with nominal profits growing due to either
inflation or real growth, on average, investors using these naive benchmarks will constantly be
surprised by this quarter's high earnings and will send prices higher.
These explanations based on naive investor surprise, while appealing, fail to predict the
cross-sectional relation between volume and the premium. Two other pieces of evidence cast
doubt on this class of explanations. First, as detailed in Barber and Odean (2004) and Hirshleifer
et al. (2004) individual investors are net buyers in response to either positive surprises (such as
extremely high earnings growth) or negative surprises (such as extremely low earnings growth).
Buying by the least sophisticated investors in response to bad news seems inconsistent with the
naive anchoring story. Second, as shown in Table IV, the earnings announcement premium
appears in many different subperiods. Analyst forecasts and consensus earnings estimates are a
relatively recent development and are unlikely to explain return patterns prior to the 1970s.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 23

Inflation varied widely over this period, yet the premium shows up in low inflation periods (such
as 1927-1949) as well as high inflation periods (such as 1973-1983). So the stability of the
premium suggests a more general explanation.
Another possible explanation is liquidity. If announcement dates involve high levels of
asymmetric information or low liquidity, then investors will demand a premium to hold stocks
during this period. While this explanation seems feasible for the day or two right before the
announcement, it is not a plausible explanation for a strategy that buys two weeks before the
announcement and sells two weeks after. Lee, Mucklow, and Ready (1993), for example, show
bid/ask spreads widening in the hours surrounding the announcement but quickly reverting to
normal within a day or two.
IV. Order imbalances around announcement days
In this section we examine daily order flow and returns around actual announcement days
in event time. According to the attention-grabbing hypothesis, individual investor buying is
triggered by the announcement. We investigate this hypothesis by calculating imputed order
flow from large and small investors. We view the evidence in this section as primarily
suggestive since it relies on a number of assumptions.
To compute trading imbalances around earnings announcements we use the NYSE
Trades and Quotations (TAQ) database. We split trades based on the dollar value of the trade
and compute a measure of trade-initiation which captures which side of the trade demands
immediate execution. We identify each trade on the TAQ tape as buyer or seller initiated using
the procedure detailed in Lee and Ready (1991) and Odders and White (2000). A trade is
classified as buyer initiated if the trade price is above the quote midpoint of the most recent bid
ask spread, or if the trade price is above the last executed trade price.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 24

Our goal is to identify trading activity by individual investors. To identify retail
investors, we use the standard assumption that individuals use small trade sizes and institutional
investors use larger trade sizes. We use trades less than $5,000 (small trades) as a proxy for
individual investors’ trades and trades over $50,000 (big trades) as a proxy for institutional
trades.3 As confirmed by Barber et al. (2005) and Hvidkjaer (2005), this assumption produces
fairly accurate classifications of trader types prior to the year 2000. Subsequent to 2000, changes
in market environment (such as decimalization and algorithmic trading) cause this classification
to be less reliable. Thus we restrict our analysis to the period 1993-2000.
One of the earliest applications of this approach is the Lee (1992) study of individual
investor trading in the hours and minutes around earnings announcements (see also Bhattacharya
(2001), Hirshleifer et al. (2004) and Battalio and Mendenhall (2005)). Instead, we perform a
daily analysis and use the intraday data only in order to calculate daily-level aggregates. For
every stock and for the two size categories (small and big) we compute order imbalances (Net
Buy) as the ratio of buyer initiated volume minus seller initiated volume for firm j today to firm j
average daily volume over the previous 250 trading days

Net BuyBIG

Net BuySMALL

VOL =

=

BUYBIG − SELLBIG
VOL
=

BUYSMALL − SELLSMALL
VOL

(1.4)

1 −1
∑ VOLs
250 s =−250

Where BUY is total buyer initiated volume in day t, SELL is total seller initiated volume, and
VOL is daily volume (all measured as number of shares). We calculate Abnormal Net Buy as the

Earnings announcement premium – Page 25

normalized trade imbalances by subtracting from Net Buy the equal weighted average of it for all
non-announcing firms that day.
Abnormal Net Buyt = Net Buyt −

1
n

no ann

∑

Net Buyt

(1.5)

non ann

Non-announcers are defined as firms not announcing within a 20 day window around the
announcement. Thus, under the null hypothesis of no announcement effect, Abnormal Net Buy
should be on average zero.
Figure 5 shows Abnormal Net Buy in event time. Consistent with the attention-grabbing
hypothesis (and with Lee (1992), Barber et al. (2005) and Hirshleifer et al. (2004)), small
investor buying soars on the announcement day. Compared to net buying by institutions, which
seem to fluctuate somewhat, the peak in small buying is quite pronounced. When interpreting
Figure 5, it is important to keep in mind that our method of imputing orders and the identity of
the traders (though standard) produces noisy measures of true individual behavior. Other studies
confirm that our method is sufficiently accurate to uncover the important properties of the data,
so the shape of the small buy curve is probably a good guide to reality.4 On the other hand, the
precise quantities shown on the axis of Figure 5 might not be reliable. For example, Figure 5
shows that the magnitude of institutional trading is far larger than the magnitude of individual
trading, which is not surprising given the mechanical definitions based on trade side. Thus we
view Figure 5 as suggestive but not conclusive evidence.
Looking at the pattern of net buying by institutions shows an intriguing pattern over time.
According to our measure, large investors buy in the days preceding earnings announcements. In
particular, large imputed buy orders appear to peak the day before small imputed buy orders.
Large investors’ buying activity drops on the announcement day and on the two trading days
subsequent to the announcement, when individual buying is most intense. Thus large investors

Earnings announcement premium – Page 26

appear to be front-running small investors buy initiating purchases of announcement stocks in
the weeks prior to an earnings announcement.
One interpretation of this evidence is that the “smart money” appropriately anticipates net
buying by the “dumb money”: large investors tend to purchase announcing stocks prior to the
announcement. This process is precisely what should be happening in an efficient market:
sophisticated traders should be accommodating uninformed demand shocks and smoothing
prices, thus eliminating predictable returns. However, while large traders appear to be
arbitraging away the anomaly, apparently they are not arbitraging enough, for the small traders
are still affecting prices.
This pattern of trading by large investors is our explanation for the pre-announcement
run-up in prices. Large traders, anticipating uninformed buying, buy stocks in the days and
weeks ahead of the scheduled announcement. In the absence of these large traders, the spike in
cumulative abnormal returns at day 0 shown in figure 3 would be much more pronounced. So
the large traders help smooth out the spike in prices, although something prevents them from
smoothing it all the way down to a flat line. Of course, if these large traders cause a rise in
prices from date t-10 to t-1, one might ask why some third class of traders do not front-run them
and buy at date t-11. A possible answer is idiosyncratic risk or holding costs. If sophisticated
traders are unable to fully diversify or face a high daily cost of holding shares, then they will
trade off price appreciation against length of holding period.
Figure 6 connects imputed buying with the volume-related measure shown in Table VIII.
We separately examine stocks with high and low concentration of trading activity around
previous announcements. For the two groups of stocks, we cumulate the small net order flow of
the type shown in Figure 5. Table VIII shows that the lagged volume concentration ratio

Earnings announcement premium – Page 27

forecasts both high returns and high volume around announcement dates. Figure 6 shows that
this variable may capturing buying from small investors: high past announcement-related volume
predicts buying by small investors. Firms with high past announcement volume have high small
buys surging on the announcement, while firms with low past announcement volume have no
discernable announcement effect.
Thus three common features characterize the behavior of security prices around
scheduled earning announcements for this set of firms: high returns around announcements, high
trading volume around announcements, and high small investor buying pressure around
announcements. Our interpretation of this evidence is that there are some firms who have more
attention-grabbing earnings announcements or who have an investor base that is more attentionconstrained. It may be that these firms have more media coverage devoted to their earnings, or
have more variable earnings, or appeal differently to inattentive investors. For whatever reason,
year after year, these firms garner small investor attention around earnings announcements dates.
Consistent with the attention-grabbing hypothesis, these firms earn predictable higher returns
around earnings announcements.
V. Conclusion
In this paper we test whether predicable increases in volume lead to predictable increases in
prices. Quarterly earnings announcements, frequent events that are scheduled at known
intervals, exogenously occurring, and that generate substantial volume, provide a natural setting
to test the hypothesis that predictable volume generates predictable returns. We focus on
monthly data using expected announcement months based on stale information, hence issues
related to timing of the announcement or changes in liquidity around the announcement dates are
unlikely to be an issue.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 28

We show that the strategy of buying every stock expected to announce over the
subsequent month and shorting every stock not expected to announce yields a return of over 60
basis points per month. We show that announcement premium is quantitatively substantial,
especially among large cap securities, lasts about 20 days, and is evident in samples going back
to 1927.
Consistent with the volume hypothesis, stocks with the largest predicted volume
increases in announcement months (as forecasted by a high concentration of past trading activity
around earnings announcements) tend to have higher subsequent premia. These stocks also tend
to have the highest imputed buying by small investors around announcement dates.
Mounting evidence shows individuals investors appear to make uninformed trading
decisions.5 Consistent with the attention-grabbing hypothesis, according to which individual
investors are more likely to initiated purchases on stocks that grab their attention via an earnings
announcement, small investors buys (as proxied by small buyer initiated trades) soar on
announcement day, especially for securities where most of the past trading activity in
concentrated around announcements. One coherent explanation of these facts is that some
securities attract small attention constrained investors around earnings announcement dates.
Since these investors rarely sell short, the predictable rise in volume pushes prices higher around
announcement dates, generating a seasonal component in the stock’s expected return.
These results fit into the broader research effort to connect trading activity to prices.
Concepts such as liquidity, information flow, heterogeneous beliefs, and short sale constraints
are all potentially important in understanding this connection. The evidence here imposes an
additional requirement on any theory attempting to connect volume and prices. Any theory now
must explain why highly predictable volume leads to highly predictable return. One potential

Earnings announcement premium – Page 29

explanation is uninformed demand by individuals, coupled with imperfect arbitrage by informed
traders.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 30

ENDNOTES
1

If the forecasting algorithm was completely accurate, 100% of the announcements would fall in

predicted months. If the algorithm was completely random, only 33% of the announcements
would (for firms with four announcements per year).
2

For announcements reported on days where the market is closed, we use the next available

business day as the announcement date.
3

Several papers rely on similar dollar cutoff to separate trading imbalances of individual and

institutional investors. See for example, Lee (1992), Lee and Radhakrishna (2000) and more
recently Hvidkjaer (2005) and Barber et al. (2005).
4

Barber and at. (2005), who have access to actual individual trade data and use the same dollar

cutoffs, show that order imbalances of buyer and seller initiated small trades on TAQ are highly
correlated which purchases and sales by individual investors at a large discount brokerage house
(1991–1996) and at a large retail brokerage house (1997-1999)/
5

See Odean (1999), Barber and Odean (1999) and Frazzini and Lamont (2006).

Earnings announcement premium – Page 31

Table I: Coverage of earnings announcement dates, 1973 – 2004
Panel A shows coverage of earnings announcement dates for CRSP/COMPUSTAT stocks. The earnings
announcement represents the date in which quarterly earnings and earnings per share figures are first
publicly reported in the various news media. “At least one (four) ann.” is the fraction of Compustat firms
with at least one announcement that calendar year. “Exactly four ann” is the fraction of Compustat firms
with exactly four announcements that calendar year. “Larger firms” are all firms with market capitalization
above the median of the CRSP/COMPUSTAT universe that year, “smaller firms” are below median.
“Market value” is the total market capitalization of firms with exactly four announcements in that calendar
year divided by the total market value of the CRSP/COMPUSTAT stock universe.
Panel A: coverage of earnings announcement dates
year

At least one ann

All firms

0.79
0.55
0.98
0.77

0.70
0.50
0.95
0.68

1973
1974
2004
1973-2004

Exactly 4 ann
smaller firms
larger firms

0.66
0.33
0.94
0.54

0.73
0.66
0.97
0.82

market value

0.84
0.88
0.98
0.96

Panel B shows distribution of earnings announcement dates for CRSP/COMPUSTAT stocks. Column one
reports the fraction of firms with fiscal year ending in each calendar month. Column two reports the
fraction of earnings announcements occurring in each calendar month. Column three reports the fraction of
fourth fiscal quarter earnings announcements occurring in each calendar month. Column four reports the
fraction of first, second or third fiscal quarter earnings announcements occurring in each calendar month.
Column five and six report the distribution of earnings announcements for firm with fiscal year ending in
December.
Panel B: distribution of earnings announcement dates
all firms

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

Dec fiscal year

Fiscal yr end

Ann

Q4

Q1-Q3

Q4

Q1-Q3

4.32
1.76
4.82
1.94
2.04
8.29
2.07
1.96
7.02
2.75
1.51
61.52

9.73
9.79
4.71
15.21
7.59
2.41
15.01
7.51
2.46
15.69
7.38
2.52

23.96
29.22
12.38
4.08
3.44
2.77
3.44
5.31
3.18
4.02
4.71
3.50

5.15
3.52
2.24
18.80
8.93
2.29
18.74
8.22
2.22
19.45
8.24
2.20

36.49
45.89
15.32
2.27
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.01
23.97
8.53
0.09
25.12
8.01
0.14
25.85
8.26
0.03

Earnings announcement premium – Page 32

Table II: Accuracy of announcement date prediction, 1973-2004
This table shows the accuracy of announcement date prediction. We report the fraction of announcements that occur on expected date and the fraction of
announcements that do not occur on expected dates. This table includes all available stocks. The top part of panel A reports results for announcements predicted
based on fiscal year end. At the beginning of each calendar month t, we compute the frequency of announcements in table A1 using data available up to month t.
We assign each firms to one of two portfolios: if calendar month t+1 matches any of four calendar months with the highest number of announcements
corresponding to the firms’ fiscal year end month, we classify the firms as expected announcer in month t+1, provided that the firm did not have an
announcement in month t. If calendar month t+1 does not match any of the four calendar months with the highest number of announcements corresponding to
the firms’ fiscal year end month, or the firms has an announcement in month t, we classify the firm as expected non-announcer in month t+1. The bottom part of
panel A reports results for announcements predicted based on the previous year. We set the expected announcement month equal to the firm’s previous year
announcement month, provided that the firm did not have an announcement in the last calendar month. Panel B report the accuracy of announcement date
prediction by firms size. We assign firms to size deciles at the beginning of each calendar month using NYSE breakpoints.

All firms

Four announcements in the previous year

1973 - 2004

1973-2004

1973-1983

1984-1993

1994-2004

Ann predicted based on fiscal year end
% Announcement
% No announcement

0.54
0.46

0.73
0.27

0.72
0.28

0.70
0.30

0.72
0.28

Ann predicted based on previous year
% Announcement
% No announcement

0.80
0.20

0.93
0.07

0.92
0.08

0.92
0.08

0.93
0.07

Size Decile
Ann predicted based on fiscal year end
% Announcement
% No announcement
Ann predicted based on previous year
% Announcement
% No announcement

1 (small)

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 (large)

0.31
0.69

0.58
0.42

0.64
0.36

0.68
0.32

0.73
0.27

0.78
0.22

0.83
0.17

0.86
0.14

0.86
0.14

0.91
0.09

0.75
0.25

0.82
0.18

0.84
0.16

0.86
0.14

0.87
0.13

0.87
0.13

0.88
0.12

0.90
0.10

0.92
0.08

0.94
0.06

Earnings announcement premium – Page 33

Table III: Excess returns on expected announcement months vs other months, 19732004
This table shows calendar time portfolio excess returns. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks
are assigned to one of two portfolios (expected announcers and expected non-announcers) using
announcements predicted based on the previous year. All stocks are value weighted within a given
portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. This table
includes all available stocks with four announcements in the previous twelve months at portfolio formation.
We report average portfolio returns minus Treasury bill returns in the period 1973 to 2004. Returns are in
monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates. L/S is monthly average return of a
zero cost portfolio that holds the portfolio of expected announcers and sells short the portfolio of expected
non-announcers.

All stocks

Expected nonannouncers

Expected
announcers

L/S

Mean
t-statistic

0.529
[2.28]

0.329
[1.34]

0.942
[3.60]

0.613
[5.30]

Std deviation
Skewness
kurtosis

4.598
-0.438
4.749

4.802
-0.535
5.436

5.117
-0.032
4.882

2.264
1.366
11.095

Sharpe ratio

0.115

0.069

0.184

0.271

Earnings announcement premium – Page 34

Table IV: The earnings announcement premium
This table shows calendar time portfolio abnormal returns. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are
assigned to one of two portfolios (expected announcers and expected non-announcers) using either
announcement predicted based on fiscal year end, or announcement predicted based on the previous year. All
stocks are value weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to
maintain value weights. This table includes all available stocks with four announcements in the previous twelve
months at portfolio formation. We report the monthly return of a zero cost portfolio that hold the portfolio of
expected announcers and sell short the portfolio of expected non-announcers. Alpha is the intercept on a
regression of return from the rolling strategy. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and
French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. # of stocks is the average number of
stocks in the portfolio. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient
estimates.
xret
Alpha
MKT
SMB
HML
Panel A: Full sample 1973-2004, different methods, 4 prior announcements required

UMD

R2

previous year

0.07

fiscal year end
Actual dates

0.613

0.613

-0.037

0.031

-0.135

0.087

[5.30]

[5.13]

[-1.33]

[0.87]

[-3.24]

[3.32]

0.723

0.77

0.005

-0.037

-0.082

-0.001

[5.09]

[5.08]

[0.14]

[-0.83]

[-1.55]

[-0.03]

0.603

0.599

-0.012

-0.013

-0.094

0.063

[5.82]

[5.51]

[-0.47]

[-0.40]

[-2.47]

[2.60]

0.009
0.038

Panel B: Subsamples, 1973-2004, using previous year method, 4 prior ann required
1973 – 1983
1984- 1993
1994 – 2004

0.396

0.438

-0.023

-0.087

-0.029

0.034

[2.21]

[2.22]

[-0.51]

[-1.34]

[-0.42]

[0.73]

0.521

0.592

-0.025

-0.064

-0.114

-0.029

[3.79]

[4.00]

[-0.70]

[-1.03]

[-1.81]

[-0.62]

0.915

0.811

0.029

0.081

-0.135

0.149

[3.58]

[3.21]

[0.44]

[1.22]

[-1.58]

[3.28]

0.035
0.034
0.171

Panel C: Fiscal year-end method, testing back to 1927, no prior ann required
1927 – 1972
1927 – 1949
1950- 1972
1973-2004
Full sample 1927 – 2004

0.384

0.390

-0.004

0.03

0.022

-0.025

[3.41]

[3.33]

[-0.19]

[0.84]

[0.59]

[-0.89]

0.510

0.526

-0.010

0.005

0.023

-0.04

[2.53]

[2.55]

[-0.28]

[0.09]

[0.41]

[-0.99]

0.259

0.210

0.001

0.102

0.038

0.034

[2.56]

[1.91]

[0.04]

[2.23]

[0.78]

[0.87]

0.727

0.774

0.002

-0.039

-0.081

0.001

[5.16]

[5.15]

[0.07]

[-0.87]

[-1.55]

[0.02]

0.523

0.528

0.013

0.011

-0.007

-0.018

[5.91]

[5.71]

[0.72]

[0.41]

[-0.24]

[-0.84]

Earnings announcement premium – Page 35

0.007
0.009
0.021
0.009
0.003

Table V: Robustness checks: size, 1973–2004
This table shows calendar time portfolio abnormal returns. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios (expected
announcers and expected non-announcers) using either announcement predicted based on fiscal year end, or announcement predicted based on the previous year.
All stocks are value weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. This table includes all
available stocks in the period 1973 to 2004 with four announcements in the previous twelve months at portfolio formation. We report the monthly return of a
zero cost portfolio that hold the portfolio of expected announcers and sell short the portfolio of expected non-announcers. # of stocks is the average number of
stocks in the portfolio. We assign firms to size deciles at the beginning of each calendar month using NYSE breakpoints. Returns and alphas are in monthly
percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates.

Size decile
Ann based on previous year

Ann based on fiscal year end

1(small)

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 (large)

0.021

0.300

0.300

0.413

0.351

0.548

0.749

0.724

0.693

0.621

[0.27]

[2.97]

[2.63]

[3.26]

[2.43]

[4.25]

[5.32]

[5.10]

[4.48]

[3.48]

0.705

0.615

0.589

0.408

0.663

0.605

0.459

0.952

0.688

0.719

[8.16]

[5.64]

[4.70]

[2.96]

[4.09]

[3.75]

[2.91]

[5.51]

[3.52]

[3.61]

Earnings announcement premium – Page 36

Table VI: The persistence of the announcement premium, 1973-2004
This table shows calendar time portfolio returns. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are ranked in
ascending order on the basis of the previous announcement premium (PREMIUM). The ranked stocks are assigned to
one of 5 quintile portfolios. We use four year premium, defined as average return on the previous 16 announcement
months minus by the average return on non-announcement months in the previous 48 months. We lag PREMIUM
from one month to five years. Within each quintile, we assign stocks to one of two portfolios (expected announcers
and expected non-announcers) using announcement predicted based on the previous year. All stocks are value
weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights.
This table includes all available stocks in the period 1973 to 2004 with 16 announcements in the previous 48 months at
portfolio formation. L/S is the return of a zero cost portfolio that holds the portfolio of expected announcers and sell
short the portfolio of expected non-announcers. Average # of stocks per month is the average number of announcers
and non announcers per calendar month. Returns are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient
estimates.

Panel A: sort on lagged announcement premium
Average #
of stocks
per month

# of
months

1(low)

2

3

4

5(high)

5-1

335

Expected announcers

1323
590

1.103
1.549

0.598
0.950

0.278
0.948

0.479
1.278

1.010
2.379

-0.094
0.834

L/S

1913

0.441

0.412

0.649

0.788

1.369

0.928

[1.60]

[1.93]

[3.38]

[4.64]

[6.06]

[2.68]

0.192

0.607

0.590

0.972

1.230

1.038

[0.70]

[2.39]

[2.90]

[4.52]

[5.99]

[2.89]

0.146

0.763

0.479

0.754

0.961

0.816

[0.55]

[3.22]

[2.19]

[2.92]

[4.44]

[2.44]

0.799

0.196

0.659

0.780

0.780

-0.020

[2.93]

[0.91]

[2.69]

[3.54]

[3.58]

[-0.06]

Expected non-announcers

Skip 1 year, L/S

Skip 3 years, L/S

Skip 5 years, L/S

1680

1400
1192

324

300
240

Panel B: lagged announcement premium, skip announcement in t-12, t-24, t-36, t-48
Expected non-announcers

1323

Expected announcers
L/S

335

0.911

0.375

0.339

0.371

0.803

-0.108

590

1.115

0.965

0.798

1.080

2.287

1.172

1913

0.204

0.565

0.475

0.691

1.484

1.280

[0.86]

[2.55]

[3.02]

[4.88]

[6.87]

[4.04]

Earnings announcement premium – Page 37

Table VII: Event time returns and volume around announcements, 1973–2004
This table shows event time average abnormal returns and average abnormal volume around earnings announcements
dates. Abnormal return (AR) is defined as daily return minus the return of an equally weighted portfolio of all nonannouncing firms that day. Abnormal volume AV is defined as daily scaled volume minus the average scaled volume of
a portfolio of all non-announcing firms that day
ARt j = RETt j − (1/ n no ann ) ∑ RETt j

AVt j = SVt j − (1/ n no ann ) ∑ SVt j

no ann

no ann

where SV (scaled volume) is the ratio of daily share volume for firm j to firm j's average daily volume over the previous
250 trading days
⎛ 1 −1
⎞
SVt j = VOLtj / ⎜
∑ VOLlt+s ⎟⎠ .
⎝ 250 s =−250

We exclude a window of ±10 trading days around the announcement to compute non-event averages. We cumulate by
trading days to obtain cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs). This table includes all available stocks in the
period 1973 to 2004 with exactly four earnings announcement during the previous calendar year and market
capitalization above the median of the CRSP/COMPUSTAT universe that day. T-statistics are calculated using the
standard error of the mean, clustered by calendar quarter, and are in parenthesis.

Trading day
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
10

AR
0.020%
0.013%
0.015%
0.014%
0.026%
0.023%
0.027%
0.050%
0.060%
0.089%
0.089%
0.032%
0.041%
0.010%
0.040%
0.045%
0.045%
0.029%
0.035%
0.029%
0.023%

t-stat
(2.21)
(1.60)
(2.44)
(1.51)
(2.49)
(2.06)
(2.96)
(4.55)
(4.21)
(4.23)
(5.11)
(2.89)
(3.86)
(1.34)
(5.30)
(4.25)
(5.43)
(3.57)
(3.66)
(4.28)
(3.42)

[-10,-2]
[-1 , 1]
[2 ,+10]

0.249%
0.210%
0.296%

(8.19)
(7.13)
(11.58)

CAARs
0.020%
0.034%
0.049%
0.063%
0.089%
0.113%
0.139%
0.189%
0.249%
0.338%
0.428%
0.460%
0.501%
0.511%
0.551%
0.596%
0.641%
0.670%
0.705%
0.733%
0.756%

t-stat
(2.21)
(2.71)
(3.52)
(3.76)
(4.51)
(4.94)
(5.68)
(7.04)
(8.19)
(9.15)
(10.45)
(10.84)
(11.46)
(11.52)
(12.24)
(12.89)
(13.64)
(14.05)
(14.50)
(14.94)
(15.27)

AV
-2.26%
-2.33%
-2.84%
-3.95%
-4.36%
-4.17%
-4.49%
-3.79%
-1.66%
17.70%
52.47%
52.52%
20.12%
11.52%
6.92%
4.41%
3.35%
1.96%
1.45%
0.86%
0.66%

t-stat
(-1.69)
(-1.81)
(-2.11)
(-2.98)
(-3.46)
(-4.04)
(-3.62)
(-3.51)
(-1.35)
(7.04)
(20.76)
(9.89)
(11.89)
(9.57)
(7.86)
(4.73)
(3.00)
(2.00)
(1.34)
(0.79)
(0.62)

-29.86%
122.69%
51.26%

-(8.01)
(19.18)
(15.00)

Earnings announcement premium – Page 38

CAAVs
-2.26%
-4.59%
-7.43%
-11.37%
-15.74%
-19.91%
-24.40%
-28.19%
-29.86%
-12.15%
40.31%
92.83%
112.95%
124.47%
131.39%
135.80%
139.16%
141.11%
142.57%
143.43%
144.09%

t-stat
(-1.69)
(-2.47)
(-3.24)
(-4.29)
(-5.36)
(-6.40)
(-7.29)
(-8.01)
(-8.01)
(-2.70)
(7.82)
(12.54)
(14.87)
(16.19)
(16.98)
(17.42)
(17.67)
(17.78)
(17.80)
(17.74)
(17.67)

Table VIII: The Volume Hypothesis, 1973 – 2004
This table shows calendar time portfolio abnormal returns, abnormal volume and volatility. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are ranked in
ascending order on the basis of the volume concentration ratio defined as volume on the previous 16 announcements months divided by the total volume in the
previous 48 months.
0
⎛ 0
⎞
Volume Concentration Ratiotj = ∑ (VOLtj+ s × ANN ) / ⎜ ∑ VOLtj+ s ⎟
s =−48
⎝ s =−48
⎠

where VOL is monthly volume and ANN is a dummy equal to 1 on announcement months and zero otherwise. The ratio is lagged 3 months. The ranked stocks
are assigned to one of 5 quintile portfolios. Within each quintile, we assign stocks to one of two portfolios (expected announcers and expected non-announcers)
using announcement predicted based on the previous year. All stocks are value weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every
calendar month to maintain value weights. This table includes all available stocks in the period 1973 to 2004 with 16 announcements in the previous 48 months
at portfolio formation. We report average portfolio returns minus Treasury bill returns, alpha, abnormal volume and volatility. L/S is a zero cost portfolio that
holds the portfolio of expected announcers and sells short the portfolio of expected non-announcers. Scaled volume (SV) is defined as the ratio of share volume
for firm j today to firm j's average monthly volume over the previous 12 months. We market-adjust this measure by subtracting from it the equal weight average
of scaled volume for all firms that month
1 n
⎛ 1 −1
⎞
AVt j = SVt j − ∑ SVt j
SVt j = VOLtj / ⎜
∑ VOLlt + s ⎟⎠
n j =1
⎝ 12 s =−13
Volatility is defined as follows: for each portfolio and month, we calculate the cross-sectional standard deviation of raw returns for the stocks in that portfolio in
that month. We then average across all months, 1973-2004, and report the time-series average .Alpha is the intercept on a regression of return from the rolling
strategy. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. Returns,
alphas, volatility and volume are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 39

Table VIII (continued): The volume hypothesis, 1973 – 2004

All months

Expected
announcers

Expected
nonannouncers

L/S

All months

Panel A: Abnormal volume (%)
Low volume concentration
High volume concentration
High minus low

High volume concentration
High minus low

Expected
nonannouncers

L/S

Panel B: idiosyncratic volatility (%)

0.288

2.070

-0.104

2.174

13.212

13.634

12.887

0.746

[0.35]

[1.94]

[-0.15]

[1.82]

[54.09]

[48.61]

[51.47]

[3.24]

0.461

8.727

-1.936

10.663

13.258

14.532

12.648

1.884

[0.74]

[8.24]

[-2.27]

[7.72]

[53.87]

[46.74]

[53.11]

[7.32]

0.175

6.656

-1.832

8.488

0.083

0.898

-0.240

1.138

[0.16]

[4.46]

[-2.66]

[4.54]

[0.52]

[3.43]

[-1.37]

[3.69]

Panel C: excess returns (%)
Low volume concentration

Expected
announcers

Panel D: 4-factor Alpha (%)

0.711

1.125

0.740

0.385

-0.008

0.329

-0.016

0.344

[3.10]

[3.90]

[3.12]

[1.79]

[-0.08]

[1.68]

[-0.15]

[1.52]

0.624

1.916

0.387

1.530

0.052

1.149

-0.247

1.396

[2.16]

[5.39]

[1.32]

[6.34]

[0.53]

[4.89]

[-2.24]

[5.41]

-0.093

0.792

-0.353

1.144

0.034

0.820

-0.231

1.051

[-0.65]

[2.73]

[-2.14]

[3.52]

[0.26]

[2.73]

[-1.52]

[3.04]

Earnings announcement premium – Page 40

Table A1: Distribution of earnings announcement dates by fiscal year, 1973-2004
This table shows the distribution of earnings announcement dates for CRSP/COMPUSTAT stocks by fiscal year end month. The
earnings announcement represents the date in which quarterly earnings and earnings per share figures are first publicly reported in
the various news media. For every firm with a fiscal year ending in calendar month t, we report the fraction of announcements
occurring in every calendar month in the period 1973 to 2004. For each fiscal year end month, we report in bold the four calendar
months with the highest number of announcements.

Fiscal year end month
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
10.22 16.07
0.05 13.18

% of ann
Jan

Jan
0.05

Feb
11.57

Mar
16.29

Apr
0.21

Sep
16.96

Oct
4.70

Nov
14.96

Dec
8.63

Feb

3.61

0.13

8.97

12.63

0.08

9.54

11.58

0.09

8.64

14.62

6.54

10.87

Mar

14.82

3.33

0.02

12.29

16.25

0.09

14.08

14.61

0.17

11.10

16.34

3.65

Apr

4.48

13.24

4.42

0.03

8.75

16.33

0.03

10.70

16.93

0.10

9.78

18.98

May

18.18

6.24

12.53

3.21

0.01

9.48

12.38

0.35

8.50

15.28

0.11

6.61

Jun

7.60

17.14

5.64

13.87

4.86

0.03

13.35

14.68

0.12

10.01

16.52

0.08

Jul

0.04

8.47

17.15

6.30

12.64

4.62

0.04

10.22

17.36

0.13

8.56

19.17

Aug

18.06

0.44

8.88

15.60

5.41

12.81

2.16

0.04

8.20

15.75

0.02

6.12

Sep

7.57

15.32

0.10

10.00

17.31

4.95

12.33

2.52

0.05

9.39

15.52

0.12

Oct

0.09

9.71

17.11

0.08

8.98

17.35

7.77

14.85

5.92

0.01

9.96

19.50

Nov

17.33

0.62

8.87

13.79

0.06

8.64

12.85

5.51

12.51

3.11

0.12

6.22

Dec

8.17

13.79

0.02

11.99

15.41

0.08

13.39

13.24

4.65

15.80

1.58

0.04

Earnings announcement premium – Page 41

Figure 1: The earnings announcement premium, 1927-2004
This figure shows returns of the earnings premium portfolio. At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are
assigned to one of two portfolios (expected announcers and expected non-announcers) using announcement
predicted based on fiscal year end. All stocks are value weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are
rebalanced every calendar month to maintain value weights. The portfolios include all available stocks with four
announcements in the previous twelve months at portfolio formation. We plot the annual return of the long/short
portfolio.

35%

30%

25%

Annual return

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1929 1933 1937 1941 1945 1949 1953 1957 1961 1965 1969 1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997 2001
-5%

-10%

Earnings announcement premium – Page 42

Figure 2: excess returns and abnormal volume subsequent to announcement month, 1973–
2004
This figure shows average abnormal return and average abnormal volume in month t+k of a portfolio of announcing stocks in
month t. Abnormal return is defined as monthly return minus the average return of a portfolio of non announcers. We report
average monthly abnormal volume (return) of a portfolio of announcers minus volume (return) of a portfolio of nonannouncers. Scaled volume (SV) is defined as the ratio of share volume for firm j today to firm j's average monthly volume
over the previous 12 months. Abnormal volume (AV) is defined as scaled volume minus the equal weight average of scaled
volume that month. This table includes all available stocks in the period 1973 to 2004.
⎛ 1 −1
⎞
SVt j = VOLtj / ⎜
VOLlt + s ⎟
∑
12
⎝ s =−13
⎠

1 n
∑ SVt j
n j =1

0.80%

8.00%

0.60%

6.00%

0.40%

4.00%

0.20%

2.00%

0.00%

0.00%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

-0.20%

-2.00%

-0.40%

-4.00%
Month t+k
return

Abnormal volume

Earnings announcement premium – Page 43

Monthly abnormal volume

Monthly abnormal return

AVt j = SVt j −

Figure 3: CAR and volume around earnings announcements, 1973–2004
This figure shows event–time daily cumulative abnormal return and cumulative turnover in trading day t+k for firms
announcing earnings at date t. Abnormal return is defined as daily return minus an equally weighted portfolio of
non-announcing firms. Scaled volume is defined as share volume in month t divided by average volume in the
previous 250 trading days. Abnormal volume is defined as scaled volume minus the equal weight average of scaled
volume for all firms on that day. This figure includes firms in the period 1973 – 2004 with market capitalization (as
of the previous month) above the median market capitalization of CRSP firms. Volume and return are in percent.
0.80%

160.0%
140.0%

0.70%

120.0%
100.0%
0.50%

80.0%
60.0%

0.40%

40.0%

0.30%

20.0%
0.20%
0.0%
0.10%

-20.0%

0.00%

-40.0%
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

trading day t+k
Cumulative abnormal return

Cumulate abnormal volume

Earnings announcement premium – Page 44

8

10

Cumulative abnormal volume

Cumulative abnormal return

0.60%

Figure 4: Returns and volume sorted by prior volume concentration ratio.
This figure shows event–time daily cumulative abnormal return and cumulative turnover in trading day t+k for firms
announcing earnings at date t. Abnormal return is defined as daily return minus an equally weighted portfolio of
non (expected) announcing firms. Abnormal return is defined as daily return minus an equally weighted portfolio of
non-announcing firms. Scaled volume is defined as share volume in month t divided by average volume in the
previous 250 trading days. Abnormal volume is defined as scaled volume minus the equal weight average of scaled
volume for all firms on that day. We cumulate by trading days to obtain cumulative average abnormal returns
(CAARs) and cumulative average abnormal volume (CAAVs). At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are
ranked in ascending order on the basis of the volume concentration ratio defined as volume on the previous 16
announcements months divided by the total volume in the previous 48 months. We lagged volume concentration 3
months. This figure includes firms with market capitalization (as of the previous month) above the median market
capitalization of CRSP firms. We plot returns and volume for the top 20% high volume concentration ratio stocks
and the bottom 20% low volume concentration ratio stocks.

250%

1.20%

Cumulative abnormal return

150%
0.80%
100%
0.60%
50%
0.40%
0%

0.20%

-50%

0.00%

-100%
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

trading day t+k
CAAR low concentration ratio
CAAV low concentration ratio

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

CAAR high concentration ratio
CAAV high concentration ratio

Earnings announcement premium – Page 45

9

10

Cumulative abnormal volume

200%

1.00%

Figure 5: Order flow around announcements, 1993-2000
This figure shows event–time daily abnormal order flow in trading day t+k for firms announcing earnings at date t.
We split trades based on dollar value of the trade and compute a measure of trade-initiation which captures which
side of the trade demands immediate execution. Each trade on the TAQ tape as buyer or seller initiated using a
procedure detailed in Lee and Ready (1991): a trade is classified as buyer initiated or seller initiated, respectively, if
the trade price is above or below the quote midpoint of the most recent bid ask spread, or if the trade price is above
or below the last executed trade price. Small (large) trades are defines a trades less than $5,000 ($50,000). For
every stock and for each trade size bin we compute order imbalances (Net Buy) as the ratio buyer initiated volume
minus seller initiated volume for firm j today to firm j average daily volume over the previous 250 trading days
Net BuyBIG =

BUYBIG − SELLBIG

Net BuySMALL =

VOL

BUYSMALL − SELLSMALL

VOL =

VOL

1 −1
∑ VOLs
250 s =−250

where BUY is total buyer initiated volume in day t (number of shares), SELL is total seller initiated volume, and
VOL is daily volume. We normalize Net Buy by subtracting from it the equal weighted average of Net Buy for all
non-announcing firms that day. This figure includes firms in the period 1993 to 2000 with market capitalization (as
of the previous month) above the median market capitalization of CRSP firms.

0.20%

4.50%

4.00%
0.15%

0.10%

3.00%

2.50%
0.05%
2.00%

0.00%

1.50%
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
1.00%

-0.05%
0.50%

-0.10%

0.00%
trading day t+k
Abnormal Net Buy (small trades)

Abnormal Net Buy (large trades)

Earnings announcement premium – Page 46

Abnormal Net Buy (large trades)

Abnormal Net Buy (smal trades)

3.50%

Figure 6: Order flow sorted by prior volume concentration ratio, 1993–2000
This figure shows event–time daily abnormal order flow in trading day t+k for firms announcing earnings at date t.
We split trades based on dollar value of the trade and compute a measure of trade-initiation which captures which
side of the trade demands immediate execution. Each trade on the TAQ tape as buyer or seller initiated using a
procedure detailed in Lee and Ready (1991): a trade is classified as buyer initiated or seller initiated, respectively, if
the trade price is above or below the quote midpoint of the most recent bid ask spread, or if the trade price is above
or below the last executed trade price. Small (large) trades are defines a trades less than $5,000 ($50,000). For
every stock and for each trade size we compute order imbalances (Net Buy) as the ratio buyer initiated volume minus
seller initiated volume for firm j today to firm j average daily volume over the previous 250 trading days
Net BuyBIG =

BUYBIG − SELLBIG

Net BuySMALL =

VOL

BUYSMALL − SELLSMALL

VOL =

VOL

1 −1
∑ VOLs
250 s =−250

where BUY is total buyer initiated volume in day t (number of shares), SELL is total seller initiated volume, and
VOL is daily volume. We normalize Net Buy by subtracting from it the equal weighted average of Net Buy for all
non-announcing firms that day. This figure includes firms with market capitalization (as of the previous month)
above the median market capitalization of CRSP firms. We cumulate by trading days to obtain cumulative net buy.
At the beginning of every calendar month stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of the volume
concentration ratio defined as volume on the previous 16 announcements months divided by the total volume in the
previous 48 months. We lagged volume concentration 3 months. This figure includes firms in the period 1993 to
2000 with market capitalization (as of the previous month) above the median market capitalization of CRSP firms.
We plot small order flow for the top 20% high volume concentration ratio stocks and the bottom 20% low volume
concentration ratio stocks.
1.50%

order flow (small trades)

1.00%

0.50%

0.00%
-10

-9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

-0.50%

-1.00%
trading day t+k
Cumulative Small Net Buy (low concentration ratio)

Cumulative Small Net Buy (high concentration ratio)

Earnings announcement premium – Page 47

10

References
Baker, Malcolm and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Market Liquidity as a Sentiment Indicator, Journal
of Financial Markets, 2004, 7, 271-299.
Baker Malcolm, Lubomir Litov , Jessica A. Wachter and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004, Can Mutual
Fund Managers Pick Stocks? Evidence from the Trades Prior to Earnings Announcements,
NBER working paper 10685.
Ball, Ray and S. P. Kothari, 1991, Security Returns around Earnings Announcements, The
Accounting Review, 66, 718-738.
Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, 1999, The Courage of Misguided Convictions: The Trading
Behavior of Individual Investors, Financial Analyst Journal, 41-55.
Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, T, 2004, All that Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News
on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors, working paper.
Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean and Ning Zhu, 2005, Do Noise Traders Move Markets?, working
paper.
Battalio, Robert H. and Richard R. Mendenhall, 2005. Earnings Expectations and Investor
Clienteles, Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 257-288.
Beaver, William H, 1968, The Information Content of Annual Earnings Announcements Journal
of Accounting Research, 6, 67-92.
Begley, J. and P. Fischer, 1998, Is there Information in an Earnings Announcement Delay,
Review of Accounting Studies, 3, 347-363.
Bhattacharya, Nilabhra, 2001, Investors’ Trade Size and Trading Responses Around Earnings
Announcements: An Empirical Investigation. The Accounting Review, 76, 221-244.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller,1988, Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends,
Journal of Finance, 43, 661-76.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Bad Beta, Good Beta, 2004, American Economic
Review, 94, 1249-1275.
Chae, Joon, 2005, Trading Volume, Information Asymmetry, and Timing Information, Journal
of Finance, 60, 412-442.
Chambers, A. and S. Penman ,1984, Timeliness of Reporting and the Stock Price Reaction to
Earnings Announcements, Journal of Accounting Research, 22, 21-47.
Chari, V. V., Ravi Jagannathan and Ofer, Aharon R, 1988, Seasonalities in Security Returns:
Earnings announcement premium – Page 48

The Case of Earnings Announcements, Journal of Financial Economics, 21, 101-2
Cohen, Daniel A., Aiyesha Dey, Thomas Z. Lys and Shyam V. Sunder, 2005, Earnings
Announcement Premia and the Limits to Arbitrage, working paper.
Dey, Malay K. and B. Radhakrishna, 2006, Who Trades Around Earnings Announcements?
Evidence from TORQ Data, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 00, 1–23 ;
Frazzini , Andrea and Owen Lamont, 2005, Dumb Money: Mutual Fund Flows and the CrossSection of Stock Returns, NBER Working Paper No. 11526
Gervais, Simon, Ron Kaniel, and Dan Mingelgrin, 2001, The High-Volume Return Premium,
Journal of Finance 56, 877-919
Givoly, Dan and Dan Palmon, 1982, Timeliness of Annual Earnings Announcements: Some
Empirical Evidence , Accounting Review, 57, 486-508
Harrison, J. Michael and D. M. Kreps, 1978, Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
Heterogeneous Expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323-36.
Heston, Steve L. and Ronnie Sadka, 2005, Seasonal Liquidity and Stock Returns, working paper
Hirshleifer, David, James N. Myers, Linda A. Myers and Siew Hong Teoh, 2004, Do Individual
Investors Drive Post-Earnings Announcement Drift? Direct Evidence from Personal Trades,
working paper.
Hong, Harrison and Jialin Yu, 2006, Gone Fishin’: Seasonality in Trading Activity and Asset
Prices, working paper.
Hvidkjaer, Soeren, 2005, Small trades and the cross-section of stock returns, working paper.
Kandel, Eugene, Pearson, N., 1995, Differential Interpretation of Public Signals and Trade in
Speculative Markets , Journal of Political Economy, 103, 831-72
Karpoff, J., 1987, The Relation between Price Change and Trading Volume: A Survey, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 22, 109-126.
Lee, Charles M. C. and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring Trade Direction from Intraday Data,
Journal of Finance, 46, 733-46
Lee, Charles M. C. (1992). Earnings news and small traders: An intraday analysis, Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 15, 265-302.
Lee, Charles M. C, Belinda Mucklow and Mark J. Ready, 1993, Spreads, Depths, and the
Impact of Earnings Information: An Intraday Analysis, The Review of Financial Studies, 6, 345374.
Earnings announcement premium – Page 49

Lee, Charles M. C., and Balkrishna Radhakrishna, 2000, Inferring investor behavior: Evidence
from TORQ data, Journal of Financial Markets, 3, 83-111.
Leftwich, Richard W., Ross L Watts, and Jerold L. Zimmerman, 1981, Voluntary Corporate
Disclosure: The Case of Interim Reporting, Journal of Accounting Research 19, 50-77.
Mei, Jianping, Jose A. Scheinkman, J. and Wei Xiong, 2005, Speculative Trading and Stock
Prices: Evidence from Chinese A-B Share Premia , NBER working paper 11362.
Miller, Edward, 1977, Risk, Uncertainty and Divergence of Opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
1151-1168.
Odders-White, Elizabeth R., 2000, On the Occurrence and Consequences of Inaccurate Trade
Classification, Journal of Financial Markets, 3, 259-286
Odean Terrance, 1999, Do Investors Trade Too Much?, American Economic Review, 89, 12791298.
Richardson, Scott A., Siew Hong Teoh and Peter D. Wysocki, 2004, The Walk-Down to
Beatable Analyst Forecasts: The Role of Equity Issuance and Insider Trading, Contemporary
Accounting Research, 21, 885-924.
Scheinkman, Jose A. and Wei Xiong., 2003, Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles, Journal
of Political Economy, 111, 1183-1219.
Seasholes, Mark S. and Guojun, Wu, 2005, Predictable Behavior, Profits, and Attention,
working paper.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 50

Appendix: fiscal year end method to predict announcements
In this section we describe the algorithm used to forecast announcement months based on
fiscal year end. Table A1 shows the distribution of earnings announcement dates for
CRSP/COMPUSTAT stocks by fiscal year end for the period 1973-2004. For every firm with a
fiscal year ending in calendar month t, we report the fraction of earning announcements
occurring in every calendar month. For each fiscal year end month, we highlight the four
calendar months with the highest number of announcements. For example: firm with a fiscal
year ending in December tend to announce in February (10.87% of the total number of
announcements), April (18.98%), July (19.17%) and October (19.5%). Firms with a fiscal year
ending in December tend to announce in March May, August and November, and so on.
We compute expected announcement month as follows. At the beginning of each
calendar month t, we compute the frequency of announcements in table A1 using data available
up to month t. We assign each firms to one two portfolios: if calendar month t+1 matches any of
four calendar months with the highest number of announcements corresponding to the firms’
fiscal year end month and we classify the firms as expected announcer in month t+1, provided
that the firm did not have an announcement in month t. If calendar month t+1 does not match
any of the four calendar months with the highest number of announcements corresponding to the
firms’ fiscal year end month, or the firms has an announcement in month t, we classify the firm
as expected non-announcer in month t+1. For example, based on the second row of table A1, on
the last trading day of January 2005 we would classify firms with fiscal year end ending April,
October and December that did not have an announcement in January 2005, as expected
announcers in February 2005.

Earnings announcement premium – Page 51

