NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY ANALYSIS WITH POTENTIALLY MISSPECIFIED MODELS
Marco Del Negro
Frank Schorfheide
Working Paper 13099
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

We would like to thank Kosuke Aoki, David Arsenau, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, John Geweke,
Lars Hansen, Andrew Levin, Ramon Marimon, Tom Sargent, Peter Summers, Charles Whiteman,
Raf Wouters, as well as the participants of the 2004 EEA-ESEM session on "Empirical Models for
Monetary Policy Analysis,'' the 2004 ECB Conference on "Monetary Policy and Imperfect Knowledge,''
the Fall 2004 Macro System Committee Meetings, the 2004 SEA Meetings, the Conference on "25
Years of Macroeconomics and Reality,'' the 2005 Conference on "Quantitative Evaluation of Stabilization
Policies'' at Columbia University, the 2006 EC2 Meetings, and seminar participants at the Bank of
England, the Bank of Italy, the FRB Kansas City, and the University of Miami for helpful comments.
Schorfheide gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the
National Science Foundation under Grant SES-0617803. The views expressed in this paper do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Marco Del Negro and Frank Schorfheide. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Analysis with Potentially Misspecified Models
Marco Del Negro and Frank Schorfheide
NBER Working Paper No. 13099
May 2007
JEL No. C32,E52
ABSTRACT
Policy analysis with potentially misspecified dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models
faces two challenges: estimation of parameters that are relevant for policy trade-offs and treatment
of estimated deviations from the cross-equation restrictions. This paper develops and explores policy
analysis approaches that are either based on a generalized shock structure for the DSGE model or the
explicit modelling of deviations from cross-equation restrictions. Using post-1982 U.S. data we first
quantify the degree of misspecification in a state-of-the-art DSGE model and then document the performance
of different interest-rate feedback rules. We find that many of the policy prescriptions derived from
the benchmark DSGE model are robust to the various treatments of misspecifications considered in
this paper, but that quantitatively the cost of deviating from such prescriptions varies substantially.
Marco Del Negro
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree St NE
Atlanta GA 30309-4470
marcodelnegro@frbatlanta.org
Frank Schorfheide
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil 525
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
schorf@ssc.upenn.edu

1

1

Introduction

Following the work of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters
(2003), many central banks are building and estimating dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models with nominal rigidities and using them for policy analysis. Despite the
success in improving the empirical performance of DSGE models, misspecification remains
a concern, as documented in Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007, henceforth
DSSW). Some of the cross-equation restrictions imposed by these models remain at odds
with the data. This paper illustrates the difficulties involved in conducting policy analysis with misspecified models. Two broad issues arise. First, how should the parameters
be estimated in the presence of misspecification? Second, how should one treat empirical
deviations from model-implied cross-equation restrictions when conducting policy analysis?
In the literature and in the practice of central banks, there exist three different approaches for dealing with misspecification. One approach is to ignore the problem and
derive quantitative policy recommendations as if the DSGE model were correctly specified,
e.g., Laforte (2003) and Levin, Onatski, Williams, and Williams (2006). A second approach
is to manipulate the shock structure of the DSGE model to optimize the fit of the resulting
empirical specification. Smets and Wouters (2003) use more shocks than observables to
obtain a DSGE model with a fit to Euro area data comparable to that of a Bayesian VAR.
Smets and Wouters (2006) generalize the law of motion of some of the exogenous shocks in a
DSGE model for U.S. data in which the number of shocks equals the number of observables.
The tacit assumption underlying the policy analysis is that these shocks are policy invariant,
even if they partially reflect misspecification.
A third approach is to model the deviations from the cross-equation restrictions explicitly in the likelihood. For instance, Ireland (2006), following Sargent (1989), assumes that
the observations based on which the DSGE model is estimated are subject to “measurement” errors. While the measurement errors improve the empirical fit, they raise serious
identification problems – how can one distinguish measurement error dynamics from the dynamics in the underlying model-based variables - and tie the hands of the researcher in terms
of policy analysis: one has to assume that these measurement errors are policy-invariant.
Alternatively, Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004) propose a method for incorporating deviations from the VAR representation of the DSGE model, called DSGE-VAR. We will argue
in this paper that the DSGE-VAR framework is a versatile tool for policy analysis because
it allows us to make different assumptions on how these deviations are affected by policy

2

changes. The framework thereby enables us to assess the robustness of the DSGE model’s
policy predictions in view of its empirical deficiencies.
We study how the aforementioned approaches deal with the issues described above,
inference and treatment of misspecification. Starting point of our analysis is a state-of-theart New Keynesian DSGE model in which monetary policy follows an interest-rate feedback
rule. The goal is to assess how changes in the feedback rule affect the volatility of output,
inflation, and interest rates. We generate three types of parameter estimates. First, we
combine the DSGE model likelihood function with a prior distribution for its parameters
and compute a posterior distribution as in Schorfheide (2000). Second, we include in our
analysis the generalization of the shock structure as a possible method of dealing with
misspecification. The final set of estimates is obtained using the DSGE-VAR approach.
That is, we approximate the DSGE model with a fourth-order vector autoregression (VAR)
and specify a prior distribution for the VAR parameters centered at the model-implied
cross-equation restrictions. The resulting estimates of the VAR coefficients are implicitly
projected back onto the cross-equation restrictions to obtain a minimum-distance estimator
of the DSGE model parameters. While the direct estimator forces the DSGE model to
match all the observed fluctuations, the DSGE-VAR estimator (and to some extent the
generalized shocks estimator) lets some of the fluctuations be explained by deviations from
cross-equation restrictions. This can be appealing if misspecification of the DSGE model’s
likelihood function is a concern.
While there is a substantive body of literature on how to estimate parameters of DSGE
models and how to conduct policy analysis under model uncertainty, our framework allows a unified treatment of some the key issues. It also provides new methods to assess
the robustness of policy implications of a benchmark DSGE model in view of evidence of
misspecification. The calibration literature initiated by Kydland and Prescott (1982) has
traditionally emphasized that it is more important to construct careful measurements of
the parameters that determine policy trade-offs using informative data sources, than to obtain a good time series fit of the DSGE model. This sentiment is expressed, for instance,
in Kocherlakota (2006). Bayesian analysis allows us to incorporate additional information
not captured by the likelihood function through prior distributions. It turns out that the
DSGE-VAR analysis has the feature that the greater the evidence for model misspecification, the less weight is placed on the likelihood function to construct the estimates of the
DSGE model parameters.
Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2002) estimate the parameters of their

3

DSGE model by matching DSGE model impulse responses to monetary policy and technology shocks with those obtained from an identified VAR. While this impulse response
function matching makes parameter estimates more robust to some forms of model misspecification, the resulting empirical specification is not able to explain all the variation of
output, inflation, and interest rates that we observe in the data. Hence, policy analysis
with such a model would have to assume that the propagation of other unspecified shocks
is not altered by changes in the policy rule or that the effects would mirror those of, say,
the effects on the technology shock.
Indeed, the second major issue concerns the treatment of misspecification in conducting
the policy exercise. Within the generalized-shocks framework we derive policy implication
under the standard assumption that the parameters of the shock processes are policy invariant. Within the DSGE-VAR framework we make different assumptions about the policy
invariance of the estimated deviations from the model-implied cross-equation restrictions.
These assumptions include treating the DSGE-VAR as a backward-looking structural VAR,
thereby ignoring effects of policy changes on expectation formation; treating discrepancies
in terms of moving average representations as policy invariant; evaluating policies under a
priori beliefs about misspecification.1
Empirical evidence can help us discriminating between the different approaches to policy
analysis. We find strong evidence of DSGE model misspecification. This misspecification
affects the estimates of key non-policy parameters – and specifically the persistence of technology shocks – which differ between the DSGE model, the generalized shocks approach, and
the DSGE-VAR. This difference drives much of the policy results. We also find that misspecification is not at all severe in the dimension that is most important for policy, the responses
to technology shocks. This evidence casts doubt on the polar approaches of ignoring the
cross-equation restriction completely and treating the DSGE-VAR as a backward-looking
model. Two lessons are robust across all modes of policy analysis considered in this paper.
First, deviating from the baseline parameters of the feedback rule is unlikely to provide
substantial improvements over the estimated Volcker-Greenspan policy. Second it appears
undesirable to decrease the response to inflation, or to increase the reaction to deviations
of output from a long-run trend path. Quantitatively, the cost of deviating from these
prescriptions varies substantially across approaches.
1 Preliminary

empirical results for some of the DSGE-VAR analysis based on a simple three-equation

New Keynesian model without capital and wage rigidity were reported in the 2005 Proceedings Volume of
the Journal of the European Economic Association, Del Negro and Schorfheide (2005).

4

There is a long-standing recognition that model uncertainty is an important aspect of
the assessment of monetary policies, e.g., Brainard (1967), Chow (1975), and Craine (1979).
A natural approach in the presence of model uncertainty is to evaluate policy rules within
all the model specifications that are under consideration, either following a Bayesian route
or a minimax strategy. The literature contains numerous applications of these ideas, e.g.,
McCallum (1988), Levin, Wieland, and Williams (1999, 2003), Rudebusch (2001, 2002),
Onatski and Stock (2002), Onatski and Williams (2003), Brock, Durlauf, and West (2004),
Cogley and Sargent (2005), and Hansen and Sargent (2005). All these papers differ with
regard to the type of models included in the model set, and the formulation of the decision
problem that leads to the choice of a preferred policy.
Our model set is purposefully smaller than that considered in recent papers that study
the performance of different interest-rate feedback rules across a variety of econometric
models, including models that are currently used by the Board of Governors and the European Central Bank, e.g., Levin, Wieland, and Williams (1999, 2003), Taylor (1999), Coenen
(2003), Levin and Williams (2003), Brock, Durlauf, and West (2004), and Adalid, Coenen,
McAdam, and Siviero (2005).2 The benchmark DSGE model is at the center of our analysis. We surround this benchmark model with (i) DSGE models with a more general shock
structure, and (ii) structural VARs that allow for deviations from the cross-equation restrictions to improve the empirical fit. We view our framework as a diagnostic tool. If our
likelihood-based measure of fit point toward misspecification, we provide tools to parameterize the discrepancies between theory and data, and assess the robustness of the DSGE
model’s policy implications under different assumptions about the policy invariance of the
discrepancies.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the econometric framework. The
DSGE model is presented in Section 3. This model is based on work by Altig, Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Linde (2002), Smets and Wouters (2003), and Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005). Compared to the benchmark New Keynesian models discussed, for
instance, in Woodford (2003), our model has been subjected to a number of modifications,
all designed to improve its empirical fit. Section 4 describes the data set and discusses our
empirical findings, and Section 5 concludes. Detailed analytical derivations, a description
of the Markov-Chain-Monte Carlo methods used to implement the Bayesian computations,
and the precise specification of the prior distribution for the DSGE model parameters are
2 With

the exception of Brock, Durlauf, and West (2004) little or no attention is paid to fit and forecasting

performance when weighting predictions from various models.

5

provided in a Technical Appendix that is available from the authors upon request.

2

Setup and Inference

This section describes our analytical framework for monetary policy analysis under potential
misspecification. The goal of the analysis is to study the effects of changing coefficients in
an interest rate feedback rule such as
Rt = ψ1 πt + ψ2 yet + σR 1,t

(1)

on the variability of some key macroeconomic variables. Here Rt is the nominal interest
rate, πt is the inflation rate, ỹt are output deviations from a smooth trend, which we refer
to as output gap, and 1,t is a monetary policy shock with unit variance. We make the
simplifying assumption that the public believes the new policy to be in place indefinitely
after being announced credibly.
Starting point for the analysis is a DSGE model that describes the optimal behavior
of households and firms and determines an equilibrium law of motion for the macroeconomic variables of interest. The following two equations provide a simple version of a New
Keynesian DSGE model
yet − gt
πt

= IE t [e
yt+1 − gt+1 ] − (Rt − IE t [πt+1 ]),

(2)

= βIE t [πt+1 ] + κ(e
yt − zt − gt ),

(3)

which we use in this section for the sake of exposition. Equation (2) is obtained from the
consumption Euler equation, (3) is derived from the optimal price setting of monopolistically
competitive firms and typically referred to as New Keynesian Phillips curve. To complete
the model specification one needs to specify a law of motion for the exogenous processes gt
(government spending) and zt (technology), such as:
gt = ρg gt−1 + σg g,t ,

zt = ρz zt−1 + σz z,t ,

(4)

where the innovations g,t and z,t are identically and independently distributed standard
normal random variates.
We proceed by grouping the parameters into two categories: θ(p) = [ψ1 , ψ2 , σR ]0 is
the vector of parameters that describe central bank behavior and the elements of θ(np) =
[β, κ, ρg , ρz , σg , σz ]0 characterize preferences and technologies as well as the law of motion of
0
0
the exogenous processes. We let θ = [θ(p)
, θ(np)
]0 , y1,t = Rt , and y2,t = [e
yt , πt ]. Equations (1)

6

to (4) characterize a linear rational expectations system. Its solution leads to a movingaverage representation for y2,t in terms of the innovations t = [1,t , g,t , z,t ]0 :
y2,t =

X

Dj∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) )t−j .

(5)

j=0

The matrices Dj∗ embody the cross-equation restrictions imposed by the DSGE model.
With (1) and (5) in hand it is straightforward to compute the covariance matrix for interest rates, output, and inflation V∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) as well as weighted averages of variances
tr[WV∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) )] that can serve as performance measures for monetary policy. Here tr[·]
denotes the trace operator and W is a symmetric positive definite weight matrix.
In the absence of misspecification policy analysis is straightforward. Suppose we adopt
a Bayesian framework and start from a prior distribution with density p(θ(p) , θ(np) ) for
the DSGE model parameters. We then combine the prior with the likelihood function
p(Y |θ(p) , θ(np) ) of the DSGE model to obtain a posterior distribution with density p(θ(p) , θ(np) |Y ).
The calculations can be implemented with the methods described in An and Schorfheide
(1)

(2)

(2007). The posterior expected weighted variance differential for two policies θ(p) and θ(p)
is given by:
Z 







∗ (2)
∗ (1)
p θ(np) |Y dθ(np) ,
tr WV θ(p) , θ(np) − tr WV θ(p) , θ(np)

(6)

where p(θ(np) |Y ) is the marginal posterior density of the non-policy parameters.
Unfortunately, much of the empirical evidence points towards misspecification of the
restricted moving average terms Dj∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) in (5). As an alternative to (5) we consider
an unrestricted moving-average representation for output and inflation of the form
y2,t

∞
X
 ∗

=
Dj (θ(p) , θ(np) ) + Dj∆ t−j .

(7)

j=0

Using a modified version of the DSGE-VAR framework developed in Del Negro and Schorfheide
(2004) and DSSW we first re-confirm the empirical evidence that Dj∆ is not zero. Once model
misspecification has been detected two challenges arise: (i) How does the presence of misspecification affect the estimate of the non-policy parameters θ(np) ? This is an important
question because some of these parameters (e.g., the degree of nominal rigidities, or the
persistence of shocks) play a key role in the policy analysis. (ii) How do policy changes of
θ(p) translate into changes in Dj∆ ? In turn we will discuss two approaches to address these
challenges.
The first approach is described in Section 2.1 and builds upon the DSGE-VAR framework. We solve the DSGE model, then create a prior distribution for a VAR that concen-

7
trates in the neighborhood of the DSGE model implied restrictions yet allows for deviations.3
We construct a joint posterior distribution for VAR and DSGE model parameters. The VAR
likelihood function is penalized by the prior distribution if its parameters strongly deviate
from the DSGE model-implied restrictions. Simultaneously, the DSGE model parameters θ
are essentially estimated by minimizing the deviations Dj∆ from the cross-equation restrictions Dj∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ). The DSGE model is treated as a reference model around which the
more loosely parameterized VAR is centered. We will subsequently provide reasons why the
estimates of θ(np) obtained under the DSGE-VAR, rather than those obtained under the
DSGE model, might be preferable for policy analysis.
Once we have obtained estimates of the VAR and the DSGE dynamics we consider four
methods of conducting a policy analysis that differ with respect to the assumptions about the
policy-invariance of private agents’ behavior and the discrepancies Dj∆ : (i) One extreme is
to perform the policy exercise under the DSGE model. In this case the DSGE-VAR is only a
tool to provide alternative estimates of θ(np) . (ii) The other extreme is to ignore the rational
expectations responses of the private sector behavior. That is, one treats the DSGE-VAR
as a structural (backward looking) VAR and only changes the coefficients of the monetary
policy rule. The third and forth approach lie in between these two polar cases. Under (iii)
we use Dj∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) but acknowledge the presence of misspecification. We regard historical
estimates of the discrepancy matrices as largely uninformative about the post-intervention
misspecification. Performance measures are computed from (7) under the prior instead of
posterior distribution of the Dj∆ ’s. Finally, method (iv) uses the posterior of the Dj∆ ’s and
treats the discrepancies as policy invariant. We discuss under what circumstances each of
these methods can be appealing.
A second approach to cope with model misspecification is discussed in Section 2.2 and
refines a common practice in the empirical work with DSGE models. This practice amounts
to relaxing the restrictions placed on the law of motion of the exogenous shocks in (4) by
introducing additional shocks into the model and/or by generalizing the AR(1) structure.
The modification of the shock structure introduces additional parameters that have to be
estimated along with θ(p) and θ(np) . Although macroeconomists understand that these
additional parameters in most cases do not capture micro-founded propagation mechanisms,
they are nonetheless often introduced to ameliorate misspecification problems. Once these
3 Unlike

in our earlier work which applies this prior to the law of motion of both Rt and y2,t , we use

this prior distribution only for the equations that describe the evolution of y2,t . These equations are then
combined with the monetary policy rule.

8

parameters have been estimated, it is common practice to treat them as “structural,” i.e.
policy invariant and to conduct policy analysis by calculating rational expectations solutions
of the DSGE model under the modified shock structure.4

2.1

Relaxing Restrictions on the Reduced Form

We begin by modifying the DSGE-VAR framework to obtain estimates of the extent to which
the DSGE model implied restrictions are violated. Rather than working with infinite-order
moving-average representations along the lines of Equation (7), the DSGE-VAR uses finiteorder VAR representations since they are easier to handle at the model estimation step. We
then explain how θ(np) and Dj∆ are identified.

2.1.1

The DSGE-VAR Framework

Let us write Equation (1), which describes the policymaker’s behavior, in more general form
as:
0
y1,t = x0t β1 (θ) + y2,t
β2 (θ) + 1,t σR ,

(8)

0 0
0
0
, 1]0 is composed of the first
where yt = [y1,t , y2,t
] and the k × 1 vector xt = [yt−1
, . . . , yt−p

p lags of yt and an intercept. The vector-valued functions β1 (θ) and β2 (θ) interact with xt
and y2,t to generate the policy rule. In our simple example β1 (θ) = 0 and β2 (θ) extracts
inflation and output from the vector y2,t and multiplies it by the policy rule coefficients ψ1
and ψ2 . Our notation is general enough to cover the more elaborate monetary policy rules
used in the empirical analysis.5
We proceed by approximating the DSGE model-implied moving average representation (5) of y2,t with a p-th order autoregression, which we write as
0
y2,t
= x0t Ψ∗ (θ) + u02,t .

(9)

Assuming that under the DSGE model the law of motion for y2,t is covariance stationary
D
0
0
for every θ, we define the moment matrices ΓXX (θ) = IE D
θ [xt xt ] and ΓXY2 (θ) = IE θ [xt y2,t ].
4A

related approach to misspecification amounts to introducing ad-hoc features into the model. Given

that these features are model specific, we do not deal explicitly with them in our framework. One can see
however that this related approach is in many ways germane to relaxing the shock structure.
5 Considering forecast-based policy rules in this framework would require significant modifications. However, according to the findings reported by Levin, Wieland, and Williams (2003) forecast-based rules do not
provide substantial gains in stabilization performance compared with simple outcome-based rules. Hence,
we decided not to pursue these modifications at this point.

9
In our notation IE D
θ [·] denotes an expectation taken under the probability distribution for
yt and xt generated by the DSGE model conditional on the parameter vector θ. We define
the VAR approximation of y2,t through
Ψ∗ (θ) = Γ−1
XX (θ)ΓXY2 (θ).

(10)

The equation for the policy instrument (8) can be rewritten by replacing y2,t with expression (9):
y1,t = x0t β1 (θ) + x0t Ψ∗ (θ)β2 (θ) + u1,t ,

(11)

Let u0t = [u1,t , u02,t ] and define
Σ∗ (θ) = ΓY Y (θ) − ΓY X (θ)Γ−1
XX (θ)ΓXY (θ).

(12)

If we assume that the ut ’s are normally distributed, denoted by ut ∼ N (0, Σ∗ (θ)), then
Equations (9) to (12) define a restricted VAR(p) for the vector yt . While the movingaverage representation of yt under the linearized DSGE model does in general not have
an exact VAR representation, the restriction functions Ψ∗ (θ) and Σ∗ (θ) are defined such
that the covariance matrix of yt , which enters the construction of our policy performance
AR
measure (6), is preserved. Let IE VΨ,Σ
[·] denote expectations under the restricted VAR. It

can be verified that
D
0
0
IE VΨ∗AR
(θ),Σ∗ (θ) [yt yt ] = IE θ [yt yt ].

(13)

This point is important given that the second moments of the endogenous variables are the
objects of interest for this analysis.
To account for potential misspecification we now relax the DSGE model restrictions and
introduce discrepancy matrices Ψ∆ and Σ∆ such that
y1,t
0
y2,t


= x0t β1 (θ) + x0t Ψ∗ (θ) + Ψ∆ β2 (θ) + u1,t ,

= x0t Ψ∗ (θ) + Ψ∆ + u02,t ,

(14)

and ut ∼ N (0, Σ∗ (θ) + Σ∆ ). Our analysis is cast in a Bayesian framework in which initial
beliefs about the DSGE model parameter θ and the model misspecification matrices Ψ∆
and Σ∆ are summarized in a prior distribution. In contrast to Del Negro and Schorfheide
(2004) and DSSW, we assume in (14) that there is no misspecification in the policy rule.
Our prior distribution for Ψ∆ and Σ∆ is chosen such that conditional on a DSGE model
parameter θ
∆

Σ |θ
∆

∆

Ψ |Σ , θ



∼
∼

∗

∗



IW T Σ (θ), T − k − Σ∗ (θ)
N

∗


−1

1
∗
∆ −1
0
0, ∗ (B2 (θ) Σ (θ) + Σ
B2 (θ) ) ⊗ ΓXX (θ)
T

(15)
!
,

10

where IW denotes the inverted Wishart distribution, B1 (θ) = [β1 (θ), 0k×(n−1) ], and B2 (θ) =
[β2 (θ), I(n−1)×(n−1) ].
A few remarks on the shape of the prior contours for Ψ∆ , Σ∆ , and how the prior distributes mass along these contours are in order. First, the distribution of mass is controlled
by the hyperparameter T ∗ , which we will re-parameterize in terms of multiples of the actual sample size T , that is T ∗ = λT . Large values of λ imply that large discrepancies are
unlikely to occur and the prior concentrates near the restriction functions Ψ∗ (θ) and Σ∗ (θ).
We consider values of λ on a finite grid Λ and use a data-driven procedure to determine
an appropriate value for this hyperparameter. A natural criterion to select λ in a Bayesian
framework is the marginal data density
Z
pλ (Y ) = p(Y |Ψ, Σ, θ)pλ (Ψ, Σ, θ)d(Ψ, Σ, θ).

(16)

Here pλ (Ψ, Σ, θ) is a joint prior distribution for the VAR coefficient matrices Ψ = Ψ∗ (θ)+Ψ∆
and Σ = Σ∗ (θ)+Σ∆ and the DSGE model parameters θ. This prior is obtained by combining
the prior in (15) with a prior density for θ, denoted by p(θ):
pλ (Ψ, Σ, θ) = p(θ)pλ (Σ|θ)pλ (Φ|Σ, θ).

(17)

λ̂ = argmaxλ∈Λ pλ (Y ).

(18)

We define

As discussed in DSSW, λ̂ and the marginal likelihood ratio pλ=λ̂ (Y )/pλ=∞ (Y ) provide an
overall measure of fit for the DSGE model. If there is a large discrepancy between the
autocovariances implied by the DSGE model and the sample autocovariances, λ̂ will be
small and the marginal likelihood ratio will be large.
Second, the size of the model misspecification is associated with the ease with which it
can be detected via likelihood ratios, in the spirit of Hansen and Sargent’s (2005) robust control approach, as discussed in detail in DSSW. Third, holding the innovation matrix Σ∗ (θ)
constant, ΓXX (θ) tends to be large – hence the prior variance of Ψ∆ small – whenever θ
implies that the endogenous variables are highly persistent. We view this as an attractive
feature of the prior. Since due to the presence of transversality conditions DSGE model solutions are restricted to be stationary, our prior steers us away from VAR parameterizations
that imply non-stationarity and explosiveness. Finally, our prior is also computationally
convenient. We use Markov-Chain-Monte Carlo methods described in the Technical Appendix to generate draws from the joint posterior distribution of Ψ, Σ, and θ as well as
to evaluate the marginal data density pλ (Y ). We refer to empirical model comprised of

11

the likelihood function associated with the restricted VAR in Equation (14) and the prior
distributions pλ (Ψ, Σ|Y ), given in (15), and p(θ) as DSGE-VAR(λ).

2.1.2

Parameter Estimation

This subsection provides some intuition for how the parameters of the DSGE model are
estimated under the DSGE-VAR procedure. To simplify the exposition, we will condition on
the covariance matrix Σ and the hyperparameter λ that controls the magnitude of deviations
from the DSGE model restrictions. Conforming with the partitioning of ut into u1,t and u2,t ,
we partition the covariance matrix into the sub-matrices Σ11 , Σ12 , Σ21 , and Σ22 . Moreover,
we define Σ11.22 = Σ11 − Σ12 Σ−1
22 Σ21 . The joint posterior density can be expressed as
p(Ψ, θ(p) , θ(np) |Y )
∝

(19)



−T /2
−1
0
|Σ22 |
etr Σ (Y2 − XΨ) (Y2 − XΨ)


0
−1
×|Σ11.22 |−T /2 etr Σ−1
Y
−
Xβ
(θ
)
−
XΨβ
(θ
)
−
(Y
−
XΨ)Σ
Σ
1
1
2
2
21
(p)
(p)
11.22
22


× Y1 − Xβ1 (θ(p) ) − XΨβ2 (θ(p) ) − (Y2 − XΨ)Σ−1
22 Σ21


×etr λT B2 Σ−1 B20 (Ψ − Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ))0 ΓXX (Ψ − Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ))
×p(θ(p) , θ(np) )

where etr[A] = exp{−tr[A]/2}, ∝ denotes proportionality, and the columns of Y and X are
composed of yt0 and x0t , respectively.
We can draw several conclusions from the form of the posterior density. First, the
policy parameters are essentially identified via exclusion restrictions. The functions β1 (·)
and β2 (·) only depend on the policy parameters, the only DSGE model parameters that
enter the monetary policy rule. Conditional on Ψ most of the information about the policy
parameters stems from the contribution of Y1 to the likelihood function (lines 2 and 3 in (19))
as well as the prior p(θ(p) , θ(np) ). The term (Y2 − XΨ)Σ−1
22 Σ12 corrects for the endogeneity
of the contemporaneous regressors in the policy rule. Identification is achieved through
an exclusion restriction embodied in β2 (·). In the above example no lagged endogenous
variables enter the policy rule (1). In the empirical application we assume that only lagged
interest rates enter the policy rule in addition to contemporaneous measures of inflation
and output. These exclusion restrictions are consistent with the specification of the DSGE
model and identify the monetary policy shock 1,t in the DSGE-VAR.

12

Second, we discuss the estimation of the non-policy parameters. The value of λ –
the extent to which we admit the presence of misspecification – plays an important role
here. Conditional on Ψ, the shape of the posterior of θ(np) is determined by p(Ψ|θ(p) , θ(np) )
(line 4 in (19)) and the prior p(θ(p) , θ(np) ). If the hyperparameter λ is small, the latter will
dominate. For large values of λ the estimate of θ(np) has the flavor of a minimum distance
estimate and is identified provided that different values of θ(np) imply different values for
Ψ∗ (·) (see Smith 1993). The posterior density is high for values of θ(np) that imply a
small discrepancy between Ψ and the restriction function Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ). In summary, if
we assume there is no misspecification (λ = ∞), we force the θ(np) to generate all the
dynamics observed in the data. As we lower λ, we relax this constraint and let our prior
density p(θ(p) , θ(np) ) play a more important role in the formation of the posterior. Given
that current macroeconomic practice puts emphasis on the prior information obtained from
– say – microeconomic evidence (for example, on the degree of price stickiness), this reliance
on the prior can be appealing.
Third, conditional on θ(p) and θ(np) , the shape of the posterior for Ψ is mostly determined
by the contribution of Y2 to the likelihood function (line 1 in (19)). The prior density
p(Ψ|θ(p) , θ(s) ) serves as a penalty function, that penalizes values of Ψ that deviate strongly
from the restriction function Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ). In fact, we show in a slightly different setup
in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004) that the VAR is estimated subject to the restriction
Ψ = Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ), if λ = ∞.

2.1.3

Policy Analysis

The challenge in the evaluation of monetary policy rules is to predict the private sector’s
behavioral responses to policy regime changes, which are captured by the coefficient matrix
Ψ and the elements of Σ that are unrelated to the monetary policy shock. We will describe
four types of analysis that differ according to the assumptions that are being made about
the policy-invariance of private agents’ behavior and model misspecification.
Forward-looking Analysis: One can decide to use the DSGE-VAR framework only to
obtain estimates of θ(np) that in the presence of misspecification do not force the DSGE
model to capture all the dynamics in the data. Conditional on these parameter estimates,
the policy analysis is conducted directly with the DSGE model.
Backward-looking Analysis: At the other extreme, one can choose to conduct the exercise using DSGE-VAR as a structural VAR, as for instance in Sims (1999). This amounts

13

to assuming that the decision rules of firms and households are unaffected by the policy
change. The DSGE-VAR developed previously can be interpreted as a structural VAR in
which the monetary policy rule is identified through exclusion restrictions:
y1,t

= x0t β1 (θ(p) ) + [x0t Ψ + u02,t ]β2 (θ(p) ) + 1,t σR

0
y2,t

= x0t Ψ + u02,t .

According to the underlying DSGE model, u2,t is a function of the monetary policy shock
1,t and other structural shocks 2,t . We assume that the shocks 2,t have unit variance and
are uncorrelated with each other and the monetary policy shock. We express u2,t as
u02,t = 1,t A1 + 02,t A2 .

(20)

Straightforward matrix algebra leads to the following formulas for the effect of the structural
shocks on u02,t :
A1
A02 A2


−1
Σ11 − β20 Σ22 β2 − 2(Σ12 − β20 Σ22 )β2
(Σ12 − β20 Σ22 )


= Σ22 − A01 Σ11 − β20 Σ22 β2 − 2(Σ12 − β20 Σ22 )β2 A1 .

=

(21)
(22)

While this decomposition of the forecast error covariance matrix identifies A1 , it does not
uniquely determine the matrix A2 . Let A2,tr be a Cholesky factor of A02 A2 and ũ2,t be
a vector of innovations with mean zero and unit variance, that is uncorrelated with the
monetary policy shock 1,t . Following Sims (1986), we express the private sector equations
as follows:
0
y2,t
(I + β2 A1 ) − y1,t A1 = x0t (Ψ − β1 A1 ) + ũ02,t A2,tr .

(23)

In the backward-looking analysis we use posterior draws of (θ, Ψ, Σ) to determine β1 , β2 , A1 ,
and A2,tr and assume that the coefficients in (23) are policy-invariant. The counterfactual
law of motion of yt under a new policy θ̃(p) is obtained from
0
y1,t − y2,t
β2 (θ̃(p) )
0
y2,t
(I + β2 A1 ) − y1,t A1

= x0t β1 (θ̃(p) ) + 1,t σR

(24)

= x0t (Ψ − β1 A1 ) + ũ02,t A2,tr .

The first equation represents the new monetary policy rule, whereas the second equation
captures the (unchanged) law of motion for the private-sector variables.
Acknowledge Misspecification We use the historical sample to estimate the non-policy
parameters θ(np) and the overall degree of misspecification measured by λ̂. Starting from
the forward-looking analysis we do acknowledge misspecification and hence introduce the

14
matrices Ψ∆ and Σ∆ into the policy analysis step. The DSGE-VAR framework is used to
predict policy outcomes:
y1,t
0
y2,t


= x0t β1 (θ̃(p) ) + x0t Ψ∗ (θ̃(p) , θ(np) ) + Ψ∆ β2 (θ̃(p) ) + u1,t

= x0t Ψ∗ (θ̃(p) , θ(np) ) + Ψ∆ + u02,t ,

(25)

where the covariance matrix of ut is given by Σ∗ (θ̃(p) , θ(np) ) + Σ∆ . In the absence of a
firm theory that explains how the discrepancy matrices respond to policy changes, we use
the prior distribution (15) to characterize beliefs about post-intervention model misspecification. This analysis reflects the belief that the sample, and hence the posterior of Ψ∆
and Σ∆ provides no information misspecification after a new policy has been implemented.
This scepticism about the relevance of sample information is shared by the robust control
approaches of Giannoni (2002), Onatski and Stock (2002), Onatski and Williams (2003),
and Hansen and Sargent (2005). However, instead of using a minimax calculation we rely
on a prior probability distribution p(Ψ∆ , Σ∆ |θ, λ) to cope with misspecification uncertainty.
Policy-Invariant Misspecification To characterize the degree of misspecification in an estimated DSGE model, DSSW compare impulse response functions from the DSGE-VAR(λ̂)
to those from a DSGE-VAR(∞). If the DSGE model is well specified, λ̂ is likely to be
large and the discrepancy among the impulse response functions is small. If on the other
hand, the misspecification is substantial and λ̂ is small, then the discrepancy between the
impulse response functions can be used to diagnose in which dimension the DSGE model
is misspecified. We will now assume that the estimated discrepancy, in terms of impulse
response functions, is policy invariant.
For the impulse response functions to be interpretable, it is useful to apply an identification scheme that links them to the structural shocks in the underlying DSGE model.
Recall that the monetary policy shock has been identified through an exclusion restriction.
However, we still have to identify the matrix A2 in (20). We follow the approach taken
in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004). Let A02,tr A2,tr = A02 A2 be the Cholesky decomposition of A02 A2 . The relationship between A2,tr and A2 is given by A02 = A02,tr Ω, where Ω is
an orthonormal matrix that is not identifiable based on the estimates of β(θ), Ψ, and Σ.
However, we are able to calculate an initial effect of 2,t on y2,t based on the DSGE model,
denoted by AD
2 (θ). This matrix can be uniquely decomposed into a lower triangular matrix
and an orthonormal matrix:
0

0

D
∗
AD
2 (θ) = A2,tr (θ)Ω (θ).

(26)

15
To identify A2 above, we combine A02,tr with Ω∗ (θ).6 Loosely speaking, the rotation matrix
is constructed such that in the absence of misspecification the DSGE model’s and the DSGEVAR’s impulse responses to 2,t coincide. To the extent that misspecification is mainly in the
dynamics as opposed to the covariance matrix of innovations, the identification procedure
can be interpreted as matching, at least qualitatively, the short-run responses of the VAR
with those from the DSGE model.
In order to implement the policy analysis, we use posterior draws of (θ, Ψ, Σ) to create
two moving average representations for y2,t :
∞
X

e j∗ (θ)u2,t−j
D

=

∞
X

j=0

j=0

∞
X

∞
X

e j (Ψ)u2,t−j
D

j=0

=

e j∗ (θ) A∗1 (θ)0 1,t−j + A∗2 (θ)0 2,t−j
D




e j A1 (θ, Σ)0 1,t−j + A2 (θ, Σ)0 2,t−j .
D

j=0

The first representation is calculated from the VAR approximation of the DSGE model
Ψ∗ (θ) and Σ∗ (θ). The second representation is obtained from the estimated DSGE-VAR
specification. The impulse response function discrepancies (DSGE-VAR(λ̂) versus DSGEVAR(∞)) are given by




e j (Ψ) A1 (θ, Σ)0 , A2 (θ, Σ)0 − D
e j∗ (θ) A∗1 (θ)0 , A∗2 (θ)0 .
IRFj∆ = D
We consider the following post-intervention law of motion for y2,t :
y2,t




∞ 
X



e j∗ (θ̃(p) , θ(np) ) A∗1 (θ̃(p) , θ(np) )0 , A∗2 (θ̃(p) , θ(np) )0 + IRFj∆  1,t−j  .
D
=
2,t−j
j=0

(27)

If we were endowed with with a credible model of how Ψ∆ and Σ∆ vary with policy, we
should of course use such model, and the DSGE-VAR analysis would lose its appeal. In the
absence of such a model our forward-looking analysis, the backward-looking analysis, and the
policy-invariant misspecification analysis take different attitudes toward the Lucas critique
in that they assume that certain coefficients in the empirical model are policy invariant.
The acknowledge-misspecification analysis is more agnostic in that it places a probability
distribution over the post-intervention misspecification matrices.

2.2

Relaxing Restrictions on the Exogenous Shocks

Equation (4) in our example restricts the exogenous shocks to follow AR(1) processes that
are uncorrelated with each other at all leads and lags. While this assumption is common
6 The

calculation is easily implementable in a MCMC analysis. For every draw of (θ, Ψ∆ , Σ∆ ) from their

joint posterior distribution we compute Ω∗ (θ) and A2 .

16

in the literature on estimated DSGE models, it is also arbitrary. For instance, there is
no theory that implies that technology shocks have to follow AR(1) processes. In general,
the literature strives to build models in which persistence and co-movements are generate
endogenously, through some economic mechanism, rather than exogenously. This pursuit
favors specification in which shocks are indeed uncorrelated with each other and have fairly
simple dynamics. However, once taken to the data, these specifications often miss important
aspects, which has lead researchers to consider more general shock processes.
The generalization of the exogenous shocks takes in most cases the form of additional
AR(1) processes. For instance, Smets and Wouters (2003) fit a model with 10 exogenous
shocks to seven macroeconomic variables. Several of these shocks have been added in the
model building process to overcome specification problems. More recently, a number of
authors including Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007) and Primiceri, Schaumburg, and
Tambalotti (2006) have studied the extent to which intra- and intertemporal optimality
conditions implied by DSGE models are consistent with the data. If they are not, the
resulting “wedges” are represented by stochastic shocks, underlining that the proliferation
of exogenous shocks in empirical DSGE models can be thought of as an attempt to overcome
specification problems. Alternatively, Smets and Wouters (2006) are using ARMA(1,1)
processes to describe the law of motion of price and wage mark-up shocks in their DSGE
model. We show that this approach is simply another ways of allowing for deviations
Dj∆ from the cross-equation restrictions Dj∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) in (7). Unlike in the DSGE-VAR
framework, these deviations are introduced in the structural form rather than the reduced
form. But when it comes to policy analysis, this approach shares the same conceptual
difficulties as the DSGE-VAR: One needs to assume that the Dj∆ ’s are policy invariant.
Suppose we generalize (4) in our example as follows









∞ 
j

X
gt
ρg σ g
0

∆

=
 +Cj 

 2,t−j .


zt
0
ρjz σz
j=0 

|

{z
}
∗ ∗
Cj (θ(x) )




0

(28)

0

0
∗
∆ 0
] , where θ(s) =
and partition the vector of non-policy parameters θ(np) = [θ(s)
, θ(x)
, θ(x)
∗
[β, κ]0 , θ(x)
= [ρg , ρz , σg , σz ]0 , and θx∆ is composed of the non-redundant elements of the lag
P∞
polynomial j=0 Cj∆ Lj . It follows from Sims (2002) that the law of motion of y2,t can then

be expressed as
y2,t =

∞
X
 ∗

∗
∆
Dj (θ(p) , θ(s) , θ(x)
) + Dj∆ (θ(p) , θ(s) , θ(x)
) t−j .
j=0

(29)

17
Hence, this approach generates a representation for the discrepancy matrices Dj∆ in (7), and
∆
links them to the policy parameters θ(p) under the assumption that θ(x)
is policy invariant.

2.2.1

Implementation

As in Section 2.1 it is more convenient to work with vector autoregressive representations
when implementing the analysis in practice. In the context of our example we stack the
exogenous processes in the vector zet = [gt , zt ]0 and consider a general representation of the
form
zet = Φ1 zet−1 + . . . + Φp zet−1 + e
t .

(30)

zt−1 , . . . , zet−p ]0 ,
The innovations e
t are not normalized and have a covariance matrix Σ . Let x0t = [e
Φ0 = [Φ01 , . . . , Φ0p ], and write
zet0 = x0t Φ + e
0t .

(31)

Notice that (31) mirrors (9). From the restricted moving-average representation zet =
P∞
∗ ∗
∗
∗
∗
j=0 Cj (θ(x) )t−j we can derive the moment matrices ΓZZ (θ(x) ), ΓXX (θ(x) ), and ΓXZ (θ(x) ).
∗
Following the steps in Section 2.1, we can define the restriction functions Φ∗ (θ(x)
) and
∗
∗
∗
) + Σ∆
). Then let Φ = Φ∗ (θ(x)
) + Φ∆ , and Σ = Σ∗ (θ(x)
Σ∗ (θ(x)
 . Finally, we can use a prior

of the form
∗
Σ∆
 |θ(x)

Φ

∆

∗
|Σ∆
 , θ(x)


∼
∼

IW T
N

∗

∗
Σ∗ (θ(x)
), T ∗

1
0, ∗
T



∗
Σ∗ (θ(x)
)


∗
− m − Σ∗ (θ(x)
)
+

−1
Σ∆


(32)
−1

⊗

∗
ΓXX (θ(x)
)

!
.

The intuition for this prior is very simple. Suppose we are generating a prior for an AR(2)
∗
model from an AR(1). Given the parameters of the AR(1) (θ(x)
) we can generate artificial

observations from an AR(1) model. The expected moments of these observations are summa∗
∗
∗
rized in the matrices ΓZZ (θ(x)
), ΓXX (θ(x)
), and ΓXZ (θ(x)
) and serve as sufficient statistics

for the estimation of the parameters of the AR(2) model. The posterior distribution from
this (fictional) estimation is given by (32).
Under the generalized shocks, the DSGE model in our example would consist of Equations (1) to (3) and (30). The parameter vector is composed of θ(p) , θ(s) , Φ, and Σ .
∗
Equation (32) generates a prior distribution for Φ and Σ conditional on θ(x)
, which can be
∗
combined with a prior on the hyperparameters θ(x)
as in (17). Thus, the joint distribution

of data and parameters has the following factorization
∗
∗
p(Y |θ(p) , θ(s) , Φ, Σ )p(θ(p) )p(θ(s) )pT ∗ (Φ, Σ |θ(x)
)p(θ(x)
).

18

2.2.2

Parameter Estimation

Under the generalized shock structure the law of motion for the exogenous processes is
∗
parameterized in terms of Φ and Σ instead of just θ(x)
. Nevertheless, we can estimate the

DSGE model with standard Bayesian methods. However, the less restrictive the specification
for the exogenous shock processes, the more difficult it becomes to disentangle the taste-andtechnology parameters θ(s) from the parameters that determine the evolution of zet . From
an econometric perspective, the likelihood function may flatten as we generalize the shock
structure. It is well known that in a Bayesian framework, prior distributions will not be
updated along directions in the parameter space in which the likelihood function is flat (see
Poirier, 1998).

2.2.3

Policy Analysis

If one is willing to assume that the generalized shocks are structural, in the sense that they
are invariant to changes in economic policies, analyzing the effect of changing θ(p) remains
straightforward:
(1)

(2)

∆
∆
Dj∆ (θ(p) , θ(s) , θ(x)
) − Dj∆ (θ(p) , θ(s) , θ(x)
)

can be calculated by solving the DSGE model under the generalized shock structure for
(1)

(2)

policy parameter settings θ(p) and θ(p) . However, to the extent that the lag polynomial
P∞
∆ j
j=0 Cj L has essentially been added to compensate for model misspecification, its policy
invariance is not self-evident.

3

Model

For the empirical analysis we will use a model that is more sophisticated than the one used
in Section 2. In addition to responding to inflation and output, the central bank also engages
in interest rate smoothing:
Rt = ρR Rt−1 + (1 − ρR )(ψ1 πt + ψ2 yet ) + σR 1,t .

(33)

As before, Rt and πt are the nominal interest rate and the inflation rate, respectively.
The output gap yet represents output deviations from a smooth trend path. This notion
is broadly consistent with the measure of potential output calculated by the Congressional
Budget Office (CBO) and used historically in monetary policy making. While much of the
theoretical literature defines potential output as the level of output that would prevail in

19

the absence of nominal rigidities, we want (33) to closely resemble the specifications in the
empirical literature on interest rate feedback rules (e.g. Taylor, 1993).
The remainder of the model is based on work by Smets and Wouters (2003) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2003) and is identical to the specification in DSSW with
one exception. Since yet captures deviation from a long-run trend path we model technology
shocks as a stationary process rather than a unit-root process. For brevity we only present
the log-linearized equilibrium conditions and refer the reader to the above referenced papers
for the derivation of these conditions from assumptions on preferences and technologies. All
variables that appear subsequently are expressed as log-deviations from the steady state.
The economy is populated by a continuum of firms that combine capital and labor
to produce differentiated intermediate goods. These firms have access to the same CobbDouglas production function with capital elasticity α and total factor productivity zt . The
intermediate goods producers hire labor and rent capital in competitive markets and hence
face identical real wages, wt , and rental rates for capital, rtk . Cost minimization implies that
all firms produce with the same capital-labor ratio
kt − Lt = wt − rtk

(34)

mct = (1 − α)wt + αrtk − (1 − α)zt .

(35)

and have marginal costs

The intermediate goods producers sell their output to perfectly competitive final good
producers, which aggregate the inputs according to a CES function. Profit maximization of
the final good producers implies that

yet (j) − yet = − 1 +

1
λf eλef,t


(pt (j) − pt ).

(36)

Here yet (j) − yet and pt (j) − pt are quantity and price for good j relative to quantity and price
of the final good. The price pt of the final good is determined from a zero-profit condition
for the final good producers.
We assume that the price elasticity of the intermediate goods is time-varying. Since
this price elasticity affects the mark-up that intermediate goods producers can charge over
marginal costs, we refer to λf,t as mark-up shock. Following Calvo (1983), we assume that in
every period a fraction of the intermediate goods producers ζp is unable to re-optimize their
prices. These firms adjust their prices mechanically according to the steady state inflation

20
π ∗ .7 All other firms choose prices to maximize the expected discounted sum of future
profits, which leads to the following equilibrium relationship, known as New Keynesian
Phillips curve:
πt = βIE t [πt+1 ] +

(1 − ζp β)(1 − ζp )
1
mct + λf,t
ζp
ζp

(37)

where β is the discount rate.8 Our assumption on the behavior of firms that are unable
to re-optimize their prices implies the absence of price dispersion in the steady state. As a
consequence, we obtain a log-linearized aggregate production function of the form
yet = (1 − α)Lt + αkt + (1 − α)zt .

(38)

Equations (35), (34), and (38) imply that the labor share lsht equals marginal costs in terms
of log-deviations: lsht = mct .
There is a continuum of households with identical preferences, which are separable in
consumption, leisure, and real money balances. Households’ preferences display (internal)
habit formation in consumption, that is, period t utility is a function of ln(Ct − hCt−1 ).
Households supply monopolistically differentiated labor services. These services are aggregated according to a CES function that leads to a demand elasticity 1 + 1/λw (see
Equation (36)). The composite labor services are then supplied to the intermediate goods
producers at real wage wt . To introduce nominal wage rigidity, we assume that in each
period a fraction ζw of households is unable to re-optimize their wages. These households
adjust their t − 1 nominal wage by π ∗ eγ , where γ represents the average growth rate of the
economy. All other households re-optimize their wages. First-order conditions imply that




1 + λw
1 + λw
1 + νl
w̃t + 1 + ζw βνl
wt
λw
λw
 h

i
1 + λw
IE t w̃t+1 + wt+1 + πt+1
(39)
= ζw β 1 + νl
λw


eγ (eγ − h)
1
+(1 − ζw β) νl Lt − ξt + 2γ
bt +
φt ,
2
(e + βh )
1 − ζw β
where w̃t is the optimal real wage relative to the real wage for aggregate labor services,
wt , and νl would be the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity in a model without wage
7 An

alternative assumption is what Eichenbaum and Fisher (2003) refer to as “dynamic indexation,”

where these firms’ prices grow at the previous period’s inflation. In Del Negro and Schorfheide (2006), we
discuss the extent to which a model with dynamic indexation is roughly observationally equivalent to one
with autocorrelated mark-up shock, using a similar framework and the same set of observables. Of the two
alternatives, here we use the one with autocorrelated mark-up shocks. It is beyond the scope of this paper
to investigate the implications of this choice for policy questions.
8 We

ef,t .
used the following re-parameterization: λf,t = (1 − ζp β)(1 − ζp )λf /(1 + λf )λ

21

rigidity (ζw = 0) and differentiated labor. Moreover, φt is a preference shock that affects
the intratemporal substitution between consumption and leisure and bt is a discount rate
shock that shifts the intertemporal substitution. The real wage paid by intermediate goods
producers evolves according to
wt = wt−1 − πt +

1 − ζw
w̃t .
ζw

(40)

Households are able to insure the idiosyncratic wage adjustment shocks with state contingent claims. As a consequence they all share the same marginal utility of consumption
ξt , which is given by the expression:
(eγ − hβ)(eγ − h)ξt

= −(e2γ + βh2 )ct + βheγ IE t [ct+1 ] + heγ ct−1

(41)

+(e2γ + βh2 )bt − βhe−γ (e2γ + βh2 )IE t [bt+1 ],
where ct is consumption. In addition to state-contingent claims households accumulate
three types of assets: one-period nominal bonds that yield the return Rt , capital k̄t , and
real money balances. Since preferences for real money balances are assumed to be additively
separable and monetary policy is conducted through a nominal interest rate feedback rule,
money is block exogenous and we will not use the households’ money demand equation in
our empirical analysis.
The first order condition with respect to bond holdings delivers the standard Euler
equation:
ξt = IE t [ξt+1 ] + Rt − IE t [πt+1 ].

(42)

Capital accumulates according to the following law of motion:


k̄t = (2 − eγ − δ)k̄t−1 + (eγ + δ − 1) it + S 00 e2γ (1 + β)µt ,

(43)

where it is investment, δ is the depreciation rate of capital, and µt is a stochastic disturbance
to the price of installed capital relative to consumption. Investment in our model is subject
to adjustment costs, and S 00 denotes the second derivative of the investment adjustment cost
function at steady state. Optimal investment satisfies the following first-order condition:
it =

1
β
1
it−1 +
IE t [it+1 ] +
(ξ k − ξt ) + µt ,
1+β
1+β
(1 + β)S 00 e2γ t

(44)

where ξtk is the value of installed capital and evolves according to:
 k



k
ξtk − ξt = βe−γ (1 − δ)IE t ξt+1
− ξt+1 + IE t (1 − (1 − δ)βe−γ )rt+1
− (Rt − πt+1 ) .

(45)

22
Capital utilization ut in our model is variable and rtk in the previous equation represents
the rental rate of effective capital kt , which is given by
kt = ut + k̄t−1 .

(46)

The optimal degree of utilization is determined by
ut =

r∗k k
r .
a0 t

(47)

Here a0 is the derivative of the per-unit-of-capital cost function a(ut ) evaluated at the steady
state utilization rate.
The aggregate resource constraint is given by:



c∗
i∗
r∗k
yet = (1 + g∗ )
ut
ct +
it + γ
+ gt .
y∗
y∗
e −1+δ

(48)

Here c∗ /y∗ and i∗ /y∗ are the steady state consumption-output and investment-output ratios,
respectively, and g∗ /(1 + g∗ ) corresponds to the government share of aggregate output. The
process gt can be interpreted as exogenous government spending shock. It is assumed that
fiscal policy is passive in the sense that the government uses lump-sum taxes to satisfy its
period budget constraint. In addition to the monetary policy shock 1,t the DSGE model has
six exogenous shocks zt , gt , φt , λf,t , bt , and µt . In the benchmark specification we assume
that bt and µt are equal to zero and that the other four shocks follow AR(1) processes. We
use the method in Sims (2002) to solve the DSGE model.9 We collect all the DSGE model
parameters in the vector θ and stack the normalized innovations of the structural shocks in
the vector t .

4

Empirical Results

The goal of our empirical analysis is to study the effects of changes in the coefficients of
the monetary policy rule, θ(p) , on the dynamics of the output gap, inflation, and nominal
interest rates. In addition to these three key macroeconomic variables we include the labor
share and hours worked in our estimation sample because these series can provide additional
information about the degree of price and wage rigidity. Our interest and inflation rates are
measured as annualized percentages. Within the model, yet denotes the percentage deviation
of output from its trend path γ(t)y∗ . We interpret the potential output series published
9 The

simplified model in Section 2 is obtained by setting α = 0, h = 0, νl = 0, ζw = 0, ρR = 0, 1/a0 = 0,

S 00 = 0, γ = 0, kt = 0, bt = 0, µt = 0, φt = 0, λf,t = 0.

23

by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) as a measure of γ(t)y∗ . Hence, the output gap,
computed as log difference of real and potential GDP provides us with a measure of yet .
We scale the output gap, labor share, and log hours worked by a factor of 100 to obtain
percentages. Further details about the data are provided in the Appendix. The empirical
results reported subsequently are based on a quarterly sample from 1982:Q4 to 2005:Q4.
Following Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) the beginning of the sample is chosen to exclude
the high inflation episode of the 1970s as well as Volcker’s disinflation.
The relationships between the deviations from steady state that appear in the model
description of Section 3 and the observables yt are given by the following measurement
equation:

y1,t = r∗a + 400γ + π∗a + 4Rt ,

y2,t

π∗a + 4πt



 yet
=

 100 ln(1 − α)/(1 + λf ) + lsht

Lt





.




(49)

Here, we have partitioned yt such that y1,t corresponds to the policymaker’s instrument
(the interest rate), and y2,t is a vector that includes the remaining four observables. The
steady state (net) real interest rate in our model is given by r∗a + 400γ. The parameter r∗a
is related to the discount rate β according to β = 1/(1 + r∗a /400), and π∗a = 400π ∗ denotes
steady state annualized inflation.
The remainder of this section is organized as follows. As a benchmark we use the DSGE
model of Section 3 with four exogenous shocks that follow independent AR(1) processes
(technology zt , government spending gt , labor supply φt , mark-up λf,t ) and the serially
uncorrelated monetary policy shock 1,t . First, we will present evidence of misspecification
in the benchmark DSGE model by comparing its fit to the fit of a DSGE-VAR that relaxes
the DSGE model implied restrictions. Discrepancies in the dynamics of DSGE model and
DSGE-VAR are used to motivate generalizations of the shock structure in the theoretical
model. Overall, we will consider three alternative empirical models that are meant to
capture some of the misspecification present in the benchmark DSGE model. These are:
(i) a DSGE-VAR with four lags that relaxes the cross-equation restrictions implied by the
rational expectations solution of the DSGE model; and two versions of the DSGE model in
which we generalize the exogenous shock structure prior to solving the model, namely, (ii)
a version in which the AR(1) government spending shock is replaced by an AR(2) process
(AR(2)-in-gt ); (iii) a version that contains two additional AR(1) shocks: an investmentspecific technology shock µt and a shock to the discount factor bt (7-shocks).

24

Second, we document how the treatment of misspecification will affect the estimation
of preference and technology parameters in the underlying DSGE model. In particular,
we compare the estimates obtained from the four empirical specifications and study how
differences in parameter estimates translate into differences in policy predictions with the underlying DSGE model. Finally, we conduct the policy analysis using the benchmark DSGE
model, the AR(2)-in-gt and the 7-shocks DSGE models, and the DSGE-VAR (backwardlooking analysis, policy-invariant misspecification, and acknowledge misspecification). We
show that the policy implications of the DSGE model are by and large robust to the treatment of misspecification.

4.1

Assessing Misspecification

The first step in our empirical analysis is the specification of a prior distribution for the
parameters of the DSGE model. Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 contain prior means and standard deviations. The prior distribution for the policy parameters ψ1 and ψ2 is approximately
centered at Taylor’s (1993) values, whereas the smoothing parameter lies in the range from
0.18 to 0.83. The prior for the Calvo parameters ζp and ζw , which characterize the nominal
rigidities in prices and wages, respectively, are centered at 0.6 with a standard deviation of
0.15. This is a fairly diffuse distribution that encompasses findings in micro-level studies of
price adjustments such as Bils and Klenow (2004).10 The priors for the autocorrelation and
standard deviation of the shocks processes are chosen with two criteria in mind. First, we
want to be close to previous studies in the literature, such as Smets and Wouters (2003),
DSSW, and Levin, Onatski, Williams, and Williams (2005). Second, we want to make sure
that the second moments (especially volatility and autocorrelation) of the endogenous variables are roughly in line with the evidence from the pre-sample (1955:Q3 and 1982:Q3).
Further details about the prior are provided in the Technical Appendix.
We proceed by computing log marginal likelihood values for our four empirical model
specifications. The marginal likelihoods provide an overall measure of relative fit that tradesoff in-sample fit with model complexity. Log marginal likelihoods and posterior odds relative
to the DSGE-VAR (assuming that all four specifications receive equal prior probability)
10 We

have also estimated the same model under a prior for the Calvo parameters centered at the higher

value of 0.75, with standard deviation of 0.1. Interestingly, the fit of the model under the two priors, one
largely agnostic and one that assumes a high degree of nominal rigidities, is roughly comparable. In the
interest of space we show only the results from the agnostic prior, which achieves slightly better fit. But
most of the results are robust under the alternative prior view of the world.

25

are reported in Table 2. The fit of the DSGE-VAR crucially depends on the choice of
hyperparameter λ. For λ = ∞ we are dogmatically imposing all the restrictions of a
VAR(4) approximation of the DSGE model, whereas for λ = 0 these restrictions are ignored.
We have estimated the DSGE-VAR model for the grid of λ values {0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 1, 2, 5}.
Consistent with the results in DSSW we find that the marginal likelihood of the DSGE-VAR
as a function of λ has an inverted U-shape with a peak reached for λ = 0.75. The marginal
likelihood of the DSGE-VAR reported in Table 2 as well as all DSGE-VAR results presented
subsequently are therefore based on λ = 0.75.11 The log marginal likelihood differential
between the DSGE benchmark model and the DSGE-VAR is 109. We conclude that allowing
for deviations from the restricted moving average representation associated with the DSGE
benchmark DSGE model – we generically denoted these deviations by Dj∆ in Equation (7)
– leads to a substantial improvement in the marginal likelihood. A generalization of the
shock structure also leads to better fit: the marginal likelihood differentials relative to the
DSGE-VAR shrink to 79 (AR(2)-in-gt ) and 64 (7-shocks), respectively.
To gain insights into the misspecification of the DSGE model restrictions we examine
the moving-average representation generated by the DSGE-VAR. More specifically, we use
Equations (24) and (26) to compute DSGE-VAR impulse responses to technology, government spending, mark-up, labor supply, and monetary policy shock innovations. For exposition purposes we focus on those variables that are most important for the policy exercise:
the interest rate, inflation, and the output gap. The following impulse-response functions
are in principle of interest: the benchmark DSGE model, the VAR approximation of the
DSGE model, that is, DSGE-VAR(λ = ∞), and the DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75), which provides
the best fit. A comparison of DSGE and DSGE-VAR(λ = ∞) documents the approximation
error induced by potential lack of invertibility and truncation of VAR lags (see FernandezVillaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, Sargent, and Watson (2007)). We find that for our model and
identification procedure the VAR approximation error is not a concern.12 Hence, we will focus on a comparison of impulse-responses obtained from the DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75) and the
DSGE-VAR(λ = ∞) using the posterior draws of the DSGE model parameters θ associated
with the estimated DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75). Figure 1 displays the posterior mean impulse
responses and illustrates the effect of the misspecification matrices Ψ∆ and Σ∆ in (14).
11 Instead

of conditioning on the value of λ that maximizes the marginal likelihood function, we could

average all of our results with respect to the posterior probabilities of λ, which are proportional to the
marginal likelihood values. However, since the marginal likelihood function is sharply peaked and the model
predictions of interest tend to be smooth functions of λ, we believe that our simplification does not distort
the empirical results.
12 A Figure with the relevant impulse response function comparison is provided in the Technical Appendix.

26

Consistent with results reported in DSSW we find that the misspecification of the propagation mechanism for the technology shock is fairly small. The propagation of mark-up and
labor supply shocks is also by and large not affected by the discrepancy matrices. Most of
the misspecification is concentrated in the response to government spending/demand shocks
(gt ). The DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75) responses are hump-shaped and much more persistent than
the DSGE-VAR(λ = ∞)’s.
The DSGE-VAR analysis provides some justification for the generalizations of the exogenous shock structure in the benchmark DSGE model that we are considering. Since it
is the response to a government spending shock that appears to be most severely misspecified, we replace the AR(1) process for gt with an AR(2) process using the hierarchical prior
described in Section 4.4:
gt = ρ̃g,1 (1 − ρ̃g,2 )gt−1 + ρ̃g,2 gt−1 + σ̃g t .
The parameterization of the AR(2) process in terms of partial autocorrelations ρ̃g,1 and ρ̃g,2
guarantees that the process is stationary for ρ̃j ∈ (−1, 1) (see Barndorff-Nielson and Schou
(1973)). We shrink the coefficients of this AR(2) process toward an AR(1) representation
with autocorrelation ξg and innovation variance ωg (see Table 1). Overall, our prior takes
the form p(ρ̃g,1 , ρ̃g,2 , σ̃g |ξg , ωg )p(ξg , ωg ), where p(ρ̃g,1 , ρ̃g,2 , σ̃g |ξg , ωg ) is given in (32) and we
set T ∗ = 70.13 Figure 2 overlays the impulse responses for the AR(2)-in-gt DSGE model
(black lines) with those from the benchmark specification (gray lines). A comparison with
Figure 1 indicates that the responses to a demand shock in the AR(2)-in-gt model are indeed
much closer to those of the DSGE-VAR than in the baseline specification. The responses
of interest rates and the output gap are hump-shaped, whereas the response of inflation is
more persistent under than under the baseline specification. The responses to the other
shocks, on the other hand, appear essentially unaffected and closely resemble those of the
benchmark DSGE model.
As an alternative to the DSGE model with AR(2) government spending shock we consider a version of the model with investment-specific technology shocks and shocks to the
stochastic discount factor. Fisher (2006) documents that investment-specific technology
shocks are an important source of business cycle fluctuations and Justiano and Primiceri
(2006) argue that a reduction in the volatility of this shock can account for much of the
great moderation observed since the mid 1980s. Numerous studies document that the asset
pricing implications of models as the one used in this paper are at odds with the data.
13 We

chose this value of T ∗ as it implies roughly the same prior weight as in the DSGE-VAR.

27

The shock bt exogenously modifies the model implied stochastic discount factor and hence
can be viewed as a device that corrects misspecification in the consumption Euler equation.
Figure 3 compares the impulse responses for this 7-shocks model (black lines) with those
from the baseline specification (gray lines). The impulse responses to the two additional
shocks are quite persistent, as confirmed by the estimates for the corresponding autocorrelation parameters ρb and ρµ in Table 1. The additional shocks capture some of the dynamics
previously captured by demand shocks. In particular, the responses of interest rates and the
output gap to an investment-specific technology shock are hump-shaped, and the response
to inflation is quite persistent. These impulse responses very much resemble the DSGE-VAR
responses to a demand shock, much more so than the demand shock impulse responses in
the baseline model (at least in terms of the variables considered here). In other words, introducing additional shocks captures some of the misspecification present in the benchmark
specification of the DSGE model.

4.2

Misspecification and Parameter Estimates

We will now examine to what extent the estimates of the DSGE model parameters differ
across the four empirical models. Posterior means and standard deviations are reported in
Table 1. We begin with the coefficients of the monetary policy rule. The posterior means
of ψ1 , the central bank’s reaction to inflation deviations from steady state range from 2.49
(AR(2)-in-gt DSGE) to 3.06 (7-shocks DSGE). Since the posterior standard deviations are
about 0.35, there is considerable overlap of the credible intervals associated with these
estimates. Posterior means of ψ2 range from 0.07 to 0.12 with standard deviations of
approximately 0.05, indicating a modest response of the Federal Reserve to output gap
movements. Finally, we find a fairly high degree of interest rate smoothing, with posterior
mean estimates of ρR between 0.81 and 0.85. By and large, our policy rule estimates are in
line with the numbers reported in DSSW, who find ψ̂1 = 2.21, ψ̂2 = 0.07, and ρ̂R = 0.82.
The estimates in DSSW are based on a slightly larger sample, starting in 1974:Q2, a broader
set of observables that includes consumption and investment, and a different measure of
output, namely real GDP growth rates. Finally, our estimates are also broadly consistent
with numbers reported in Smets and Wouters (2006) for the 1984:Q1 to 2004:Q4 sample,
who find a somewhat smaller response to inflation: ψ̂1 = 1.77. We conclude that the policy
rule estimates are fairly insensitive to the adjustments that were made to the benchmark
DSGE model to account for misspecification. Based on our estimates we use the values
ψ1 = 2.75, ψ2 = 0.062, and ρR = 0.8 as historical reference points in the evaluation of

28

monetary policy rules.
Important for the effects of monetary policy and the propagation of monetary policy
shocks are the parameters ζp and ζw , which determine the degree of nominal rigidity in
the DSGE model. For price stickiness the estimates range from 0.67 (7-shocks DSGE) to
0.76 (AR(2)-in-gt DSGE) with standard deviations of about 0.05 and considerable overlap
in the posterior densities. Interestingly, there is more divergence in the estimated wage
stickiness with posterior mean estimates between 0.34 (AR(2)-in-gt DSGE) and 0.77 (7shocks DSGE). As a reference point, we also provide estimates from DSSW: ζ̂p = 0.83 and
ζ̂w = 0.89; Smets and Wouters (2006, post 1983 sample): ζ̂p = 0.73 and ζ̂w = 0.74; Levin,
Onatski, Williams, and Williams (2006): ζ̂p = 0.82 and ζ̂w = 0.80. In general, the analysis
differs with respect to sample period and specification of the Phillips curve. Nevertheless,
the dispersion suggests that the estimates are quite sensitive to auxiliary assumptions.
As was apparent from the impulse response functions discussed in the previous subsection, the estimated exogenous processes are highly serially correlated. Technology shocks
are particularly persistent, with ρz tightly estimated around 0.97 in the three versions of
the DSGE model. To provide a comparison, Smets and Wouters (2006) estimate ρz to be
0.97 for the 1966:Q1 to 1979:Q2 sample, 0.94 for the post 1983 sample, and 0.95 for the
combined sample. Demand shocks appear to be strongly autocorrelated in the benchmark
DSGE model (ρ̂g = 0.91) and in the AR(2)-in-gt model, for which the estimated first-order
partial autocorrelation of gt is 0.97. Labor supply and mark-up shocks are less persistent
with estimates ranging from 0.66 to 0.8 and 0.3 to 0.75, respectively.
Interestingly, the persistence of technology shocks under the DSGE-VAR is only about
0.89 and the standard deviation of the innovation is 0.42 as opposed to 0.72 in the benchmark DSGE model. Under DSGE-VAR model misspecification is partly captured by the
deviations Ψ∆ and Σ∆ from the cross-equation restrictions. This leads to smaller forecast
errors and ultimately to smaller shock volatility estimates. If the DSGE model restrictions
are not relaxed, then the misspecification has to be absorbed by some of the structural
shocks, which may result in highly persistent and fairly volatile processes. For instance,
while in the 7-shock DSGE model the estimated autocorrelations for the government spending, the labor supply, and the mark-up shock are not as high as in the benchmark DSGE
model, the additional investment-specific technology shock and the discount factor shock
appear to be highly serially correlated: ρ̂µ = 0.91 and ρ̂b = 0.94.
In general, the posterior estimates for the non-policy parameters θ(np) obtained from
the DSGE-VAR lie between the prior and the benchmark DSGE posterior. This finding

29

is consistent with Equation (19) and the theory presented in Section 2.1.2. For moderate
values of λ, indicating the presence of misspecification, less weight is placed on the likelihood
function and more weight on the prior distribution when determining the posterior.

4.3

Policy Implications of Estimates

With the parameter estimates in hand, we will now explore how the volatility of the output
gap, inflation, and interest rates is affected by changes in the coefficients ψ1 , ψ2 , and ρR of
the monetary policy rule (33). In this subsection we will compute unconditional variances
with the benchmark DSGE model using (i) the estimates of the non-policy parameters θ(np)
obtained when fitting the state-space representation of the benchmark DSGE models to the
data (columns 4 and 5 of Table 1), and (ii) the estimates of θ(np) obtained from the DSGEVAR analysis conditional on λ = 0.75 (columns 6 and 7 of Table 1). For brevity we will
refer to (i) as the direct DSGE model estimates and to (ii) as the DSGE-VAR estimates.
We consider a two-dimensional grid for the policy rule coefficients: ψ1 takes nine values
ranging from 1.001 to 3 in intervals of 0.25; ψ2 takes six different values, computed taking
the Taylor’s (1993) value ψ2T = 0.125 as a reference, namely 0,
3 T
2 ψ2

1 T
2 ψ2

= 0.062, ψ2T = 0.125,

= 0.188, 2ψ2T = 0.250, 3ψ2T = 0.375. We set the interest rate smoothing coefficient

ρR = 0.8. We will report variance differentials relative to the baseline policy rule ψ1 = 2.75,
ψ2 = 0.062, ρR = 0.8. These values are chosen based on the parameter estimates reported
in Section 4.2 and roughly correspond to the historical Volcker-Greenspan policy rule.
As in Section 2, we use V(θ(p) , θs , Ψ∆ , Σ∆ ) to generically denote the covariance matrix
of the output gap, inflation, and interest rates associate with an empirical model. Mainly
for expositional convenience we summarize the covariance matrix V(·) through the (loss)
function
min {tr[WV(θ(p) , θs , Ψ∆ , Σ∆ )], B},
where the upper bound B ensures that the posterior expected value of the variance is well
defined when averaging over θs , Ψ∆ , and Σ∆ , regardless of the shape of the posterior distribution. The upper bound B is set to 100. This value is substantially larger than the sample
variances of the output gap, inflation, and interest rates, which are approximately 4.1, 1, and
6.5, respectively, in our estimation sample. The weighting matrix for this summary measure
is diagonal with entries 1/4 (annualized interest rates), 1 (annualized inflation rates), and
1/4 (output gap, percentage deviations from potential output). Since misspecification is a
serious concern in our subsequent analysis, we decided not to use the expected utility of

30

the representative household in the underlying DSGE model as a measure of policy performance. While not welfare-based, our performance measure is of interest to many central
bankers, who are generally concerned with the stabilization of output and inflation fluctuations. Moreover, it is widely used for the comparison of policy rules across broad classes of
models (see for instance Taylor’s (1999) volume).
To understand how changes in the policy rule affect the volatility of the output gap,
inflation, and interest rates it is instructive to explore how the propagation of the structural
shocks is altered. Using the benchmark DSGE model and its direct parameter estimates for
the non-policy parameters θ(np) we compute impulse response functions for three different
values of the response to inflation in the policy rule, ψ1 : 2.75, 2, and 1.25, while fixing
ψ2 = 0.0625. Posterior mean responses are plotted in Figure 4. The lines’ darkness is
proportional to the magnitude of the response. Since the estimated ψ1 is approximately 2.75,
the dark impulse responses in Figure 4 are essentially identical to the posterior estimates
of the impulse responses for the DSGE model. The propagation of the technology shock is
most sensitive to changes in the central bank’s reaction to inflation. Since the estimated
autocorrelation of the technology shock is near unity, a decrease in ψ1 from 2.75 to 1.25
results in a large and prolonged response of inflation and the interest rate.
Figure 5 shows two surfaces summarizing the posterior expected differentials of the
weighted variances as a function of the responses to inflation (ψ1 ) and the output gap (ψ2 ).
The black surface is based on the direct estimates of the parameters θ(np) whereas the gray
surface is based on the DSGE-VAR estimates. For both surfaces the variance differentials
are computed from the state space representation of the benchmark DSGE model. The
loss differential shown by the black surface reflect the impulse responses in Figure 4: As ψ1
decreases from its historical value the variance of inflation and the interest rate increase. The
increase is first gradual, but then quite dramatic as ψ1 approaches 1. Under the DSGE-VAR
posterior distribution (gray) the loss differential also rises as ψ1 declines, but the increase
is not nearly as stark.
The difference in the surfaces is due to one element of the θ(np) vector: the persistence
of the technology shock ρz . Recall from Section 4.2 that the direct estimate of ρz is 0.97,
whereas the DSGE-VAR estimate is 0.89. Indeed, if we recompute the loss surface for the
DSGE-VAR estimates subject to the restriction that ρz = 0.97 and σz = 0.72 the two loss
surfaces are almost identical. Hence, the differences in the remaining non-policy parameters
matter very little in explaining the different shape of the loss differentials in Figure 5.
To understand how ρz affects the volatility of output and inflation, it is instructive to

31

consider the simplified version of the DSGE model introduced in Section 2. If we restrict
ψ1 = 1/β, it becomes straightforward to calculate impulse response functions for output
and inflation analytically based on Equations (1) to (4):
∂e
yt+h
κ/β
=
ρh σ z ,
∂z,t
κ/β + ψ2 + 1 − ρz z

∂πt+h
ψ 2 + 1 − ρz
=−
ρh σ z .
∂z,t
(1/β + (ψ2 + 1 − ρz )/κ)(1 − βρz ) z
(50)

In the simple model, for ψ2 > 0 real marginal costs fall below steady state in response to a
positive technology shock:
ψ 2 + 1 − ρz h
∂mct+h
=−
ρ σz .
∂z,t
κ/β + 1 − ρz z
The autocorrelation of the technology shock has two effects. Since the impulse responses
decay at the rate ρhz , the more persistent the technology shock, the longer it takes for
marginal costs, output, and inflation to revert back to their steady state levels. Second, ρz
affects the magnitude of the fall in real marginal costs. For values of ψ2 > κ/β an increase
in ρz raises the initial response of real marginal costs to a technology shock. Since inflation
is given by the sum of discounted future marginal costs, its response is amplified. We see
this mechanism at work in Figure 5. For a fixed value of ψ1 the loss increases much more
rapidly as a function of ψ2 under the benchmark DSGE model estimates (high ρ̂z ) than
under the DSGE-VAR parameter estimates (moderate ρ̂z ).
As the central bank increases its reaction to output gap movements, the response of yet+h
is dampened. Since marginal costs in this simple model are given by the difference between
output and the technology shock, the volatility of marginal costs and inflation increases. For
many reasonable weight functions, the rise in inflation fluctuations outweighs the reduction
in output volatility and the overall loss increases as a function of ψ2 , which explains the
shape of loss surface in Figure 5. In short, a strong response to output is undesirable under
the DSGE model – more so if the technology shock is highly persistent.
The theoretical literature (e.g., Woodford (2003)) emphasizes that the central bank
should not respond to output but rather to deviations of output from the level that would
prevail in the absence of nominal rigidities. In the simple model of Section 2, this flexible
(f p)

price output is given by yet

= zt + gt and the flexible price output gap equals marginal

costs. If we change the monetary policy rule (1) to
Rt = ψ1 πt + ψ2 mct + σR 1,t ,
we can show that in the simple model an increase in ψ2 leads to more stable marginal
costs and inflation. In our estimated DSGE model marginal costs correspond to the labor

32

share, which we include as observable variable in the estimation. However, the flexible price
output gap is not simply given by marginal costs. Moreover, once misspecification of the
DSGE model is a concern, the concept of flexible price output is not well defined anymore.
We recomputed the loss surfaces depicted in Figure 5 under a policy rule in which the
central bank responds to the labor share instead of our measure of output. Since inflation
in the larger DSGE model is also the expected sum of discounted future marginal costs, a
stabilization of marginal costs leads to a reduction of inflation volatility. Thus, according
to the estimated DSGE model, a response to the labor share instead of output does neither
lead to a performance deterioration, nor does it generate any improvements over a policy
that strongly responds to inflation. This conclusion holds for both the DSGE model and
the DSGE-VAR based parameter estimates, as well as for the case where misspecification
is taken into account.

4.4

Relaxing the Restrictions on the Exogenous Shocks

The policy analysis in Section 4.3 was based on the benchmark DSGE model and ignored
the model misspecification documented in Section 4.2. Subsequently, we will incorporate
concern about model misspecification into the policy analysis. We begin by studying the
policy implications for the two versions of the DSGE model with a generalized exogenous
shock structure.
It is common in the literature on policy analysis with DSGE models to assume that
the exogenous shocks are policy invariant. This assumption is plausible in so far the shocks
truly capture fundamental shifts in preferences and technologies. If, on the other hands,
the shocks partly capture model misspecification, their policy-invariance is not self-evident.
In computing the subsequent results, we assume that the (generalized) shocks are indeed
policy invariant.
Figure 6 depicts the loss surfaces associated with the AR(2)-in-gt model (black) and the
7-shocks model (gray). To compute the policy performance measure we use the posterior
parameter distributions associated with the two models, summarized in columns (7,8) and
(9,10) of Table 1. Both loss functions have roughly the same shape as under the benchmark specification: the loss increases quite rapidly as ψ1 decreases or ψ2 increases. Thus,
addressing the misspecification in the benchmark model by relaxing the restrictions on the
process for the exogenous shocks results in empirical specifications that fit the data better
but have qualitatively similar policy implications.

33

The main reason for the similarity of the loss surfaces is that neither for the AR(2)-ingt nor for the 7-shocks specification, the generalization of the shock structure significantly
affects the estimated persistence ρz of the technology shock. Under the benchmark DSGE
model ρ̂z = 0.97, whereas for the two alternative specifications ρ̂z = 0.96. As we argued in
Section 4.3, it is the persistence of the technology shock that drives the policy implications
of the DSGE model. One can interpret this finding as stating that the ‘true’ technology
process is indeed highly persistent or, alternatively, that this persistence is a symptom of
model misspecification. In the latter case one should interpret the policy recommendations
from all three DSGE models (benchmark, AR(2)-in-gt , and 7-shocks) with caution.

4.5

Relaxing Restrictions on the VAR Representation

We now proceed by directly relaxing the restrictions that the benchmark DSGE model
imposes on the (approximate) vector autoregressive representation (9) for our observables.
To account for model misspecification, the DSGE-VAR approach introduces discrepancy
matrices Ψ∆ and Σ∆ into the law of motion (14). We established in Section 4.2 that a
deviation from the restriction functions Ψ∗ (θ) and Σ∗ (θ) improves the log marginal likelihood
by 109 points. To conduct policy analysis with the DSGE-VAR we have to make assumptions
about the post-intervention values of the discrepancy matrices and will in turn implement
the approaches discussed in Section 2.1.3.
Sims (1999) uses a structural VAR framework to study whether a modern interestrate feedback rule could have prevented the great depression. He estimates the VAR on
pre World War II data and replaces the actual policy rule by a hypothetical one. Similarly,
Rudebusch and Svenson (1999) fit a small scale backward looking model to output, inflation,
and interest rate data and assess the performance of different, hypothetical interest rate
feedback rules in the context of the estimated model. In the context of the DSGE-VAR
framework this backward-looking analysis amounts to treating the estimated empirical model
as a structural VAR and conducting policy analysis by changing the interest-rate feedback
rule under the assumption that the decision rules of the private sector remain unchanged
(see Equation (24)).
Again, the simple model of Section 2 can be used to shed light on the analysis. Suppose
that gt = 0, 1,t = 0, and all fluctuations are due to the technology shock. Moreover, past
policy is given by ψ1∗ = 1/β and ψ2∗ = 0. According to (50), the conditional expectations
IE t [e
yt+1 ] and IE t [πt+1 ] under the historical policy are given by ρz yet and ρz πt , respectively.

34

If we plug the conditional expectations into (2) and (3) and quasi-difference (3) we obtain
the following backward-looking system
Rt − ψ1 πt − ψ2 yet

=

0

(1 − ρz )e
yt − ρz πt + Rt

=

0

−κe
yt + (1 − βρz )πt

(51)

= −ρz κe
yt−1 + ρz (1 − βρz )πt−1 − κσz z,t ,

which is a special case of our general representation (24). It is straightforward to show that
inflation and output evolve according to
πt

= ρz πt−1 − κ

yet

= −

1 − ρz + ψ 2
σz z,t
(1 − βρz )(1 − ρz + ψ2 ) + (ψ1 β − ρz β)κ/β

(52)

ψ 1 − ρz
πt .
1 − ρz + ψ 2

If we keep ψ1 at the historical value 1/β, then (52) is identical to the rational expectations
solution for a wide range of values of ψ2 because the conditional expectations of output
and inflation are independent of ψ2 . For other values of ψ1 , we deduce from (52) that
the backward-looking system inherits a key feature of the rational expectations system: a
stronger response to inflation tends to reduce the volatility of inflation.
Our empirical analysis is of course more complex. The vector autoregressive law of
motion of the endogenous variables is altered by Ψ∆ and Σ∆ (see Equation (24)). The
backward-looking analysis is essentially based on two assumptions: (i) private agents’ expectations of future variables as functions of current and past observables are not affected by
changes in the monetary policy rule; and (ii) the discrepancy matrices are policy invariant.
The expected loss differentials as a function of ψ1 and ψ2 based on the backward-looking
analysis are shown in Figure 7 (dark surface). We also plot the loss-differential obtained under the benchmark DSGE model (gray surface), using the posterior parameter estimates of
the DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75).14 In line with the implications of the simplified model (51), the
outcomes under the backward-looking analysis resemble the forward-looking analysis with
the benchmark DSGE model, at least qualitatively. Small values of ψ1 tend to generate
more volatility and strong responses to output tend to destabilize the economy. Quantitatively, the loss differentials are much larger for high values of ψ2 . This is because the system
becomes explosive in that region, which is a common issue with backward looking analysis.
The backward-looking approach is appealing if the degree of DSGE model misspecification (captured by Ψ∆ and Σ∆ ) is so large that the DSGE model structure (captured by
14 The

gray surfaces in Figure 7 is identical to the gray surface in Figure 5.

35
Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) and Σ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) )) is unable to explain the dynamics in the data. In this
case, one might call into question information coming from the DSGE model, that is, how
the Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) and Σ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) matrices change with policy, and decide to completely
ignore it in carrying out the policy analysis. Is the backward-looking approach justified in
the context of the estimated DSGE-VAR? Arguably, the answer is no. According to Figure 1 the DSGE model captures the dynamic responses to a technology shock quite well.
We have also shown that much of the shape of the loss surface is due to the contribution of
the technology shock to our weighted average of variances. Hence the rationale for ignoring
the impact of the policy parameters on Ψ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) and Σ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) is not very strong,
at least in those dimensions where the model fits well. For this reason we consider two
alternative approaches for dealing with model misspecifications.
The first approach – policy-invariant misspecification – amounts to assuming that the
misspecification matrices are invariant to the policy parameters. As described in (27), we
compute impulse response functions from the DSGE-VAR for λ = 0.75 and λ = ∞. These
impulse responses deliver us discrepancies IRFj∆ that capture deviations of the estimated
from the restricted moving average representation. The IRFj∆ ’s are displayed in Figure 1
as the discrepancies between the DSGE-VAR impulse responses for λ = 0.75 and λ = ∞. In
e ∗ (θ(p) , θ(np) ) vary with
terms of the notation developed in Section 2.1 we will essentially let D
j
the policy parameters θ(p) and assume that the discrepancies IRFj∆ are policy invariant.
Hence, if according to the DSGE-VAR analysis the response to a particular shock, for
instance the technology shock, is well captured by the underlying DSGE model, then we
recover the policy prediction of the DSGE model. If the DSGE-VAR analysis implies that
the propagation of a particular shock is poorly captured by the DSGE model, e.g., the
demand shock, then our policy predictions are potentially different from those of the DSGE
model.
The gray surface in Figure 8 shows the expected loss differential under the assumption
that moving-average discrepancies are policy invariant. One can readily see that these loss
differentials are almost identical to the DSGE model’s loss differentials, shown in Figure 7.
According to (27) we can write
0
IE[y2,t y2,t
]=


∞ 
X
e j∗ D
e j∗0 + D
e j∗ IRFj∆0 + IRFj∆ D
e j∗0 + IRFj∆ IRFj∆0 .
D
j=0

While the last term affects the overall variance, it does not alter variance differentials across
policies. Large values of IRFj∆ only matter if they interact with model-implied moving
e ∗ that are sensitive to changes in monetary policy. We deduce
average coefficient matrices D
j

36
from Figures 1 and 4 that the discrepancies IRFj∆ are large for the demand shock, but
the response to the demand shock is according to the DSGE model not very sensitive to
changes in ψ1 and ψ2 . Hence, overall the presence of misspecification does not change the
policy implications under the assumption that the moving-average discrepancies IRFj∆ are
policy-invariant.
The second approach – acknowledge misspecification – is closer to the robust control
literature in that the policy-maker refuses to estimate the misspecification matrices using
past data. The data are only used to assess the overall magnitude of the discrepancies,
as our analysis is conditional on the value of λ that maximizes the marginal likelihood
function associated with the DSGE-VAR. The smaller the estimated λ, the more diffuse
the prior covariance matrix for Ψ∆ and Σ∆ . We generate draws draws from the DSGEVAR based posterior distribution of θ(np) and the prior distribution of Ψ∆ , Σ∆ conditional
on θ(np) and the counterfactual policy parameter θ̃(p) to compute expected values for our
performance measure. The dark surface in Figure 8 shows the expected loss differential. A
comparison with Figure 5 (gray surface) indicates that the shape of the loss surface under the
acknowledge-misspecification analysis closely resembles the loss surface associated with the
benchmark DSGE model. The reason for this similarity is that under the prior distribution
the discrepancy matrices have essentially mean zero. However, the uncertainty surrounding
the outcomes is quite different in the two cases, as we now proceed to show.
A robust control analysis can typically be represented as a Nash equilibrium between
a policy maker and an evil adversary who chooses model misspecifications to harm the
policy maker. Bayesian analysis, on the other hand emphasizes the calculation of expected
losses and place less weight on extreme forms of model misspecification. So far, we have
essentially conducted policy analysis under the assumption of risk-neutrality. That is, we
focused on expected variance differentials, ignoring the uncertainty associated with these
differentials. Figure 9 presents pointwise 90% credible intervals (dotted) for the weighted
variance differentials as a function of ψ1 . The solid gray and black lines correspond to the
expected values that have been depicted in Figure 8. While the mean differentials obtained
from the acknowledge misspecification analysis are similar to those from the analysis that
ignores model misspecification, the uncertainty is much larger in the former case. Hence, a
risk-averse policy maker has an additional rationale for avoiding a weak response to inflation.
She also has a much smaller incentive to increase the inflation response beyond the baseline
value of 2.75 because the expected gains in performance are outweighed by the uncertainty
once potential misspecification is taken into account.

37

5

Conclusion

The presence of misspecification in DSGE models raises two challenges for policymakers.
The first challenge is recovering the structural (non-policy) parameters. Direct estimation
of the DSGE model is generally conducted under the assumption that the DSGE is the
data generating process, e.g. that there are no serious misspecification issues. When this
assumption is violated, the parameter estimates can be misleading. In the case considered
here, a key non-policy parameter is the persistence of technology shocks ρz . DSGE model
estimation delivers an estimate of ρz close to one. If we believe that technology shocks are in
reality extremely persistent, direct estimation of the DSGE model is fine and we can proceed
with the policy analysis. If on the other hand we suspect that this estimate of ρz results
from misspecification, we may be suspicious of the policy implications. These implications
are that if the reaction to inflation in the policy rule drops below 1.5, and at the same time
the reaction to the output gap rises much above the historical value, the outcomes in terms
of the volatility of inflation and the interest rate are simply disastrous.
DSGE-VAR provides the policymakers with an alternative set of estimates. Under
DSGE-VAR, the DSGE is treated as a reference model around which the more loosely parameterized VAR is centered. While the non-policy parameters are still estimated as to
minimize deviations from the cross-equation restrictions, the penalty attached to these deviations (λ) is not infinity. As a consequence, the DSGE-VAR parameter estimates are
more influenced by the prior distribution than in the case of direct DSGE model estimation. This is an advantage of the DSGE-VAR procedure to the extent that the underlying
prior distribution for the DSGE model parameters has been specified in a careful manner, drawing information about key structural parameters from a larger set of observations
that are excluded from the likelihood function. Thus, in the presence of misspecification
the determination of the structural parameters in the DSGE model to some extent resembles parameterization strategies favored by the calibration literature, which emphasizes the
careful use of data sources that provide prima facie evidence on the model parameters.
A popular approach to DSGE model estimation in presence of misspecification is to
relax the cross-equation restrictions by adding free parameters to the model. This can be
done by adding more shocks, or by enriching the dynamics of the existing shocks. We
pursue both approaches and find that they indeed improve fit. They do not however affect
the estimates of ρz , that remain very close to 1. This could be seen as indirect evidence
that neither approach fully addresses the misspecification issue. In any case, this estimate

38

of ρz implies that the policy prescriptions remain very close to those of the DSGE model.
The second challenge is to address misspecification in the policy analysis. If we are confident that the DSGE model at hand, in spite of being misspecified, captures the relevant
policy trade-offs (see for instance the example in Kocherlakota (2006)), then misspecification might not be a concern. If one option is to ignore misspecification completely, an
alternative option is to ignore the cross-equation restrictions, and conduct policy analysis
with a backward-looking model. Our empirical analysis with the DSGE-VAR framework
casts some doubts on both extremes. On the one hand, we document that misspecification
is present and likely affects the key policy trade-offs. On the other hand, we find that in
dimensions that are important for policy analysis, such as the propagation of technology
shocks, the misspecification does not seem to be a concern.
If we decide to explicitly model misspecification, either in the structural (adding free
parameters) or in the vector autoregressive (DSGE-VAR) form, the key question is how misspecification interacts with policy. The structural approach treats the additional free parameters as policy invariant. Our DSGE-VAR approach treats misspecification matrices either
as policy invariant (policy-invariant misspecification analysis) or uses a prior distribution
for the post-intervention misspecification matrices that is centered at zero (acknowledgemisspecification analysis). The approaches considered in this paper capture different attitudes toward the Lucas critique. The structural approach makes sense only if the exogenous
dynamics are truly exogenous. The DSGE-VAR/policy-invariant misspecification analysis
is appealing only if one believes that the discrepancy matrices capture adjustments to the
dynamics that are insensitive to policy interventions. The DSGE-VAR/acknowledge misspecification approach is more agnostic, as it refuses to learn from past data about the
misspecification matrices, but shares the view that these matrices are not something we can
model explicitly. To some extent, this view can be justified by the following argument: If we
knew how to change the model to address misspecification, we should have done it already.
We have documented the challenges of performing policy analysis with a state-of-theart, albeit misspecified DSGE model and developed a framework that allows researchers and
policy makers to explore the sensitivity of policy predictions under a variety of assumptions
about the policy invariance of discrepancies between theory and data. Two lessons are
robust across all modes of policy analysis considered in this paper. First, deviating from
the baseline parameters of the feedback rule is unlikely to provide substantial improvements
over the estimated Volcker-Greenspan policy. Second, it appears undesirable to decrease
the response to inflation, or increasing the reaction to deviations of output from a long-run

39

trend path.

References
Adalid, Ramon, Günter Coenen, Peter McAdam, and Stefano Siviero (2005): “The Performance and Robustness of Interest-Rate Rules in Models of the Euro Area,” ECB
Working Paper, 479.
Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde (2002): “Technology Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
An, Sungbae and Frank Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric Reviews, forthcoming.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and G. Schou (1973): “On the Parameterization of Autoregressive
Models by Partial Autocorrelations,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 3, 408-419.
Bils, Mark, and Peter Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947-985.
Brainard, William (1967): “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,” American Economic Review, 57, 411-25.
Brock, William A., Steven N. Durlauf, and Kenneth D. West, 2004, “Model Uncertainty
and Policy Evaluation: Some Theory and Empirics.” Mimeo. University of Wisconsin.
Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “ Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe, Ellen McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Accounting,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Chow, Gregory C. (1975): Analysis and Control of Dynamic Economic Systems, John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113, 1-45.
Coenen, Günter (2003): “Inflation Persistence and Robust Monetary Policy Design,” ECB
Working Paper, 290.
Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas Sargent (2005): “The Conquest of U.S. Inflation: Learning
and Robustness to Model Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 528-563.
Craine, Roger (1979): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 1, 59-83.

40

Del Negro, Marco, and Frank Schorfheide (2004): “Priors from Equilibrium Models for
VARs,” International Economic Review, 45, 643-673.
Del Negro, Marco, and Frank Schorfheide (2005): “Policy Predictions if the Model Doesn’t
Fit,” Journal of the European Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 3, 434443.
Del Negro, Marco, and Frank Schorfheide (2006): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models (And
How it Affects the Assessment of Nominal Rigidities),” FRB Atlanta Working Paper,
2006-16.
Del Negro, Marco, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters (2007): “On the
Fit of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, 25,
123-143.
Eichenbaum, Martin and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2003): “Evaluating the Calvo Model of Sticky
Prices,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper 2003-23.
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, Thomas J. Sargent, and Mark Watson
(2007): “The A, B, C (and D’s) of VARs,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Giannoni, Marc (2002): “Does Model Uncertainty Justify Caution? Robust Optimal Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 6, 111-144.
Hansen, Lars P., and Thomas J. Sargent (2005): “Misspecification in Recursive Macroeconomic Theory,” Manuscript, New York University, Department of Economics.
Ireland, Peter (2004): “A Method for Taking Models to the Data,” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 28, 1205-1226.
Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio E. Primiceri (2006): “The Time Varying Volatility of
Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Manuscript, Northwestern University, Department of
Economics.
Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
Econometrica, 50, 1345-70.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2006): “Model Fit and Model Selection.” Federal Reserve Bank
of St.Louis Review, forthcoming.
Laforte, Jean-Phillipe (2003): “Comparing Monetary Policy Rules in an Estimated General Equilibrium Model of the U.S. Economy,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, Washington, DC.
Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams (1999): “Robustness of Simple
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in: John Taylor (ed): Monetary
Policy Rules, NBER Business Cycle Series, 31.

41

Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams (2003): “The Performance of
Forecast-Based Monetary Policy Rules Under Model Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 93, 622-645.
Levin, Andrew, and John C. Williams (2003): “Robust Monetary Policy with Competing
Reference Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 945-975.
Levin, Andrew, Alexei Onatski, John Williams, and Noah Williams (2006): “Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in Mark Gertler
and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, forthcoming.
McCallum, Bennett T. (1988): “Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 29, 173-204.
Onatski, Alexei and James H. Stock (2002): “Robust Monetary Policy under Model Uncertainty in a Small Model of the US Economy,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 6, 85-110.
Onatski, Alexei, and Noah Williams (2003): “Modeling Model Uncertainty,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 1, 1087-1022.
Poirier, Dale (1998): “Revising Beliefs in Nonidentified Models,” Econometric Theory, 14,
483-509.
Primiceri, Giorgio, Ernst Schaumburg, and Andrea Tambalotti (2006): ”Intertemporal
Disturbances,” NBER Working Paper No. 12243.
Rudebusch, Glenn (2001): “Is the Fed Too Timid? Monetary Policy in an Uncertain
World,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 203-217.
Rudebusch, Glenn (2002): “Assessing Nominal Income Rules for Monetary Policy with
Model and Data Uncertainty,” The Economic Journal, 112, 402-432.
Rudebusch, Glenn, and Lars Svenson (1999): “Policy Rules for Inflation Targeting,” in:
John Taylor (ed): Monetary Policy Rules, NBER Business Cycle Series, 31.
Sargent, Thomas (1989): “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97, 251-287.
Schorfheide, Frank (2000): “Loss-Function Based Evaluation of DSGE Models,” Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 15, 645-70.
Sims, Christopher A. (1986): “Are Forecasting Models Useable for Policy Analysis?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Winter, 2-16.
Sims, Christopher A. (1999): “The Role of Interest Rate Policy in the Generation and
Propagation of Business Cycles: What Has Changed Since the 30’s?,” Proceedings of
the 1998 Boston Federal Reserve Bank Annual Research Conference.
Sims, Christopher A. (2002): “Solving Rational Expectations Models,” Computational
Economics, 20(1-2), 1-20.

42

Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
1, 1123-75.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2006): “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles:
A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” Manuscript, European Central Bank.
Smith, Anthony (1993): “Estimating Nonlinear Time-Series Models Using Simulated Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8, S63-S84.
Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.
Taylor, John B. (1999): Monetary Policy Rules, NBER Business Cycles Series, 31.
Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton University Press, Princeton.

A

Appendix

We obtain all other series from Haver Analytics (Haver mnemonics are in italics). The
nominal rate corresponds to the annualized effective federal funds rate (FED), in percent.
Inflation is computed using quarter-to-quarter log-differences of the chained-price GDP deflator (JGDP), scaled by 400 to obtain annualized percentages. The output gap is defined
as the log difference of real GDP (nominal GDP divided by the chained-price deflator) and
the CBO’s real potential output (GDPPOTH). The log differences are scaled by 100 to convert them to percentages. Our measure of hours worked is computed by taking total hours
worked reported in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), which is at annual
frequency, and interpolating it using growth rates computed from hours of all persons in
the non-farm business sector (LXNFH). We divide hours worked by LN16N to convert them
into per capita terms. We then take the log of the series multiplied by 100 so that all figures
can be interpreted as percentage changes in hours worked. The labor share is computed by
dividing total compensation of employees (YCOMP) obtained from the NIPA by nominal
GDP. We then take the log of the labor share multiplied by 100.

43

Table 1: Prior and Posterior Moments

Name

Prior

(1)

(2)

DSGE

DSGE-VAR

Benchmark

λ = 0.75

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Generalized Shocks
AR(2)-in-gt

7-Shocks

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Policy Rule Parameters
ψ1

1.56

( 0.36)

2.71

( 0.35)

2.75

( 0.37)

2.49

( 0.44)

3.06

( 0.35)

ψ2

0.20

( 0.10)

0.09

( 0.04)

0.13

( 0.05)

0.12

( 0.07)

0.07

( 0.03)

ρr

0.50

( 0.20)

0.81

( 0.02)

0.85

( 0.02)

0.84

( 0.02)

0.85

( 0.02)

Nominal Rigidities
ζp

0.60

( 0.15)

0.76

( 0.04)

0.71

( 0.05)

0.77

( 0.05)

0.67

( 0.04)

ζw

0.60

( 0.15)

0.40

( 0.14)

0.45

( 0.09)

0.77

( 0.08)

0.34

( 0.08)

Preference Parameters
h

0.70

( 0.05)

0.80

( 0.04)

0.72

( 0.05)

0.66

( 0.06)

0.62

( 0.05)

νl

2.00

( 0.75)

1.29

( 0.48)

1.82

( 0.61)

2.05

( 0.72)

1.37

( 0.37)

Technology Parameters
α

0.35

( 0.05)

0.34

( 0.00)

0.34

( 0.01)

0.34

( 0.00)

0.34

( 0.00)

00

4.00

( 1.50)

11.19

( 2.23)

5.04

( 1.59)

7.31

( 2.11)

2.69

( 0.83)

a0

0.30

( 0.08)

0.28

( 0.08)

0.30

( 0.07)

0.30

( 0.07)

0.30

( 0.08)

S

Steady State Parameters
r∗a

1.00

( 0.40)

1.23

( 0.28)

0.99

( 0.35)

1.16

( 0.32)

0.85

( 0.30)

π∗a

4.01

( 2.00)

2.63

( 0.18)

2.51

( 0.27)

2.58

( 0.27)

2.43

( 0.25)

g∗

0.25

( 0.10)

0.19

( 0.08)

0.22

( 0.09)

0.19

( 0.08)

0.28

( 0.11)

44

Table 1: Prior and Posterior Moments (continued)

Name

Prior

(1)

(2)

DSGE

DSGE-VAR

Benchmark

λ = 0.75

(3)

(4)

(5)

Generalized Shocks
gt -in-AR(2)

(6)

7-Shocks

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.96

( 0.03)

0.96

( 0.02)

0.84

( 0.08)

Shock Autocorrelations
ρz

0.75

( 0.10)

0.97

( 0.02)

0.89

( 0.05)

ρg

0.75

( 0.10)

0.91

( 0.02)

0.88

( 0.05)

ρ̃g,1

(implicit)

0.97

( 0.01)

ρ̃g,2

(implicit)

-0.62

( 0.06)

ρλf

0.75

( 0.10)

0.72

( 0.07)

0.66

( 0.11)

0.78

( 0.07)

0.80

( 0.06)

ρφ

0.75

( 0.10)

0.75

( 0.10)

0.58

( 0.10)

0.30

( 0.14)

0.53

( 0.16)

ρµ

0.75

( 0.10)

0.91

( 0.03)

ρb

0.75

( 0.10)

0.94

( 0.04)

Shock Standard Deviations
σR

0.25

( 0.13)

0.16

( 0.01)

0.12

( 0.01)

0.15

( 0.01)

0.16

( 0.01)

σz

0.38

( 0.20)

0.72

( 0.05)

0.42

( 0.05)

0.75

( 0.06)

0.79

( 0.06)

σg

0.63

( 0.32)

0.65

( 0.06)

0.32

( 0.04)

0.29

( 0.04)

σ̃g

(implicit)

0.77

( 0.11)

σλf

0.19

( 0.10)

0.09

( 0.01)

0.09

( 0.01)

0.08

( 0.01)

0.10

( 0.01)

σφ

3.76

( 1.97)

3.11

( 1.72)

3.16

( 1.14)

19.90

( 7.66)

2.45

( 0.58)

σµ

0.95

( 0.57)

0.53

( 0.11)

σb

0.95

( 0.57)

0.56

( 0.11)

Hyperparameters for AR(2) Shocks
ξg

0.75

( 0.10)

0.90

( 0.04)

ωg

0.63

( 0.32)

0.63

( 0.09)

Notes: We report means and standard deviations (in parentheses). The parameters ρb ,
ρµ , σb , and σµ only enter the DSGE model with 7-shocks. The DSGE model with AR(2)
government spending shocks is parameterized as gt = ρ̃g,1 (1 − ρ̃g,2 )gt−1 + ρ̃g,2 gt−1 + σ̃g t
and we use a hierarchical prior of the form: p(ρ̃g,1 , ρ̃g,2 , σ̃g |ξg , ωg )p(ξg , ωg ). In the table we
report p(ξg , ωg ). The following parameters were fixed: δ = 0.025, γ = 1.5/400, λf = 0.15,
and λw = 0.3.

45

Table 2: Log Marginal Data Densities and Posterior Odds

Specification

ln p(Y ) Post Odds

DSGE Model, Benchmark Specification

-525.22

4.6E-48

DSGE-VAR (λ = λ̂ = 0.75)

-416.23

1.00

DSGE Model, Generalized Shocks: AR(2)-in-gt -495.66

3.2E-35

DSGE Model, Generalized Shocks: 7-shocks

2.2E-28

-479.92

Notes: The difference of log marginal data densities can be interpreted as log posterior
odds under the assumption of that the two specifications have equal prior probabilities. We
report odds relative to the DSGE-VAR in the third column of the table.

46

Figure 1: Impulse Responses: DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75) versus DSGE-VAR(∞)

Technology

Interest Rate

Inflation

Output Gap

0

0

0.4

−0.2

−0.2

0.2

−0.4
−0.4

0

Demand

0.4

0.4
0.4

0.2

Mark−up

0

0

0

0.4

0
0.4

0.2

−0.2

0.2

0

Preference

0.2

0.2

−0.4

0

0.4

0
0.4

0.2

−0.2

0.2

0

−0.4

0
0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

16

Notes: The figure depicts impulse responses from the DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75) (black) and the
DSGE-VAR(∞) (gray) based on the DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75) posterior estimates summarized
in columns (5,6) of Table 1.

47

Figure 2: Impulse Responses: Benchmark DSGE versus AR(2)-in-gt Model

Technology

Interest Rate

Inflation

Output Gap

0

0

0.4

−0.2

−0.2

0.2

−0.4

0

−0.4

−0.2

Demand

0.6
0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

Preference

Mark−up

−0.2

0
0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

−0.2
−0.4

0

0

4

8

12

16

−0.2
−0.4
0

4

8

12

16

0

4

8

12

16

Notes: The figure depicts impulse responses from the benchmark DSGE model (gray)
and the AR(2)-in-gt model (black) using the respective posterior estimates summarized
in columns (3,4) and (7,8) of Table 1.

48

Figure 3: Impulse Responses: Benchmark DSGE versus 7-Shocks Model

Inflation

Output Gap

0

1

−0.2

−0.5

0.5

−0.4

−1

0

0.4

0.5

1

0.2

0

0

0

−0.5

−1

0.5

1

0

0

0

−0.2

−0.5

−1

−0.4

1

1

0

0

0

−0.2

−1

−1

−0.4

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.2

0.2

0

0

0

−0.5

1

0.5

1

0.5

0

0.5

Investment

Discount

Preference

Mark−up

Demand

Technology

Interest Rate
0

0

0

4

8

12

16

−0.5

0

4

8

12

16

0

0

4

8

12

16

Notes: The figure depicts impulse responses from the benchmark DSGE model (gray) and
the 7-shocks model (black) using the respective posterior estimates summarized in columns
(3,4) and (7,8) of Table 1.

49

Figure 4: Benchmark DSGE Model Impulse Responses as Function of ψ1

Interest Rate

Inflation

Mark−up
Preference

Output Gap

0

1

−0.5
−0.5

0.5
−1

Demand

Technology

0

−1

−1.5

0

0.4

0.5

1

0.2

0

0.5
0
0

−0.5

−0.5

0.5

1

0

0.5
0

−0.1
0

−0.5

−0.5

−0.2

1

1

0

0.5

0.5

0

0

−0.2

−0.5

0

4

8

12

16

−0.5

0

4

8

12

16

−0.4

0

4

8

12

16

Notes: The figure plots the posterior mean of the DSGE model impulse responses computed
for three different values of the response to inflation in the policy rule, ψ1 : 2.75 (black), 2
(dark gray), and 1.25 (light gray). The remaining policy parameters ψ2 and ρR are kept
at the baseline values of 0.0625 and 0.8, respectively. For all impulse responses we use
the posterior estimates of the non-policy parameters θ(np) , summarized in columns (3,4) of
Table 1.

50

Figure 5: Comparative Performance of Policy Rules: Benchmark DSGE versus
DSGE-VAR(λ = 0.75) Parameter Estimates

25
20
15
10
5
0
−5
0.4
3

0.3
2.5

0.2
2
0.1
ψ2

1.5
0

1

ψ1

Notes: Posterior expected variance differentials as a function of ψ1 and ψ2 relative to baseline
policy rule ψ1 = 2.75, ψ2 = 0.0625. The remaining policy parameter ρR is kept at the
baseline value of 0.8. Negative differentials signify a variance reduction relative to baseline
rule. Differentials are computed using DSGE-VAR posterior (gray) and DSGE model (black)
posterior estimates of the non-policy parameters θ(np) , summarized in columns (3,4) and
(5,6) of Table 1.

51

Figure 6: Comparative Performance of Policy Rules: AR(2)-in-gt versus 7Shocks DSGE Model

25
20
15
10
5
0
−5
0.4
3

0.3
2.5

0.2
2
0.1
ψ2

1.5
0

1

ψ1

Notes: Posterior expected variance differentials as a function of ψ1 and ψ2 relative to baseline
policy rule ψ1 = 2.75, ψ2 = 0.0625. The remaining policy parameter ρR is kept at the
baseline value of 0.8. Negative differentials signify a variance reduction relative to baseline
rule. Differentials are computed for the AR(2)-in-gt (black) and 7-shocks (gray) model using
the respective posterior estimates, summarized in columns (7,8) and (9,10) of Table 1.

52

Figure 7: Comparative Performance of Policy Rules: Benchmark DSGE versus
DSGE-VAR/Backward-Looking Analysis

25
20
15
10
5
0
−5
0.4
3

0.3
2.5

0.2
2
0.1
ψ2

1.5
0

1

ψ1

Notes: Posterior expected variance differentials as a function of ψ1 and ψ2 relative to baseline
policy rule ψ1 = 2.75, ψ2 = 0.0625. The remaining policy parameter ρR is kept at the
historical values of 0.8. Negative differentials signify a variance reduction relative to baseline
rule. Differentials are computed under the DSGE-VAR/Backward-Looking analysis (black)
and the DSGE model (gray). For the latter we use the DSGE-VAR posterior estimates of
the non-policy parameters θ(np) , summarized in columns (5,6) of Table 1.

53

Figure

8:

Comparative

VAR/Acknowledge

Performance

Misspecification

of

and

Policy

Rules:

DSGE-

DSGE-VAR/Policy-Invariant

Misspecification Analysis

25
20
15
10
5
0
−5
0.4
3

0.3
2.5

0.2
2
0.1
ψ2

1.5
0

1

ψ1

Notes: Posterior expected variance differentials as a function of ψ1 and ψ2 relative to baseline policy rule ψ1 = 2.75, ψ2 = 0.0625. The remaining policy parameter ρR is kept at the
historical values of 0.8. Negative differentials signify a variance reduction relative to baseline rule. Differentials are computed under the DSGE-VAR/Acknowledge Misspecification
(black) and DSGE-VAR/Policy-Invariant Misspecification (gray) analysis.

54

Figure 9:

Performance Uncertainty:

Benchmark DSGE versus DSGE-

VAR/Acknowledge Misspecification Analysis

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

−2

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2
ψ1

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

Notes: Posterior expected variance differentials as a function of ψ1 relative to baseline policy
rule ψ1 = 2.75. The remaining policy parameters ψ2 and ρR are kept at their historical values of .0625 and .8, respectively. Negative differentials signify a variance reduction relative
to baseline rule. Differentials are computed under the DSGE-VAR/Acknowledge Misspecification approach (black) and the DSGE model (gray). For the latter we use the DSGE-VAR
posterior estimates of the non-policy parameters θnp . Dash-and-dotted lines represent 90%
posterior bands.

