                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ASSESSING CHINA'S EXCHANGE RATE REGIME

                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                            Shang-Jin Wei

                                        Working Paper 13100
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13100


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




The authors would like to thank Yuanyuan Chen, Ellis Connolly and Chang Hong for outstanding
research assistance; and to thank for comments Jahangir Aziz, Morris Goldstein, Jianxiong He, Yun
Jung Kim, Sunyoung Lee, Katharine Moon, and John Williamson. Frankel would also like to thank
the Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and Government for support and to thank a number of
officials in the Clinton and (current) Bush Treasury Departments, at all levels, for discussion regarding
the biannual reports to Congress. The paper represents the personal views of the authors and not those
of any of the institutions with which they are affiliated.

© 2007 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Assessing China's Exchange Rate Regime
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 13100
May 2007
JEL No. F3,F59,O1

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines two related issues: (a) the implicit methodology used by the U.S. Treasury in
determining whether China and America's other trading partners manipulate their exchange rates, and
(b) the nature of the Chinese exchange rate regime since July 2005. On the first issue, we investigate
the roles of economic variables consistent with the IMF definition of manipulation - the partners' overall
current account/GDP, its reserve changes, and the real overvaluation of its currency - but also some
variables suggestive of American domestic political considerations -- the bilateral trade balance, US
unemployment, and an election year dummy. The econometric results suggest that the Treasury verdicts
are driven heavily by the US bilateral deficit, though other variables also turn out to be quite important.
On the issue of China's de facto exchange rate regime, we apply the technique introduced by Frankel
and Wei (1994) to estimate implicit basket weights, adding several refinements. Within 2005, the de
facto regime remained a peg to the dollar. However, there was a modest but steady increase in flexibility
subsequently. We test whether US pressure has promoted RMB flexibility. We also test whether the
recent appreciation against the dollar is due to a trend appreciation against the reference basket or
a declining weight on the dollar in the reference basket, and suggest that they have different policy
implications.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund
Room 10-700
19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
and NBER
swei@imf.org
1. INTRODUCTION

         The issue of the regime governing the Chinese exchange rate—and specifically
the question whether the currency is moving away from the de facto peg that for ten years
has tied it to the US dollar—is much more than just another application, to a particular
country, of the long-time question of fixed versus floating exchange rates. It is a key
global monetary issue. It bears directly on China’s surpluses in the current account and
in the overall balance of payments, which are major counterparts to US deficits. The
question even bears more broadly on what may well become one of the key issues of
international political economy in the 21st century, perhaps the primary such issue: the
rise of China and its likely long-run challenge to the global hegemony of the United
States.
         Exchange rate regimes in emerging markets have been a primary concern of
international economists and policy-makers since the 1990s cycle of record capital flows
to these countries followed by widespread crises. Most emerging market countries
switched to more flexible exchange rate regimes in that episode. China is by far the
largest developing country to continue to cling to a currency peg even after the Argentine
and Turkish crises of 2001. That may have something to do with two considerations: the
peg appears to have served China well, and that country was one of the few in Asia not to
succumb to the crises of 1997-98. Indeed, it was praised by the United States and others
at the time for not letting its currency devalue. The Chinese currency, known both as the
yuan and the Renminbi (“People’s currency”), stayed fixed against the dollar into the new
phase of capital inflows to emerging markets that began around 2003.
         It is another angle, however, that gives global urgency to the issue of the yuan-
dollar exchange rate. The attention of policy-makers and researchers in international
economics in the current decade has switched to the large and rising deficits that the
United States is running in its current account and overall balance of payments. The
emerging markets have by now grown so large that they are major players in the world
economy. This is particularly true of China, which is on track to surpass Germany
around 2008 as the world’s third largest economy, even if GDP is evaluated at current
exchange rates. China’s importance in net international financial flows is even greater.
The counterparts to those rising US external deficits are surpluses among Asian countries
and major oil producers – rather than in Europe, as in the 1960s. Of these surplus
countries, China has received by far the most attention.
         There is a rapidly growing literature on the positive question of what are the
causes of the Chinese surpluses (e.g., Prasad and Wei, 2005), as well as on the normative
question of whether China should move to a more flexible exchange rate, either in its
own interest, or in the interest of others, or both. The present paper does not deal with
these issues. For what it is worth, we, like many others, come down on the side that
China should increase its exchange rate flexibility in its own interest, but that the US
deficits should not be blamed on China.




                                                                                        2
         The present paper deals, instead, with two questions that, while perhaps appearing
narrow and technical, lie at the heart of the debate. First, do the bi-annual U.S. Treasury
reports to Congress base their findings with regard to whether China and other trading
partners are “manipulating” their currencies on “manipulation” in the sense of the IMF
Articles of Agreement? Or, rather, on criteria that come from domestic American
politics? Second, is the precise exchange rate regime that China has put into place since
2005 a genuine departure from the earlier dollar peg, in the direction of flexibility? Is it
targeted on a reference basket, with the genuine possibility of cumulatable daily
appreciations, as was announced at the time?
         The question of US findings regarding manipulation and the question of the
nature of the current Chinese regime are directly connected. The connections run in both
directions. Going from the first question to the second, the US political pressure has been
fairly intense, and appears to have been an important factor behind the 2005
announcement of a change in policy, notwithstanding attempts by China’s leaders to
avoid the appearance of being swayed by the US push. In the paper, we attempt to find
timing connections between US political rhetoric and Chinese steps toward flexibility.
Going in the opposite direction, if China has not in fact changed its de facto pegging
policy, as it has its official policy, such a finding might provide ammunition for a
renewed US campaign, particularly in the form of threatened Congressional legislation.
If, on the other hand, the change in regime was genuine, perhaps the RMB/dollar problem
is already being gradually solved, with no need for further outside intervention.
         The headline empirical findings for each of our two questions might not be
surprising to some knowledgeable experts and insiders. But in both cases the findings are
at odds with what routinely appears in the press, even the highest quality financial press,
which often reports at face value both the U.S. Treasury findings regarding manipulation
and the Chinese government’s announcements regarding moves toward increased
exchange rate flexibility. And in the case of the estimated weights in the new currency
basket, even most experts are unable to guess correctly the identities of the non-dollar
currencies to which the Chinese authorities have gradually shifted.

1.1 The US Treasury as a catalyst for RMB speculation

         Political pressure from the US Treasury may have played a role in the origin of
the entire economic question of yuan appreciation. Although China had already been
running (small) balance of payments surpluses for several years before September 2003,
there had not been a tremendous amount of speculation, either in the press or in the
markets, regarding the possibility of yuan appreciation. Figure 1 shows the forward
exchange rates from the NDF (Non-Deliverable Forwards) market. The yuan had
actually been selling at a small forward discount against the dollar. Then, in October,
2003, it flipped to a forward premium. If we can use words that anthropomorphize the
market, before October 2003 the NDF market expected future depreciation, but after that
date it came to expect future appreciation. What happened around that time? In


                                                                                          3
September 2003, Treasury Secretary John Snow traveled to China to meet with its
leaders. He was reported to have browbeaten them over the currency issue and to have
extracted a promise eventually to allow the RMB to trade freely on international markets.
On September 24, he successfully enlisted the support of the G-7 at a meeting in Dubai
behind a new position for increased exchange rate flexibility, aimed at China. On
October 1, Undersecretary John Taylor testified before Congress in favor of a more
flexible RMB. On October 30, the semi-annual Treasury report was released to Congress
with the finding for the first time in nine years that concerns regarding China’s currency
merited bilateral negotiations. Secretary John Snow’s accompanying testimony repeated
“China now has an opportunity to show leadership on the important global issue of
exchange rate flexibility." In short, the timing is right to implicate the US Treasury in the
flipped sign that appears in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Prices of Non Deliverable Forwards (NDFs) Around the Time Official US
Pressure Began
                            Spot and Forward Rates of USD/RMB
   8.4
   8.2
   8
   7.8
   7.6




    04/07/03    10/15/03                   12/31/04     07/22/05                         01/08/07
                                                 date

                                       spot                   1-month
                                       3-month                12-month




The forward premium started out small, but widened substantially in 2004. By July
2005, the one-year forward rate had moved to 8 yuan per dollar (a 3 per cent forecasted
revaluation that was soon realized). The rate of accumulation of reserves by the People’s
Bank of China, i.e., the balance of payments, surplus accelerated thereafter, without a
concomitant rise in the trade balance or in foreign direct investment. In other words,
much of the increase in the BOP surpluses is explained by inflows of (unmeasured)
portfolio capital including a dramatic reversal of Chinese capital flight (Prasad and Wei,
2005). The implication of the timing in Figure 1 was that the Treasury campaign may


                                                                                           4
have been the catalyst for speculation that underlay these portfolio inflows – speculation
regarding future appreciation.
       This is not to say that the Treasury campaign was necessarily the fundamental
underlying cause of the speculative capital inflows. In the first place, it is reasonable to
assume that the opposition political party, particularly candidates in the US presidential
campaign of 2004, who subsequently picked up the theme, would have done so even in
the absence of Administration initiatives, and that the latter were indeed an attempt to
preempt the former. In the second place, the economic fundamentals -- particularly
productivity growth differentials and current account surpluses in China and deficits in
the United States -- pointed in the direction of an eventual decline in the yuan/dollar rate
and speculators would sooner or later have noticed this. But it is interesting to
“speculate” that China’s speculative inflows and soaring reserve levels, which became
the world’s highest in 2006, might have been substantially more moderate were it not for
the US public pressure.

1.2 Origins of the language of manipulation

         Article IV of the IMF Articles of Agreement deals with Obligations Concerning
Exchange Arrangements. After the Members of the Fund ratified the move to floating
exchange rates in the Jamaica Communiqué of January 1976, they agreed a framework
for mutual surveillance under what is called the “1977 Decision on Surveillance over
Exchange Rate Policies,” and they amended Article IV in 1978. Principle (A) of the
1977 Decision and Clause 3 of Section 1 of Article IV both require that each member
shall “avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to
prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive
advantage over other members.” In theory, the obligation is meant to fall on countries
seeking to keep the values of their currencies down so as to preserve a balance of
payments surplus, as much as to those seeking to keep the values of their currencies up
thereby preserving a balance of payments deficit.1 In practice, however, the economic
and political pressure on a surplus country to allow the value of its currency to adjust
upward has always been far less than the pressure on a deficit country to allow the value
of its currency to adjust downward. Many countries have been pushed into devaluing or
floating downward. There have been very few cases – and no important ones – of
countries having been successfully pushed into revaluing or floating upward since the end
of the Bretton Woods system.
         The once-obscure question of Chinese exchange rate policy is today one of the
hottest topics in the world of international monetary policy issues. The United States has

1
 International Monetary Fund (2006b, p. 15): “…the term ‘in order to prevent balance of payments
adjustment’ is sufficiently broad to cover situations where a member is manipulating its exchange rate in a
manner that makes it either overvalued or undervalued.”




                                                                                                          5
since 2003 been pressuring China to abandon its peg to the dollar and allow the renminbi
(RMB) to appreciate, and some have claimed that China’s refusal to do so constitutes
unfair manipulation of the currency for competitive advantage. The motivation evidently
stems from concerns over the US trade deficit, where China is following closely in the
path of scapegoat that was earlier tread by Japan and Korea. American firms that have
trouble competing against China are of course a source of political pressure. The Chinese
have largely resisted the pressure to appreciate, even though many economists think an
abandonment of the peg may be in their own interest.2
         The meaning of the word “manipulation” is open to dispute, since it plays no role
in economic theory. The 1977 Decision refers to the intent behind the actions of the
authorities. Some claim that a country that has in the past made the decision to fix its
exchange rate cannot now be accused of manipulation. No deliberate action has been
taken. Etymologically, the root of the word is the Latin for “hand,” which suggests active
steps rather than a passive acceptance of developments. In this view, if a country opts to
peg, it cannot be accused of manipulation. This is so even when future developments
leave the currency “undervalued,” whether because such factors as the Balassa-
Samuelson effect or low inflation have rendered a once-appropriate exchange rate level
no longer appropriate, or because the anchor currency, in this case the dollar, has in the
meantime depreciated against other relevant currencies. A fixed exchange rate is a
legitimate choice for any country under Article IV. It is pointed out that smaller countries
with long-time fixed exchange rates, say the Cote d’Ivoire, would never be accused of
manipulation.
         Some, on the other side, claim that China’s decision to cling to a peg when the
currency could as easily be allowed to appreciate is a deliberate choice with the intent to
gain competitive advantage on world markets, and that it frustrates balance of payments
adjustment, with adverse effects on the rest of the world (e.g., Goldstein, 2003, 2004; and
Goldstein and Lardy, 2003, 2005). They point out that the 1977 Decision specifically
lists “protracted large-scale intervention in one direction in the exchange market” as one
of the criteria that the Fund shall consider “as among those which might indicate the need
for discussion” with a member over its exchange rate policy.
         Although the U.S. Treasury must report to Congress biannually regarding whether
individual trading partners are manipulating currencies for unfair advantage, it has
resisted Congressional pressure to name China as an outright currency manipulator.
Part 2 of this paper tests econometrically two competing hypotheses regarding the
determinants of the Treasury decisions. (1) The first hypothesis is that the determinants
are legitimate economic variables. (2) The second hypothesis is that the determinants are
variables suggestive of domestic American political expediency. The econometric results

2
 Frankel (2006a) presents the arguments, and gives other references to recent writings. In its Article IV
consultation of October 2006, the International Monetary Fund took the position that the RMB was
undervalued as well.




                                                                                                            6
suggest that the Treasury verdicts are driven heavily by the US bilateral deficit with the
country in question, though some of the other legitimate variables also turn out to be
quite important. Partly as a result, China runs a relatively high danger of being named a
manipulator.
        An interesting question in international law arises. On the one hand, the US
Congress did legally mandate that the bilateral balance should be an important
consideration. On the other hand, the bilateral balance does not appear as a criterion in
1977 Decision or Article IV of the International Monetary Fund, the original source of
the “manipulation” language. The Fund, rather, emphasizes instead the factors described
as “legitimate economic variables” under (1) above. We shall return at the end to the
potential importance of manipulation definitions that diverge between the United States
and the Fund.

1.3 The new regime

        China announced the switch to a new exchange rate regime in July 2005. The
exchange rate – after a minor initial revaluation of 2.1%--would be set with reference to a
basket of other currencies (with numerical weights unannounced), allowing a movement
of up to +/- .3% in bilateral exchange rates within any given day. In theory this daily
band could cumulate at the maximum to a strong trend of 6.4% per month, which would
require both that movement among the major currencies is low and that the Chinese
authorities make maximum use of the 0.3% band. In practice, the cumulative trend has
been only a small fraction of this.3 The trend has been dwarfed by movements in the
dollar against the euro, yen, and other currencies, as Figure 2 shows.
        Although the announced change in official policy was originally taken at face
value in public policy circles, it is clear that, at least for the remainder of 2005, the
currency remained closely linked to the dollar. More recently, the RMB has indeed
started to give some weight to some other currencies with the result that the cumulating
trend against the dollar has gradually accelerated, but the process is very slow.
        The second econometric task of this paper is to analyze precisely what exchange
rate regime China put in place after July 2005. We take account of the likelihood that the
regime has evolved even over the short span of time since then. Fortunately, abundant
exchange rate data are available daily, or even intra-daily, which makes it possible to
answer the question. The basic approach uses the technique introduced by Frankel and
Wei (1994): one regresses changes in the value of the local currency, in this case the
RMB, against changes in the values of the dollar, euro, yen, and other currencies that are

3
 A cumulative 6 % appreciation of the RMB against the dollar by the end of 2006 – 1/17th of the
maximum possible trend—has been widely reported. But this number fails to distinguish between
appreciation against a basket and appreciation against the dollar due to changes in the cross rates of
currencies within the basket. Indeed, the effective exchange rate has hardly changed at all during this
period.




                                                                                                          7
candidate constituents of the basket. If China is following a perfect basket peg, it should
be easy to recover precise estimates of the weights. The fit should be perfect, an extreme
rarity in econometrics (the standard error of the regression should be zero, and R2 =
100%). More likely, the basket peg is not perfect, but one can still expect to estimate the
weights with fairly tight standard errors. The real questions are how wide the band is,
how great is the estimated weight on non-dollar currencies, and how strong is the trend
term.

Figure 2: Value of the Yuan in terms of other major currencies: Whole Sample
                                    Exchange Rate of USD,JPY, EUR per CNY, 7/1/2005-1/8/2007
                  1.15
   Per CNY (July 21, 2005 =1)
       1      1.05.95   1.1




                        01 Jul 05           01 Jan 06                    01 Jul 06             01 Jan 07
                                                              date

                                                        USD                  JPY
                                                        EUR




2. DOES THE US TREASURY BASE DETERMINATION OF MANIPULATION
ON VALID ECONOMICS OR POLITICAL EXPEDIENCY?

        Since they were first mandated in 1988, there have been 31 biannual reports from
the U.S. Treasury regarding whether individual trading partners – particularly those in
Asia—were manipulating currencies for unfair advantage. In recent years, parallel to
calls from American politicians to allow the RMB to appreciate against the dollar, the
Treasury has recommended policy changes and indicated that it has commenced
discussions with the Chinese government. There has been speculation that the Treasury
could go to the next step, and name China as an outright currency manipulator, as it did
in the early 1990s, and as it did to Korea and Taiwan, Province of China in the late
1980s. This part of the paper seeks to test two competing hypotheses: (1) that the
Treasury decisions are determined by legitimate economic variables – the partners’
overall current account/GDP, its reserve changes, and the real overvaluation of its


                                                                                                   8
currency, and (2) that the Treasury decisions are determined by variables suggestive of
domestic American political expediency—US unemployment, an election year dummy,
and the bilateral trade balance.4
        An alternative use for the estimated equation is to try to predict what the Treasury
can be expected to find in a given report, if it acts in accord with its past behavior. The
ex ante prediction of a probit version of the model was that there was a 40 percent chance
that China would be named as a currency manipulator in April 2006 (it wasn’t), and a 99
per cent chance that it would at least be reported as meriting bilateral discussions (it was).

2.1 Brief History of the Semi-Annual Treasury Reports

        The US Congress mandated in its Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of
1988 biannual reports from the U.S. Treasury regarding whether trading partners were
manipulating currencies. More specifically, in Section 3004, the Treasury is required to
“consider whether countries manipulate the rate of exchange between their currency and
the United States dollar for purposes of preventing effective balance of payments
adjustments or gaining unfair competitive advantage in international trade.'' The law says
the U.S. must hold talks with governments deemed to be breaking the rules. Fred
Bergsten had originally instigated in 1986 the idea of pushing the newly industrialized
economies of Asia to revalue, at a time when a large depreciation of the dollar against the
yen and other traditional major currencies had not yet produced the promised
improvement in the US trade balance. The US campaign was successful in persuading
Korea and Taiwan to let their currencies appreciate in the late 1980s.5
        In the first of the Reports to Congress on International Economics and Exchange
Rate Policy, filed in October 1988, two economies, Korea and Taiwan, Province of
China, were found to be guilty of manipulation. Singapore and Hong Kong SAR “got
off with a warning” in that policy changes were recommended. In subsequent years, the
countries pronounced manipulators, or given warnings, have always been Asian. From
May 1992 to July 1994 China was the primary target. Ironically, in January 1994, China
engineered a devaluation of its official exchange rate against the US dollar, unifying its
dual exchange rate system. In the late 1990s, the mechanism fell somewhat into disuse:
none of the countries investigated in 1996 was found to be a problem, and the Treasury
reports were not filed at all after January 1997, until January 1999. These were the years

4
  In an exercise roughly analogous to this one, Noland (1997) found that bilateral trade imbalances explain
the judgments of partners’ trade policies that are made in annually mandated reports to Congress by the US
Trade Representative.
5
  For the Korean case, see Bergsten (1989) and Frankel (1993a, b). There was an earlier precedent in the
Yen-dollar talks of 1983-84, in which the US Treasury pressured Japan to open its capital markets, with the
motive of allowing appreciation of the yen, and reducing the pattern of capital flowing from surplus Japan
to deficit America (Frankel, 1984).




                                                                                                          9
of the East Asia crises, in which the concern had abruptly shifted to whether countries
had been artificially keeping the value of their currencies too high rather than too low.
From May 2002 to May 2003, Treasury did not even identify any countries as having
been investigated. During this period, judged from the black market exchange rates on
China’s streets, the RMB was deemed overvalued. (A table in the appendix to this paper
lists the findings of all the Treasury reports, according to our classification scheme.)
         The intense pressure on China from American politicians of both parties to
revalue its currency upward began in 2003. There are plenty of good arguments pro and
con, whether China should move in the direction of increasing exchange rate flexibility
and/or allowing its currency to appreciate. This is true whether the criterion is China’s
own economic interest, or facilitating an orderly unwinding of record global current
account imbalances. But it is clear that much of the pressure coming from the United
States is political, tied to the record US trade deficits and loss of jobs in manufacturing.6
         The response of the U.S. Treasury has been measured. But ever since October
2003—as the U.S. entered a presidential election year—two countries have again been
designated in its semi-annual reports as meriting recommendations or discussion: China
plus one other, either Japan or Malaysia. As already noted, China announced a change in
exchange rate regime in July 2005, an abandonment of its de facto peg against the dollar.
But perhaps in recognition that not that much had yet changed in reality, the Treasury
gave China the same designation in its report of November 2005.
         Next came the report of April 2006.7 Speculation mounted that the Treasury was
likely to name China a manipulator outright. The domestic political pressure to do so
was strong. Congressmen had entered what is usually considered an arcane subject, a
trading partner’s exchange rate regime. The Schumer-Graham bill, originally proposed
in February 2005, has received the most attention. It would impose WTO-illegal tariffs
of 27.5 percent against all Chinese goods if China does not substantially revalue its
currency. On March 28, 2006, Senators Baucus and Grassley proposed another bill
substituting the phrase “currency misalignment” in place of “unfair manipulation.”
Schumer and Graham subsequently withdrew their bill and suggested that they might
return with a WTO-legal version.8 When the Treasury released its report, it did not

6
  Bergsten (2006), Frankel (2005, 2006a), Goldstein (2003, 2004), Goldstein and Lardy (2003, 2005), and
Roubini (2007) are among those in favor of increased flexibility and/or revaluation for the yuan.
McKinnon (2006), McKinnon and Schnabl (2003, 2004), Mundell (2004) and Cooper (2005) are among
those opposed.
7
 Dated May. In fact the reports are often submitted a little later than they are officially due. Perhaps busy
Treasury officials do not relish devoting resources to producing a document that, at best, is ignored, and, at
worst, becomes the grist for attacks by grandstanding Congressmen.
8
 By now Schumer and Graham have backed off approximately three times: first after a weeklong visit to
China where they became more familiar with the situation; second after China’s July 2005 announcement
of a change in regime, and third in 2006 when Henry Paulson was named Treasury Secretary.




                                                                                                           10
ratchet up China’s designation to “manipulator.” The result was again the same in the
subsequent report released in December 2006.
        We now examine the statistical pattern of designations in the historical record
since 1988. This allows a bottom line prediction of what the Treasury is likely to do in
the future if it follows the pattern of its predecessors. The primary goal of this section,
however, is to assess two different interpretations of the driving force behind the
Treasury reports. First, one could take the 1988 legislation and the subsequent reports at
face value, as an attempt to evaluate the economics of currency undervaluation. The IMF
Articles of Agreement prohibit member countries from manipulating their currencies for
their own competitive advantage. (That not only the phrase “manipulation” but also the
phrase “unfair competitive advantage” appears in the 1977 Decision and in the revised
Article IV illustrates that these were themselves politically-negotiated documents.9) The
IMF has seldom in practice exercised this sort of surveillance. Only twice has the IMF
found that a country has deliberately undervalued its currency, while it has found
hundreds of cases of countries overvaluing their currencies. Thus one could interpret the
US Congress and Treasury as stepping in to enforce this principle on their own, in the
absence of IMF action. The biannual Treasury reports submitted during the period when
John Snow was secretary have included Appendices that are thoughtfully written to
explain the economics of exchange rates and trade balances, and the way the Department
makes its decisions. U.S. Treasury (2005, Appendix) lists six important indicators that
factor into its decision. They include trade and current account balances, rapid foreign
exchange reserve accumulation, and measures of undervaluation and real effective
exchange rate movements. The list explicitly does not include bilateral trade balances
among the criteria, and even explains why they are not economically relevant.
        Second, one could interpret the biannual reports as a manifestation of political
pressures within the United States. While economists do not believe that bilateral trade
deficits are of much economic significance, they clearly do matter politically. Bilateral
deficits are blamed for loss of US jobs, especially in manufacturing, and politicians
compete to see who can use the tougher rhetoric. The focus was on Japan 20 years ago
and Korea 15 years ago. The spotlight is now on China, with India perhaps waiting in the
wings, auditioning for the scapegoat role. (Fortunately the actual policy actions of
whoever holds the White House tend to some extent to be tempered by offsetting
lobbying from US firms that benefit from cheap imports and by realities of international
economics and politics.)
        To accept this framework and the test of the two hypotheses, it is not necessary
either to accept or reject the claim that the three variables that refer to the partner country
are the ones that capture good economic logic. It is also not necessary either to accept or

9
   Boughton (2001, p. 68). The leitmotif over the decades in negotiations over the world monetary system
is that the US has favored free-floating exchange rates and the French have opposed them. The history of
the 1970s negotiations is in de Vries (1986).




                                                                                                      11
reject that an appreciation of the yuan by itself would have little effect on the overall US
trade balance (because the downward effect on the bilateral deficit with China would be
largely offset by upward effects on the bilateral balances with other developing countries)
and would have still less effect on US employment (because the US growth rate is
determined in the long run by the capacity of the economy and in the medium run by the
Federal Reserve, which is prepared to limit the rate of growth of demand to maintain
price stability).

2.2 Econometric Investigation of Determinants of Treasury Findings

         As already noted, we use three variables to capture the first hypothesis, that the
Treasury findings are motivated by genuine international economics: the overall current
account surplus of the trading partner (as a percent of its GDP), the change in the
partner’s reserve holdings (using its GDP as the scale variable, along with a few
alternative denominators), and the value of the partner currency (relative to the IMF’s
concept of the PPP exchange rate). We also use three variables to capture the second
hypothesis, that the reports are motivated by American politics: the bilateral balance of
the United States with the partner in question, the US unemployment rate, and a dummy
variable for a presidential election year.
         The sample consists of 63 US trading partner countries, observed in each of the
31 reports through November 2005. This estimation is updated through the end of 2006
in the final version of this paper to be published in Economic Policy. We also in that
version report clustered standard errors.

       The variable to be explained is ordinal, defined as follows:

0 = country not investigated
1 = examined as a potential manipulator
2 = policy changes recommended / conducting discussions
3 = found to be manipulating its exchange rate.

        The results are reported in the tables. There is evidence for both hypotheses.
The variables that an economist would recognize as legitimate have a statistically
significant effect on the decisions in the Treasury reports – the partners’ overall current
account/GDP, the overvaluation of its currency relative to PPP, and sometimes its reserve
changes. The results for the reserves variable—essentially the balance of payments
surplus—are uneven, in some cases showing up insignificant or with the wrong sign.
(Table 3 suggests that the best scale variable for the change in reserves is GDP, not the
level of imports or the level of reserves itself.)
        But variables that an economist would not recognize as legitimate also matter. In
particular the bilateral trade balance is the most consistently and strongly significant. It is
generally significant at the 1% level of significance (or “99% level of confidence” ). The


                                                                                            12
US unemployment rate is often significant, at the 5 or 10 % significance level, but not
always. When a dummy variable for a US presidential election year appears, it, like the
others, is of the hypothesized sign; but it is not statistically significant. When the
presidential election dummy is interacted with US unemployment, it comes closer to
statistical significance. There were only five presidential elections during this period, so
lack of observations may explain the lack of statistical significance.
         Overall, three aspects of the regression results suggest that the domestic political
variables are more important determinants of the Treasury decision than the legitimate
global manipulation criteria: the absence of a clear role for reserve accumulation by the
partner country as mandated by the IMF criteria, the significance of US unemployment,
and the very high significance of the bilateral balance notwithstanding that Treasury
(2005) deliberately excludes this indicator from its list of criteria. If it was the IMF
interpreting the criteria in the Articles of Agreement, rather than the Treasury interpreting
the criteria in the 1988 US law, then consistent uni-directional intervention in the foreign
exchange market would receive a lot more emphasis, and the US-specific variables such
as the bilateral trade balance and US unemployment would not appear at all.
         It should be noted that the law governing the Treasury reports mandates both sorts
of tests: “If the Secretary considers that such manipulation is occurring with respect to
countries that (1) have material global current account surpluses; and (2) have significant
bilateral trade surpluses with the United Sates, the Secretary of the Treasury shall take
action to initiate negotiations…” In that sense, to interpret evidence (that the bilateral
balance numbers drive the Treasury decision to accuse a country of manipulation) as
political, requires assigning the political motivation to the Congress, which passed the
law, rather than to the Treasury that merely has to follow it. Alternatively, one could
argue that the legally operative criterion lies in the interpretation of the ambiguous word
“manipulation,” that many of the 185 members of the IMF currently satisfy conditions (1)
and (2) above – most of whom are never mentioned in the Treasury reports—and that
therefore Treasury does genuinely have the latitude necessary to exercise its judgment.
Others, however, would argue that the phrase “material global current account surpluses”
means that the country in question must have a big share of the global surplus, as China
does but Cote d’Ivoire does not, to qualify as a manipulator.
         American politicians could come to regret it, if China finally followed their
advice, because the result could well be an abrupt upward movement in US interest rates
when the Chinese authorities stopped intervening in the market by buying dollar
securities. The same could be the result if the Chinese authorities were to switch the
composition of their reserves away from the dollar, perhaps in line with the ongoing shift
in the currency composition of their reference basket away from the dollar. For these
reasons, if the political pressure on the Treasury from the Congress to name China a
manipulator is intense, the Treasury has the option to invoke the provision in the last
sentence of Section 3004: “The Secretary shall not be required to initiate negotiations in
cases where such negotiations would have a serious detrimental impact on vital national
economic and security interests…” The Secretary may also explain to Congress that the


                                                                                          13
detrimental economic impact would fall on his ability to sell Treasury securities (and the
detrimental security impact would fall on the US Government’s ability to enlist China’s
help on higher priority goals such as defusing the North Korean nuclear threat).
        A third hypothesis should also be noted: that the US Treasury (in any
administration) walks a fine line. On the one hand, it needs to placate vote-conscious
Congressmen who are in danger of passing protectionist legislation more damaging than
anything likely to come out of a Treasury report. On the other hand, it needs to take into
account the constraints of international diplomacy (too much pressure on China would
backfire politically) and of international markets (the danger of sparking a hard landing
for the dollar, in which the dollar falls abruptly, interest rates rise, and securities prices
fall).
        It appears that the Treasury is eager not to single out one country for unique
opprobrium. There has never been a case where a single country is left completely
exposed on its own. Table 5 indicates that, other things equal, the country with the top
ranking in terms of the combination of economic and political variables is less likely to
be named than if it had some other country to hide behind, while the second-ranked and
third-ranked countries are more likely to be moved up, to give the leader company.
These results are highly significant statistically.

2.3 Predictions of Who Is Named by the Treasury Report

        An alternative use for the equation is to ask the question what the Treasury could
ex ante have been expected to find in its report due (for example) April 2006, if it acted
in accord with its past behavior.10 The values for the April 2006 report, predicted by the
linear equation based on recent data, were as follows

China                                                     1.62
Japan                                                     0.57
Korea                                                     0.14
Malaysia                                                  0.36
Taiwan, Province of China                                 0.17.

        The 1.62 value for China in April 2006 suggests a relatively high probability that
China would be named a manipulator. But the equation still needs to be refined.. The
linear equation predicts that China will most likely not be named a manipulator, and
rather classified only as meriting bilateral discussions.11 How can the highest predicted
score of the entire sample period be so low? The problem probably lies in part in the

10
     This section of the paper will be omitted from the published version, to save space.
11
  This is the equation that does not allow for the results in Table 5, which suggest that Japan may be
elevated to give China company.




                                                                                                         14
relatively low R2 and in part in the functional form, which is linear despite the limited
dependent variable.
         A more appropriate functional form, especially if the equation is to be used to
predict the probability that China will be named a manipulator, is the Probit, which is
suitable for prediction of probabilities in circumstances where the variable to be
explained is dichotomous. An event either happens or does not happen. (The domain of
the function maps into the appropriate 0-to-1 range.) This is our next step.
         Table 6 reports the results of the probit model. In the probit formulation US
unemployment emerges as highly significant. In the first two columns, the dependent
variable has been defined more simply as 1 for countries named manipulators and 0 for
all others. The lower half of the table lists the 10 countries with the highest predicted
scores for April 2006. The first column of the table reports results based on all 63
countries. As a result, half of the countries that appear in the top ten are oil-exporters.
Yet Treasury chooses as a matter of deliberate policy not to report oil exporters as
manipulators. So a more appropriate specification is to exclude the oil exporters, which
is done in the second column of the table. In this specification, four variables are
statistically significant and of the right sign—two each, under the political hypothesis
(bilateral balance and US unemployment) and the economic hypothesis (partner’s current
account ratio, and partner’s exchange rate overvaluation). The prediction in the lower
half of the table gives China a 40 percent chance of being found a manipulator. The right
half of the table shows the analogous equation that defines the probit event as a finding
that the partner merits at least a recommendation of policy changes or conducting
discussions. Here the probability that China will be so classified rises to 99 percent.
Running a distant second, depending on the specification, is either Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Japan, or Malaysia. Table 7 shows that the 40 percent “manipulator” rating
that the equation assigns China is higher than any country has every received, the closest
being Singapore in October 2003 (35%). But it is still less than 50%.
         As it happened, Treasury decided not to name China a manipulator in the April or
October reports, released respectively in May and December, 2006; but it did continue to
place the country in the “discussions” category.

2.4 Ordered Probit technique

       A more sophisticated analysis of this problem uses the ordered probit technique.12
Let Y denote the Treasury’s decision, which can take one of the four values:

0 = not investigated
1 = examined as a potential manipulator
2 = policy changes recommended / conducting bilateral discussions
3 = found to be manipulating its exchange rate.

12
     The earlier simple probit results will be omitted from the published version of this paper, to save space.




                                                                                                              15
      Let us assume that Y depends on the value of a latent variable Y*, which in turns
depends on a set of observables:

          Y* = X β + ε
and
          Y = 0 if Y* < k1,
          Y = 1 if k1 ≤ Y* < k2,
          Y = 2 if k2 ≤ Y* < k3
          Y = 3 if k3 ≤ Y*

where k1, k2, and k3 are "cutoff points" and k1 < k2<k3 and residual ε is assumed to
follow a standard normal distribution. Vector X includes period dummies (to capture
changing US or global economic environment), US bilateral trade balance with the
country in question, the partner country’s overall current account balance (as a share of
GDP), the extent of the partner’s currency overvaluation, and the scaled change in the
partner’s reserve position. The cutoff points and β can be estimated by maximum
likelihood.
        The sample again consists of 63 US trading partner countries, observed in each of
the 32 reports through April 2006. The results are reported in Table 8. There is again
evidence for both hypotheses. The legitimate global variables have a statistically
significant effect on the decisions in the Treasury reports – the partners’ overall current
account/GDP, and the overvaluation of its currency relative to PPP. The results for the
reserves variable are not statistically significant.
        But variables that an economist would not recognize as legitimate also matter. In
particular the bilateral trade balance is the most consistently and strongly significant. It is
generally significant at the .01 significance level. In Appendix Tables 2-4, in place of the
period dummies, we include separate measures of the US unemployment and a dummy
for US presidential election years. The US unemployment rate is often significant, at the
.10 or .05 significance levels, but not always. When a dummy variable for a US
presidential election year appears, it, like the others, is of the hypothesized sign; but it is
not statistically significant, unless interacted with the unemployment variable.

2.4.1 Extensions of ordered probit results

        It is possible the Treasury’s decisions have hysteresis. If it chooses to investigate
a country for possible manipulation in one period, it is likely to do so again in the next
period, even after holding the value of other variables constant. To check this, we
augmented the basic model by including in the X-vector a new dummy that indicates if Y
> 0 in the previous report. The estimation results are reported in Table 9a. One sees that
this conjecture is confirmed in the data. Indeed, the goodness of fit (pseudo R-squared) is
increased from about 0.2 in Table 8 to about 0.7 in Table 9a. A larger US trade deficit, a
larger partner country’s current account surplus, currency undervaluation, or a larger
currency undervaluation of the partner country would raise the probability that the


                                                                                            16
country in question may be singled out for bilateral discussions or as a currency
manipulator. These results are qualitatively the same as before. Interestingly, an increase
in the partner’s foreign exchange reserves (scaled by GDP) is now also found to raise that
probability in a statistically significant way.
        As a further extension, one can also interact the dummy for positive Y in the most
recent past Treasury report with all the key regressors. The results are reported in Table
9b. Generally the same qualitative results remain.

2.4.2 Prediction with the ordered probit model

       Now we use the estimated ordered probit model to forecast the Treasury reports.
Table 10 reports in-sample probability predictions during the last two report cycles
(November 2005 and May 2006, respectively ) for all 8 Asian countries that have ever
been singled by the Treasury for bilateral discussions or designated as a currency
manipulator.
       For May 2006, the model suggests that China had the highest probability of being
named as a currency manipulator, but the probability was 33 percent, less than a flip of
coin. The country with the second highest probability of being named as a manipulator
was Malaysia, with a probability of 22 percent. But China had a 63 percent probability of
being recommended for bilateral discussions, short of being named as a currency
manipulator.

3.   WHAT IS THE CURRENT EXCHANGE RATE REGIME IN CHINA?

        If a country announces that it adopts a basket peg but does not reveal the exact
weighting of the component currencies, how would one verify if the country’s deed is
consistent with its words? In the remainder of this paper we apply a simple methodology
first developed more than a decade ago13 to the case of a RMB currency basket to study
its evolution since July 21, 2005.
        To summarize our findings from the outset, we find that the Chinese currency
continues to assign heavy weight to the U.S. dollar, but that there are signs of some
modest but steady increase in flexibility since the spring of 2006. We also look at the
possibility of US pressure being a cause of steps toward increased flexibility, by counting
complaints from U.S. officials about the RMB as reported in the press. There is no
evidence that such complaints have led the Chinese to revalue the RMB relative to the

13
  Frankel (1993) and Frankel and Wei (1994, 1995). The approach has since been used by others,
including Bénassy-Quéré (1999), Ohno (1999), Frankel, Schmukler and Servén (2000), and Bénassy-
Quéré, Coeuré, and Mignon (2004). For the RMB: Eichengreen (2006), Shah, Zeileis, and Patnaik (2005),
and Yamazaki (2006, p.8). Haldane and Hall (1991) had earlier regressed the British pound exchange rate
against the dollar and the Deutschemark; but their equation did not have a theoretical basis as estimation of
basket weights, as nobody considered the pound to be on a basket peg.




                                                                                                          17
currency basket. There is some evidence, however, that US officials’ complaints tend to
be associated with gradual (though modest) reductions in the weight of the dollar in the
RMB currency basket.

3.1 Uncovering the Secrets in an Opaque Currency Basket

       The Chinese currency had been effectively pegged to the US dollar14 at the rate of
8.28 RMB/dollar from 1997 until July 21, 2005 when the Chinese central bank
announced the switch to a managing float regime “with reference to a basket of
currencies.” The announcement was billed as a major regime change.

3.1.1 What is publicly announced and what is not

         As is often the case with currency baskets, the weights were not made public.
Speculation ensued after the announcement about which currencies were in the new
reference basket and what their weights were. Jen (2005), for example, guessed that the
weight on the dollar was 85%.
         On August 9, 2005, Central Bank Governor Zhou Xiaochuan (2005) disclosed a
list of 11 currencies as constituents of the reference basket, in a speech in Shanghai
marking the opening of the central bank’s second headquarters. In particular, he stated
that the major currencies in the basket are the US dollar, the euro, the yen, and the
Korean won. We will label these four as the first-tier currencies in the basket. In
addition, Governor Zhou stated that the rest of the currencies in the basket are the
Singapore dollar, the British pound, the Malaysian ringgit, the Russian ruble, the
Australian dollar, the Thai baht, and the Canadian dollar. The last seven will be labeled as
the second-tier currencies. The governor said that these currencies were chosen because
of their economies’ importance for China’s current account.
         What were not announced were the weights on these currencies, nor the frequency
and the criteria with which these weights might be altered.

3.1.2 A picture is worth a thousand words

        Before we turn to regression-based estimation, it may be useful to inspect some
simple time series plots. Some perspective can be gleaned from Figure 1, the graph that
traces out the spot and three forward rates (from 1, 3 and 12 months non-deliverable
forward contracts, respectively) of the USD/RMB exchange rate from April 2003 to
January 2007. Interestingly, even though the actual regime change came in July 2005, the
market had been expecting an RMB revaluation as reflected in the forward rate ever since

14
   Incidentally, however, China’s official policy has never been a pegged exchange rate. This just goes to
show the common divergence between de jure and de facto exchange rate regimes and the importance of
inferring the true regime from observed data, a point that is by now well understood.



                                                                                                        18
October 2003. In fact, on July 20, 2005, the day before the actual regime change, the 12-
forward contract was forecasting an exchange rate of 8 RMB/US dollar, which implied a
higher magnitude of appreciation than what actually happened the day after, but which
turned out to be relatively close to the actual spot rate a year later (July 20, 2006).
        To see how the RMB’s value has evolved relative to major currencies, turn to
Figure 2, the one that plots the value of the yuan in units of US dollars, euros and yen,
respectively, since July 1, 2005. The three exchange rate series are rescaled to be equal to
one on the first day (July 21, 2005) after the exchange rate regime reform, so that one can
easily see subsequent percentage changes. A number of features stand out. First, in spite
of the announced abandonment of the dollar peg, the link to the U.S. dollar even after
July 21, 2005, is clearly much stronger than to either the euro or the yen. Second, one can
discern a gradual (and very slow) strengthening of the RMB against the dollar,
accumulating a total of another 4% of appreciation from July 21, 2005 to the end of 2006.
Third, the value of the RMB against the euro and the yen fluctuates a lot from day to day,
mostly a reflection of the fluctuation in the value of the US dollar against these other two
currencies. Relative to July 20, 2005, the day before the exchange rate reform, the RMB
had by April 26, 2006, appreciated by about 12% against the yen, but depreciated against
the euro by about 2%.
        To get a sense of the evolving range of the dollar/RMB movement, Figure 3 plots
the percentage changes (the first differences in the log) of the exchange rate since July
22, 2005. Up to the spring of 2006, most of the daily movement was within 0.05%, with
occasional movements approaching or exceeding 0.1% especially in the more recent
period. In other words, the daily movement of the dollar/RMB had been tiny, despite the
announced switch to a managed floating exchange rate. Since the spring of 2006,
however, there has been a visible increase in the daily movement, with daily changes
exceeding 0.1% frequently.
        As another way to see the evolving flexibility, Figure 4 plots the standard
deviation of the daily exchange rate movement over a sequence of rolling 20-day sample
since July 22, 2005. After some initial moderate gyration in the rate following the
announced regime change, the fluctuations die down in the last few months of 2005 and
the beginning of 2006. The standard deviation then trends upward after the beginning of
2006, reaching around 0.08% by the end of 2006, a tripling relative to the magnitude in
the immediate aftermath of the regime change announcement. In order not to lose sight of
the big picture, we note again that, in spite of the visible increase in exchange rate
flexibility, the absolute magnitude of the movement has been small so far.

3.1.3 Implicit weights in the currency basket

       Assuming that the value of the RMB is indeed determined by a currency basket,
how does one uncover the currency composition and weights in the basket? This is a
problem to which Ordinary Least Squares regression is unusually well suited. If we
know the list of currencies, of which the ones used in the basket can be a subset, then we


                                                                                         19
regress changes in the log value of the RMB against changes in the log values of the
candidate currencies.
        The reason to work in terms of changes rather than levels is the likelihood of non-
stationarity. Concern for nonstationarity goes beyond the common refrain of modern
time series econometrics, the inability to reject statistically a unit root, which in many
cases can be attributed to insufficient power. One of the most important hypotheses we
are testing is that the authorities have allowed the yuan to drift away from a basket,
perhaps via an upward trend. Thus it is important to allow for nonstationarity. Working
in terms of first differences is the cleanest way to do so. We should include a constant
term to allow for the likelihood of a trend appreciation in the RMB, whether against the
dollar alone or a broader basket. Algebraically, if the RMB is pegged to currencies X1,
X2, … and Xn, with weights equal to w1, w2, … and wn, then

logRMB(t+s)-logRMB(t) =c+ ∑ w(j) [logX(j, t+s) - logX(j, t)]

If the exchange rate is truly governed by a strict basket peg, then we should be able to
recover the true weights precisely, so long as we have more observations than candidate
currencies, and the equation should have a perfect fit.
         Shah, Zeileis, and Patnaik (2005) adopted this methodology to study the Chinese
currency basket after July 21, 2005 and found that the RMB was still tightly pegged to
the dollar and nothing else. However, they only considered four candidate currencies in
the RMB basket (the dollar, the yen, the euro, and the pound), probably unaware of the
eleven-currency disclosure made the Chinese central bank. In addition, their sample was
only the initial few months after July 21, 2005. Frankel and Wei (2006) extended to 11
the components of the basket, but found that the RMB regime in the second half of 2005
was still a tight dollar peg – as tight as that of the Hong Kong SAR regime. Eichengreen
(2006, p. 22-25) had daily observations of data that ran from July 22, 2005, to March 21,
2006, and found a dollar weight around .9, but with no evidence of a downward trend in
the weight, and no significance on non-dollar currencies. Each of these three papers was
too early to catch the evolution in 2006. Yamazaki (2006, p.8) updated the estimation,
and found some weight had shifted to the euro, yen and won; but he estimated the
equation in terms of levels rather than changes (risking non-stationarity), did not allow
for a trend, did not allow for the other currencies on the list, and had a relatively small
number of (bimonthly) observations.
         One methodological question, before we turn to the new results. How do we
define the “value” of each of the currencies? This is the question of the numeraire. 15 If

15
   Frankel (1993) used purchasing power over a consumer basket of domestic goods as numeraire; Frankel
and Wei (1995) used the SDR; Frankel and Wei (1994, 2006), Ohno (1999), and Eichengreen (2006) used
the Swiss franc; Bénassy-Quéré (1999), the dollar; Frankel, Schmukler and Luis Servén (2000), a GDP-
weighted basket of five major currencies; and Yamazaki (2006), the Canadian dollar.




                                                                                                   20
the exchange rate is truly a basket peg, the choice of numeraire currency is immaterial;
we estimate the weights accurately regardless.16 If the true regime is more variable than a
rigid basket peg, then the choice of numeraire does make some difference to the
estimation. Some authors in the past have used a remote currency, such as the Swiss
franc (e.g., Frankel and Wei, 1994).
         A weighted index such as the SDR or a trade-weighted measure is probably more
appropriate. Here is why. Assume the true regime is a target zone or a managed float
centered around a reference basket, where the authorities intervene to an extent that
depends on the magnitude of the deviation. This seems the logical alternative hypothesis
in which a strict basket peg is nested. Then the error term in the equation represents
shocks in demand for the currency that the authorities allow to be partially reflected in
the exchange rate (but only partially, because they intervene if the shocks are large).
Following this logic, one should use a numeraire that is similar to that used by the
authorities in measuring what constitutes a large deviation. The authorities are unlikely
to use the Swiss franc or Canadian dollar in thinking about the size of deviations from
their reference point. They are more likely to use a weighted average of major
currencies. If we use a similar measure in the equation, it should help minimize the
possibility of correlation between the error term and the numeraire.17 Similarly, if there is
a trend in the exchange rate equation (a constant term in the changes equation)
representing deliberate gradual appreciation of the currency, then the value of the RMB
should be defined in terms of whatever weighted exchange rate index the authorities are
likely to use in thinking about the trend. These considerations suggest a numeraire that is
itself composed of a basket of currencies. We choose here the Special Drawing Right
(SDR).
         Using daily exchange rates (from July 21, 2005 to the beginning of 2007) and the
SDR as the numeraire currency, we implement a sequence of estimations for the whole

16
  If the linear equation holds precisely in terms of any one “correct” numeraire, then add the log exchange
rate between that numeraire and any arbitrary unit to see that the equation also holds precisely in terms of
the arbitrary numeraire. This assumes the weights add to 1, and there is no error term, constant term, or
other non-currency variable.
17
   A methodological innovation, relative to Frankel-Wei (1994) and other past work estimating currency
weights for a putative basket peg, should soak up some of the error term and give better estimates: by
including on the right-hand side of the equation percentage changes in total exchange market pressure
(defined as percentage changes in the value of the currency plus percentage change in reserves), the test can
allow for the fluctuations in demand for the currency that can push the exchange rate away from the central
basket parity. A coefficient near zero implies that fluctuations in currency demand provoke sufficient
reserve changes to prevent a deviation of the exchange rate from the basket, i.e., a basket peg. A
coefficient closer to one implies that fluctuations in currency demand are largely allowed to be reflected as
deviations of the exchange rate from the basket, a situation of managed floating. This approach may do a
better job of answering the question to what extent the authorities intervene to stabilize the currency, not
just the question what is the basket in terms of which the authorities define stability. We were not able to
implement this approach for the post-2005 RMB because reserve data are only available monthly, and 18
observations are not enough for estimation. But we hope to try out this idea in the future.



                                                                                                          21
sample. Column 1 of Table 10 reports the result. Of the 11 currencies that are
supposedly in the basket, only two currencies receive weights that are steady enough
throughout the sample period to show up with positive and statistically significant
weights: the US dollar (90% weight) and Malaysian ringgit (5% weight). Surprisingly,
two major non-dollar currencies, the euro and the yen, receive zero weight in the basket.
(These results stay the same when we switch the numeraire currency from SDR to Swiss
franc or gold as a robustness check, to be discussed below.) It appears that the Chinese
authorities are more concerned with preserving trade competitiveness against major
Asian rivals than with minimizing variability vis-à-vis the world’s most important
currencies or China’s most important export markets.
        Despite the official pronouncement that China has ceased its particular link to the
U.S. dollar, substituting instead a reference basket of currencies, the sample-wide
estimated weight on the dollar is still 90%. Further, the regression has a tight fit, with R-
squared of 0.95 and root mean squared errors (MSE) of 0.03%, suggesting a tight peg to
the basket. This finding is in contrast to the official position that the link to the basket
(whatever its composition) is loose, that it is just a reference point. For comparison, we
implement the same methodology on a currency that is clearly floating, namely the
Japanese yen, and another currency that is known to be pegged to the U.S. dollar, namely,
the Hong Kong dollar. The R2 is 0.54 for the Japanese yen, much lower than that of the
RMB. It is 99% for Hong Kong dollar, not that much different from the RMB. Similarly,
the root mean squared error is 0.36% for the yen, an order of magnitude bigger than for
the RMB, but is 0.02% for the Hong Kong dollar, virtually the same as the RMB. It is
striking that the behavior of the Chinese RMB since July 21, 2005 closely resembles that
of a known dollar pegger, the HK dollar, but is very far from a known floater, the yen.
        We implement similar methodology on three other East Asian currencies: the
Singapore dollar, the Malaysian ringgit, and the Korean won. They constitute
intermediate cases. Of the three, the Singapore dollar and Malaysian ringgit both appear
to be following loose basket pegs. The weights on the dollar are lower, and the fit looser,
than in the case of the RMB. Nevertheless, considering that the Malaysian currency
appears to be the only important non-dollar currency in the Chinese basket, it is striking
that the ringgit itself gives .5 weight to the dollar (also .1 weight, each, to the Taiwan
dollar, Philippine peso and Indian rupee). It means there is even less scope for yuan
appreciation against the dollar.

3.2 Evolution of the Basket

        The situation is changing rapidly over time. Estimates that impose unchanging
coefficients could well be misleading.




                                                                                          22
3.2.1 Estimates from the sub samples

         To allow for evolution of the Chinese exchange rate regime since the July 21,
2005 policy change, we divide the sample into six approximately equal-sized sub-
periods: (1) July 22-October 31, 2005, (2) November 1, 2005 – January 31, 2006, (3)
February 1 – April 28, 2006, (4) May 1- July 31, 2006, (5) August 1-October 31, 2006,
and (6) October 1, 2006 – January 8, 2007.18 The results are reported in Tables 11
through 17.
         The estimation by sub-periods reveals some interesting shifts. In the first two sub-
samples, the regime is virtually a US dollar peg, after the initial 2.1% revaluation. The
weight on the dollar is 0.997 in the first sub-sample, and 0.968 in the second sample.
Neither estimate differs statistically from one. Except for a tiny weight (0.02) on the
Korea won in the second sub-sample, no other currency in the basket receives weight.
The R2 is essentially 100%. So for these sub-periods, the regime was simply a dollar peg
masquerading as a basket.
         After January 2006, however, the dollar weight falls. In the sub-period February-
April, 2006, the estimated weight on the US dollar is only 0.70. A few other currencies,
notably, the Malaysian ringgit, the Korea won, the Russian rubble, and the Thai baht,
receive positive weights in the basket. The yen and euro continue to receive no positive
weight. The root MSE increases marginally from 0.02-0.03% in the first two sub-
samples to 0.04% in the third sub-period.19
         The estimated weight on the dollar returns to 0.95 during May-July, 2006, but
then declines to 0.87 and 0.89 in the last two sub-periods. Interestingly, none of the other
currencies such as the ringgit, the won, the yen, or the euro, received a positive weight
that is statistically significant. In other words, the relaxed association between the RMB
and the dollar in the last five months of 2006 is not accomplished by shifting more
weights to other non-dollar currencies in the basket, but by a looser association between
the RMB and the entire currency basket. These are also the first two sub-periods when
the trend is statistically significant: a trend appreciation of .0002 per day, which is .001
per week, or 5.2 per cent per year. This is far less than the maximum allowable under the
announced band, but is nonetheless large enough to be important.
         To summarize, in the first six months following the announced shift by the
Chinese central bank to a managed floating regime with reference to a basket of eleven


18
  The last subperiod overlaps with the previous one for a month in order to ensure enough observations in
the sample.
19
  When similar regressions are done for other currencies, most are seen to switch, from assigning
significant weights to the US dollar in the first two sub-samples, to none in the third sub-sample. The
exceptions are Malaysia, which reduces its dollar weight from 0.964 in the first sub-period to 0.608 in the
last sub-period, and Hong Kong SAR, the institutionally-fixed currency, which as expected continues to
assign nearly 100% weight to the US dollar.




                                                                                                          23
currencies, China made such a heavy reference to the US dollar that it was
indistinguishable from a dollar pegger. However, during the period after February, 2006,
there came signs of increased flexibility. First, in the spring of 2006, some weight in the
basket was shifted to other currencies, particularly the Malaysian ringgit, the Korean
won, the Russian ruble, and the Thai baht. Surprisingly, throughout the sample, there is
not an iota of evidence of any positive weight assigned to the yen or the euro. Second,
since the fall of 2006, in addition to the lesser weight on the dollar (an estimated weight
of 0.9 rather than 1.0 as in the earlier periods), the association between the RMB and the
reference currency basket has become looser. There is a non-negligible trend of
appreciation against the basket, and slightly looser fit.

3.2.2 Robustness with respect to numeraire currency

        We have chosen to emphasize estimates that use the Special Drawing Right as the
numeraire currency. We have said earlier that the choice of the numeraire is irrelevant if
the currency is strictly pegged to a currency basket. However, if the value of the currency
relative to the basket is allowed to fluctuate, different numeraires might generate different
point estimates. For this reason, we now examine if the conclusions are robust with
respect to the choice of numeraire. In particular, we repeat these regression tables by
using the price of gold as an alternative numeraire.
        The new regression results are reported in Tables 10A and 11A through 17A,
corresponding to the whole sample, and the sub-periods, respectively. Although the
exact point estimates vary somewhat, the same qualitative results as before emerge
clearly. First, in the initial eight months after July 21, 2005, the Chinese exchange rate
regime is best characterized as a virtual peg to the US dollar. The goodness-of-fit
measure and RMSE for the Chinese RMB are closer to those of the Hong Kong dollar,
than to currencies known to have some flexibility. Second, there are signs of increased
flexibility since February of 2006. The weight on the US dollar declines (though the
estimated magnitude of the decline is not as large as when the SDR is used as the
numeraire). Third, as before, there is no evidence of a positive weight assigned to either
the euro or the yen.

3.2.3 Allowing for steady acceleration in the shift

         Several considerations suggest it would be useful to return to estimation over the
entire 18-month sample period but to allow for steady escalation of the various flexibility
parameters. First, everything we know about Chinese government officials, from their
history of economic reforms to their own words, points to policy change that is gradual.
Second, looking simply at the yuan/dollar exchange rate in Figure 2, there is a gradual
trend appreciation that visually accelerates. Third, looking at the econometric estimates
across our sub-samples, all three flexibility parameters loosen up as we move from 2005
to late 2006: the weight on the dollar tends to fall, the appreciation trend becomes


                                                                                          24
positive and significant, and the fit becomes looser. All these considerations recognize
very little movement in the short-term, but suggest signs of an accelerating pattern that if
extrapolated a few years into the future could imply substantial flexibility.
         Allowing for a time trend of appreciation that is linear in the log of the exchange
rate is easy; that is the constant term that has been in the changes regression all along.
Allowing for a steadily accelerating time trend requires adding some function of time to
the changes equation; the simplest is to add time itself. Allowing for there to be a time
trend in weight placed on the dollar versus non-dollar currencies is trickier. We add to
the equation time-dependent terms that interact with the changes in currency values, to
see how the weights change over time. We begin with a simple linear trend specification
for these time-dependent terms as well, even though linearity here is less realistic than for
the trend in the log of the RMB exchange rate itself.
         The penultimate row of estimates in Table 18 shows a highly significant
downward linear trend in the weight placed on the dollar.20 The constant term is still
highly significant statistically as well, but the implied estimated trend appreciation
against the basket (.0001 per day, or 2.5 per cent per year) is now half what it was before.
Interestingly, there is only weak evidence here of an acceleration of the trend
appreciation per se (third to last row of estimates in Table 18). Evidently the visual
impression of accelerating appreciation in, for example, Figure 2, may be primarily due
to the (quite modest) shift in weight to non-dollar currencies at a time when they have
been appreciating against the dollar.

3.2.4 Pressure from the U.S. and the movement of the Chinese currency

         We now turn to a question that links the two parts of the paper: Do complaints
about the Chinese exchange rate from US Treasury officials or other US officials lead
China to respond by appreciating its currency relative to the basket and by reducing the
weight of its currency on the dollar?
         The change of the currency regime on July 21, 2005, came after two years of
complaints from the United States (and a few other countries). Complaints from US
officials and politicians continued, perhaps because as we have seen there had been so
little de facto change to match the announcement. To document the official US pressure
systematically, we searched an electronic database of news reports
(FACTIVA/NewsPlus) and recorded the number of news stories in all English-language
newspapers in Washington DC, New York City, and Los Angeles, in which US officials
are reported to have asked China to speed up the exchange rate flexibility/revaluation
from July 1, 2005 to January 8, 2007. Figure 5 plots two separate time series: the
cumulative numbers of the complaints from US Treasury officials and those from

20
  We have also allowed for non-linear trends, which would slow down with the passage of time. The
basic results were little changed.




                                                                                                    25
officials of other government agencies (e.g. the White House, Congress and Federal
Reserve System), respectively. Complaints from the two sources appear correlated in
their timing.
        To see whether Chinese exchange rate behavior is related to the complaints, Table
19 [and 19A] reports a sequence of currency weight regressions that have added the
cumulative US complaints and their interactions with the weight on the dollar as extra
regressors. When the two complaint series are added separately (Columns 1-3 in Table
19), the new regressors are not statistically significant, perhaps because they are
collinear. We next try add the sum of the two sets of complaints together (Columns 4-6).
There is no evidence of an association between the complaints from U.S. officials and
appreciation of the RMB relative to the currency basket. There is evidence that
cumulative complaints are associated with a reduction in the RMB’s weight on the US
dollar.
        Since the two complaint series are by construction non-decreasing functions of
time, one could wonder if they simply pick up a trend effect. We add a time trend and its
interaction with the dollar weight as the additional regressors. The results are little
changed. Again, there is evidence of a gradual decline in the RMB’s weight on the US
dollar, but there is no evidence of a steady appreciation of the RMB relative to the whole
basket.

3.2.5 Constraining the basket weights to sum to 1

        There is a good argument for constraining the weights on the currencies to add up
to 1. However weak one thinks the link to the reference basket might be, and or however
large or small the weight on the dollar, the authorities must view movements in the RMB
through the metric of distance from some reference rate or effective exchange rate. The
easiest way to implement the adding up constraint is to run the regressions with the
changes in the log yuan value on the left-hand side of the equation transformed by
subtracting off the changes in the log value of one of the currencies, say the dollar, and
the changes in the values of the non-dollar currencies on the right-hand side transformed
in the same way.
        To see this, we repeat equation (1):

∆ log RMBt     = c + ∑ w(j) [∆ logX(j)t ]
               = c + α ∆ log $ t + β(1) ∆ log €t + β(2) ∆ log £t + β(3) …

We want to impose the adding up constraint α = 1 - β(1) - β(2) - β(3) … We implement
it by running the regression equation (2):

[∆ log RMB t - ∆ log$t ]
              = c + β(1) [∆ log €t - ∆ log $t ] + β(2)[ ∆ log £ t - ∆ log $ t] + β(3) … (2)




                                                                                         26
         The results are reported in Tables 20-21. One can recover the implicit weight on
the dollar by adding the estimated weights on the non-dollar currencies, and subtracting
the sum from 1. We see in columns (1) or (7) of Table 20 [or 20A] for example, that the
weight on the dollar is 1 minus the weights on the won (.02) and ringgit (.07), which is
.91. These are very similar to the corresponding estimates in Table 18 [or 18A], when no
constraint was imposed on the weights. The increase in the Root MSE is tiny, suggesting
that a test would not reject the constraint that the weights sum to one. But imposing the
constraint sharpens the estimates a bit; for example the coefficient on the Korean won
now appears statistically significant not just when gold is used as numeraire but also in
the preferred case where the SDR is used as numeraire. The basic findings are
unchanged: significant weights only on the same two non-dollar currencies, a trend
appreciation against the basket, and gradually diminishing linear weight on the dollar.
         Table 21 [and 21A] impose the adding-up constraint in the equation where we test
the role of official US complaints. Again the results are little changed from Table 19 [and
19A]; but the complaints have an even stronger negative effect on the dollar weight.
There is little evidence that they lead to an immediate appreciation, however small, per
se.

3.2.7 Allowing for nonlinear trends in the weights

         In sections 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 we allowed for a downward trend in the weight
assigned to the dollar in the basket of reference currencies. But the specification was a
linear trend. Since the currency weights are logically bounded by 0 and 1, a linear
functional form for the trend in the weights, which has the undesirable property that the
weights eventually breech the limits of 0 or 1, is not the best specification. Instead, the
term designed to capture the possible shifting of weight toward non-dollar currencies can
be assumed proportionate to [1-exp(-δ t)], which runs from 0 to 1 as required. The
parameter δ helps captures the speed of the shift.
         We can continue to impose the constraint that the weights sum to 1, not just at t=0
but throughout the period, implementing the constraint by subtracting the change in the
value of an arbitrary currency from all currency variables (i.e., from both the change in
the RMB value and the change in the values of other candidate currencies in the basket).
Algebraically, if X(j) is the value of currency j in the basket, and w(j) is the weight on
that currency, then
                              ∆ log RMBt = f(t) + ∑ w(j) ∆ X(j)t

To impose the constraint that ∑1J w(j) =1, we only need w(1) = 1- ∑2J w(j) .
Now we choose euro as the first currency. The constraint on the weights implies that

             [∆ log RMBt - ∆ log €t ] = f(t) + ∑2J w(j) (∆ X(j)t - ∆ log € t ) ,

where w(j) can lie anywhere between zero and one.


                                                                                         27
        Now let us add the time-dependent weight terms, using the exponential functional
form for the weights w(j). We consider four different ways to specify and/or estimate the
trend terms; the choice depends on how one feels about nonlinear estimation.21

•        Specification 1: let w(j) = b0(j) + b1(j)* t,          f(t) = c0 + c1*t .

This is the simplest specification and is estimated with OLS.

•        Specification 2 : let w(j) = b0(j) + b1(j)* [1- exp(-d t)],            f(t) = c0 + c1*t .

We set d = 0.00001. While the trend on the currency weights is non-linear, by selecting a
particular value for d we keep the specification still linear in the parameters to be
estimated. Therefore, this equation can be estimated with OLS as well.

•        Specification 3: let w(j) = b0(j) + b1(j)* [1- exp(-d t)],             f(t) = c0 + c1*t

Instead of imposing a value, d is a parameter to be estimated. A non-linear least squares
method is used for estimation.

•        Specification 4: let w(j) = b0(j) + b1(j)* [1- exp(-d t)],            f(t) = c0 + c1*t

Because estimation of the parameter b1(USD) in specification 3 does not converge, we
now set b1(USD) = -28.9, which is the point estimate of b1(USD) from specification 2.
The parameter d is still to be estimated, which we do by a non-linear least square method.
         The results are reported in Table 22. This table is probably the most important for
distinguishing whether the gradual appreciation of the yuan against the dollar is
attributable to a shift of weights in the basket away from the dollar, or rather to an
appreciation against the basket. The table confirms that in the immediate aftermath of the
policy change in July 2005, the weight on the dollar was an estimated .98, statistically
indistinguishable from 1. It also confirms a downward trend in the weight on the dollar
(this time estimated in a realistic nonlinear functional form). While it is less clear which
of the other currencies are receiving the reallocation of weight, an upward trend in the
weight on the Malaysian ringgit appears the strongest statistically. With non-linear least
squares (the last two columns in the table), the ringgit trend acquires statistical
significance. Strikingly, there is no statistical significance to the trend of appreciation
against the basket, let alone to acceleration in that trend. Rather the action comes from
the decline in the weight on the dollar.
         Could the steady decrease in the dollar weight that we find produce important
flexibility in the future if it continues? It is hard to judge the importance of the parameter

21
  We tried also imposing the constraint that the relative importance of the non-dollar weights vis-à-vis each
other remains constant over time, while still allowing the upward trend in their collective importance. But
this constraint was not supported by the data, and those results are not included here.




                                                                                                         28
estimates by just looking at them, especially for estimates from a non-linear specification.
So we calibrate what the implied path for the weight on the dollar is out in the future,
extrapolating the trend of our sample period based on the last column in the table.
Figure 6 reveals the shift away from the dollar to be painfully slow over a five year
period: starting at .98 in 2005, the dollar weight has fallen only to .87 by 2010.

3.3 Other extensions

        Some extensions of the empirical estimates allow us to gain more confidence in
the findings.

3.3.1 Method of moments

         Bénassy-Quéré, Coeuré, and Mignon (2004) propose a modification of the
Frankel-Wei methodology based on a method of moments approach. The advantage of
the modification is that it does not depend on the choice of a numeraire currency. As a
robustness exercise, we apply the Bénassy-Quéré et al approach to the Chinese currency
data. We take the eleven currencies that the Chinese central bank says are in the basket
as given, impose the restriction that the sum of their weights in the basket is equal to one,
and estimate by GMM. We experimented with different sets of lagged regressors as the
instrumental variables, skipping the first lag to avoid contamination from possible serial
correlation. Unfortunately, it is generally difficult for the estimation to converge in our
sample.
         As an alternative, we focus on the set of first-tier currencies in China’s announced
basket, namely, the dollar, the yen, the euro, and the Korean won. This time, we do
obtain convergence. There is also a decline in the weight on the US dollar by this
approach, though the decline is more moderate than in the previous estimation, from
0.97/0.98 in the first and second subperiods to 0.91 in the last subperiod. As before, the
Korean won receives some positive weight, especially in the latest subperiod, and there is
little sign of positive weight on the euro or yen.

3.3.2 Intra-daily movements

         It is possible that the RMB regime governing intra-day exchange rate movement
is different from that governing day to day or month to month movement. In particular,
the regime announced in July 2005 sets a limit on intra-day movement, leaving the
possibility that the rules governing the change from daily close to the following day’s
open quotes could be different. Unfortunately, as RMB trading is relatively thin, there
are generally too few observations to perform a regression based on one day’s data. So
we have to pool intra-day data together.
         We have collected intra-day data (quotes at 15 minute intervals) for two periods:
July 22 – August 25, 2005, and February 16 – May 17, 2006. In a given 15 minute


                                                                                          29
interval, say, 10:00-10:15 am, the exchange rate is the last quote during the interval. If
there is no active quote available, then the most recently available quote is used. For a
very active currency, say the euro, the quote is likely to take place at or close to 10:15
am. However, for a thinly traded currency, such as the RMB, the actual time of the quote
could be much earlier. It is useful to bear in mind that this potential mismatch in timing
among the different exchange rates introduces noise into our estimation.
        Table 23 reports a sequence of estimation using 15-minute exchange rates and the
SDR as the numeraire currency.22 If one focuses on the four first-tier currencies in the
Chinese basket, one sees that the weight on the dollar is very high throughout the sample,
virtually 99-100% in all sub-periods. If one uses all 11 currencies as candidate currencies
in the basket, then the weight on the dollar fluctuates (between 0.51 in the very last sub-
period to nearly 1 in the second-to-the last sub-period).23
        These results are consistent with the interpretation that the intra-day RMB regime
may be somewhat different from the day to day or month to month regime. Within a day,
the dollar weight is likely to be high and close to 1, now as in 2005. However, from day
to day, the dollar weight may have declined subsequent to the first months after the July
2005 announcement.

3.3.3 A proposed extension for future work

        In a future extension (to be applied to other currencies where a quasi-basket may
have lasted long enough to give us a full sample of monthly data), we plan to integrate
our technique for estimating basket weights with the other, larger, branch of the literature
on empirical inference of exchange rate regimes: the attempts at de facto classification of
regimes into such categories as fixed, floating and intermediate, based typically not just
on observed movements in the exchange rate but also on observed movements in
reserves.24 The first literature estimates weights, regardless how tight or loose the
relationship, while the second literature estimates the tightness of the relationship.


22
   The SDR rate is reported once a day by the International Monetary Fund. However, since its composition
is fixed in the sample except for a one-time discrete adjustment of the currency weights on January 1, 2006,
we can compute its intra-day rate vis-a-vis the dollar based on the intra-day exchange rates of the
currencies that make up the SDR.
23
  Table 23A repeats these estimation but using the Swiss franc as the numeraire currency. This time, the
weight on the dollar stays in a narrower range (0.895 to 1). Interestingly, with intra-day data (and the
Swiss franc as the numeraire), one can see a hint of the influence of the euro on the value of the Chinese
currency, especially in the more recent period (April 18 – May 17, 2006) when the euro has a weight of
0.02. The yen never has a positive weight, and sometimes appears with a negative estimated weight in the
earlier sub-periods.

24
  E.g., Calvo and Reinhart (2002), Shambaugh (2004), Levy-Yeyati & Sturzenegger (2005), Bubula &
Otker-Robe (2002), Reinhart & Rogoff (2003, 2004).



                                                                                                         30
        It is time for a merger of techniques. The proposed approach is still to seek to
explain changes in the value of the RMB by means of changes in the values of other
currencies, as in Frankel-Wei (1994, 1995) and other past work, but at the same time to
include on the right-hand side of the equation percentage changes in total exchange
market pressure (defined as percentage change in the foreign exchange value of the
currency plus percentage change in reserves). This test should do a better job of
answering the question to what extent the authorities intervene to stabilize the currency,
not just the question what is the basket in terms of which the authorities define stability.
One respect in which this innovation would be an improvement over the original Frankel-
Wei approach is that, by controlling for total exchange market pressure, it would take into
account periods of high variability in the exchange rate equation’s exogenous
disturbances, which could otherwise show up as a looser fit (higher Standard Error of
Regression) in some periods or countries than in others and erroneously be interpreted as
evidence of higher-flexibility regimes. If the coefficient on the exchange market pressure
variable is 1, that means that the authorities allow fluctuations in the demand for the
national currency to show up solely in the exchange rate, and do not intervene in the
market at all. If the coefficient is zero, then the authorities are accommodating
fluctuations in demand for the currency by allowing the supply of the currency to change
correspondingly, and are holding the exchange rate constant. We are unable to apply this
technique to the RMB because there are not yet enough post-2005 observations of
reserves to run a meaningful regression.

3.4 Conclusions regarding the recent Chinese exchange rate regime

        To summarize our findings, within 2005 there was very little change in the de
facto regime despite the announced policy change in July of that year. Not only did the
true weight on the dollar in the basket remain close to 1, but the tightness of the fit was
similar to that of the Hong Kong dollar, which is on a currency board! 25 In 2006, the de
facto regime began to put a significant, but still small, weight on some non-dollar
currencies. These were not primarily the yen or euro as one would expect, but rather the
currencies of other Asian developing countries (the won and the ringgit) which
themselves do not float freely against the dollar. Moreover, these weights were still small
and the peg was still tight. The small increase in flexibility that we have seen could be
important only if it were a harbinger of more to come. This is likely, as Chinese leaders
gradually become more comfortable with the idea.
        Reporting in the financial press has focused on the appreciation of the RMB
against the dollar. The focus is understandable, both because this is the question of
political interest, and because looking at a graph of the dollar/yuan exchange rate (e.g. in

25
  As often with countries said to be on a currency board, Hong Kong SAR’s regime differs in some ways
from a pure idealized currency board.




                                                                                                    31
Figure 2) seems to tell a clean story of an appreciation trend that, though starting out very
small, has been gradually escalating in an exponential way. If this accelerating trend
were in fact deemed part of the current regime, one could extrapolate it and predict more
serious appreciation in the future.
        Our results, however, suggest that the regime probably is not best described as a
dollar peg with a trend appreciation, let alone a gradually accelerating trend. The
findings of Section 3.2.7 are the sharpest on this point. Rather, the regime is better
described as a basket peg with weights on non-dollar currencies that, though starting out
very small in 2005, rose gradually rising in 2006. The difference in characterizations of
the regime could make a big difference for the future. Our results suggest that if the
Korean won and Malaysian ringgit stop appreciating against the dollar, or even begin to
reverse, so will the Chinese currency. In any case, the evidence supports the hypothesis
of small steps away from the dollar link more than small steps toward appreciation per se.
This ultimately may not be enough to appease the US Treasury or, especially, the US
Congress.
        This adds to the onus on the IMF to deal with the yuan/dollar question.
Multilateral institutions and international law are more relevant to this issue than is the
case with most big-power issues realistically speaking. The Members originally intended
the Fund, not national authorities, to judge manipulation. More recently, the institution
was given a reinforced mandate in the spring of 2006, both by its governing body and –
perhaps more importantly—by the G-7. The mandate was to reconsider the 1977
Decision and thereby expand the surveillance described in the Articles of Agreement
beyond the World Economic Outlook and bilateral Article IV consultations, and to look
into the issue of global current account imbalances through a multilateral consultation
process. In practical terms, this means that the US Treasury in 2006 passed the RMB
issue on to the IMF, giving that institution a rare potential opportunity to pass judgment
or at least help broker a multilateral agreement over the Chinese currency and also G-7
imbalances.26 Many economists identify G-7 imbalances as more a result of deficient US
national saving than of China’s support of the dollar against its own currency.27 A
cooperative agreement might entail concrete steps by the US government to raise national
saving, together with a decision by China jointly with other Asian countries, and oil-
exporters which are running even larger surpluses, to allow their currencies to appreciate
simultaneously. Europe would have a role as well.28 Negotiations over such an

26
   To Mervyn King (2006), the IMF either takes this opportunity or else is out of a job. The U.S. Treasury
also supported a strengthening of IMF surveillance: in Adams (2006) and U.S. Treasury (2006a), e.g., by
making more explicit the definition of “protracted large-scale intervention.” The IMF Managing Director
responded to the new mandate with a process to review surveillance, both bilateral and multilateral, as part
of his Medium-Term Strategy for the Fund.
27
   Frankel (2006b) considers the various arguments.
28
   Traditionally the part of European policymakers is to agree to make their goods and labor markets more
flexible. Perhaps a more realistic European contribution to the package could be an agreement to stand by
                                                                                               (continued)


                                                                                                        32
agreement cannot take place in the G7 because China, Korea, and the others are not
members. The IMF is the logical place.
         Agreeing on such multilateral cooperation will not be easy. Both sides will be
reluctant to make the necessary concessions. The United States is not likely to give up
easily on the politically attractive idea that China bears some responsibility for its trade
deficit, represented numerically by the bilateral deficit. Congress deliberately intended to
legitimize the bilateral deficit in the 1988 law, however the IMF Articles of Agreement
define manipulation. China for its part is not likely to give up easily on the idea that it has
the sovereign right to move as slowly on currency reform as it deems in its interest. But
both sides also have something important to lose if the issue is not settled. China’s
leaders run the danger of losing free access to a very large and important export market.
The US leaders run the risk of the political momentum behind the scapegoat strategy
backfiring, in the form of either self-inflicted protectionist legislation or a hard landing
for the dollar and US securities in global financial markets. The RMB/dollar rate and
associated imbalances is a better subject for multilateral surveillance and international
cooperation than any subject to come along in many years, and it is more likely to be
amenable to progress in the forum of the IMF than anywhere else. If nothing else, this
process might help delay and deflect protectionist fervor in the US Congress.




in the event that the dollar goes into uncontrolled freefall, ready to buy up dollars to put a reasonable floor
under its value. Talk of a “new Plaza Agreement” could be dangerous unless there is also a “new Louvre
Agreement” waiting in the wings.




                                                                                                             33
References
Adams, Tim, 2006, “Working with the IMF to Strengthen Exchange Rate Surveillance,” remarks by
Treasury Undersecretary for International Affairs, Feb. 2.; www.treas.gov/press/releases/js4002.htm.

Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, 1999, “Exchange Rate Regimes and Policies: An Empirical Analysis,” in
Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries, edited by Stefan Collignon, Jean Pisani-Ferry, and
Yung Chul Park (Routledge: London), 40-64.

Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Benoit Coeuré, and Valérie Mignon, 2004, “On the Identification of de facto
Currency Pegs,” Journal of Japanese and International Economies.

Bergsten, C.Fred, 1989, “Currency Manipulation? The Case of Korea,” Statement before the Committee on
Finance, Subcommittee on International Trade,” United States Senate, May 12.

Bergsten, C.Fred, 2006, Testimony before the Hearing on US-China Economic Relations Revisited,
Committee on Finance, United States Senate, March 29.

Boughton, James, 2001, Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund 1979–1989 (International
Monetary Fund: Washington). October 1, 2001.

Bubula, Andrea, and Inci Otker-Robe (2002) Exchange Arrangements and Foreign Exchange Markets:
Development and Issues, Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department, IMF, 2003.

Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
no. 2, May, 379-408.

Cooper, Richard, 2005, “Living with Global Imbalances: A Contrarian View,” Policy Brief No. 05-3,
Institute for International Economics, December.

De Vries, Margaret, 1986, The IMF in a Changing World, 1945-1985. (International Monetary Fund:
Washington) June 15, 1986.

Eichengreen, Barry, 2006, "China's Exchange Rate Regime: The Long and Short of It," revision of paper
for Columbia University's conference on Chinese money and finance held in New York on February 2-3.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1984, "The Yen/Dollar Agreement: Liberalizing Japanese Capital Markets," Policy
Analyses In International Economics No.9, M.I.T. Press for Institute for International Economics:
Washington, D.C..

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1993a, "Foreign Exchange Policy, Monetary Policy and Capital Market Liberalization in
Korea," in Korean-U.S. Financial Issues, Joint Korea-U.S. Academic Symposium Vol. 3, Chwee Huay Ow-
Taylor, ed., Korea Economic Institute of America, Washington, D.C., 91-107.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1993b, "Liberalization of Korea's Foreign Exchange Markets, and the Role of Trade
Relations with the United States," in Shaping a New Economic Relationship: The Republic of Korea and
the United States, Jongryn Mo and Ramon Myers, eds., Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, CA: 120-142.




                                                                                                       34
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1993, "Is Japan Creating a Yen Bloc in East Asia and the Pacific?" in Regionalism and
Rivalry: Japan and the U.S. in Pacific Asia, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Miles Kahler, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 53-85.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2006a, “On the Yuan: The Choice Between Adjustment Under a Fixed Exchange Rate and
Adjustment under a Flexible Rate,” in Understanding the Chinese Economy, edited by Gerhard Illing
(CESifo Economic Studies, Munich). NBER WP No. 11274.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2006b, “Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates: An Equilibrium Model vs. a
Disequilibrium Reality -- Comments on Caballero, Farhis and Gourinchas,” BIS Annual Research
Conference, Brunnen, Switzerland, June 19-20.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler and Luis Servén, 2000, ”Verifiability and the Vanishing Intermediate
Exchange Rate Regime,” Brookings Trade Forum 2000, edited by Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik
(Brookings Institution, Washington DC).

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1994, “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc? Exchange Rate Policies of the East
Asian Economies,” in Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange Rates and Capital Flows, Takatoshi
Ito and Anne O. Krueger, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 295-329.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1995, "Emerging Currency Blocs," The International Monetary
System: Its Institutions and its Future, Hans Genberg, ed., Springer, Berlin, 111-143.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2006, “Currency Mysteries,“ May 28.

Goldstein, Morris, 2003, “China's Exchange Rate Regime,” Testimony before the Subcommittee on
Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade, and Technology, Committee on Financial Services,
US House of Representatives, Washington, DC, October 1.

Goldstein, Morris, 2004, “Adjusting China’s Exchange Rate Policies,” High-Level Seminar, Dalian, China,
May 26-27. Working Paper 04-1, Petersen Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.

Goldstein, Morris, and Nicholas Lardy, 2003, “Two-Stage Currency Reform for China,” Wall Street
Journal, September 12.

Goldstein, Morris, and Nicholas Lardy, 2005, “China's Role in the Revived Bretton Woods System: A Case
of Mistaken Identity,” WP 05-2, Petersen Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.

Haldane, AG, and SG Hall, 1991, “Sterling’s Relationship with the Dollar and the Deutschemark: 1976-
89,” The Economic Journal, 101: 436-443.

International Monetary Fund, 2006a , “Article IV of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement: An Overview of the
Legal Framework,” Legal Department, June 28.

International Monetary Fund, 2006b, “People’s Republic of China: 2006 Article IV Consultation – Staff
Report,” IMF Country Report No. 06/394, October.

International Monetary Fund, 2006c, “Selected Decisions and Selected Documents of the IMF, Thirtieth
Issue – Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies, Legal Department, updated June 30.




                                                                                                          35
Jen, Stephen, 2005, “Chinese RMB Basket Still a Mystery,” Global Economics Forum, Morgan Stanley,
August 19.

King, Mervyn, 2006, “Through the Looking Glass – Reform of the International Institutions,” Inaugural
Distinguished Lecture, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Melbourne Centre for Financial Studies, 21
December.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2003, “To Float or to Trail: Evidence on the Impact of
Exchange Rate Regimes,” American Economic Review, 93, No. 4, Sept..

McKinnon, Ronald, 2006, “Comment” in response to “Request for Public Comments on the Report to
Congress on International and Exchange Rate Policies,” Stanford University, April

McKinnon, Ronald, and Gunther Schnabl, 2003, “The East Asian Dollar Standard, Fear of Floating, and
Original Sin,” Stanford University, September.

McKinnon, Ronald, and Gunther Schnabl, 2004, “The Return to Soft Dollar Pegging in East Asia:
Mitigating Conflicted Virtue,” International Finance 7, pp. 169-201.

Mundell, Robert, 2004, “Adjustment in China’s exchange rate regime,” remarks at Inaugural Seminar on
Foreign Exchange System,” Dalian, China, May 26-27.

Noland, Marcus, 1997, "Chasing Phantoms: The Political Economy of USTR," International Organization,
Summer.

Ohno, Kenichi, 1999, “Exchange Rate Management in Developing Asia," Working Paper No.1. (January),
Asian Development Bank Institute.

Prasad, Eswar, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “The Chinese Approach to International Capital Flows: Patterns
and Possible Explanations,” NBER Working Paper 11306. Forthcoming as a chapter in S. Edwards, ed,

Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff (2004) “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):1-48..

Roubini, Nouriel, 2007, “Why China Should Abandon Its Dollar Peg,” RGE Monitor, January .

Shah, Ajay, Achim Zeileis, and Ila Patnaik, 2005, “What is the New Chinese Currency Regime?”
Unpublished, November.

Shambaugh, Jay, 2004, “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,” Dartmouth College;
forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Snow, John, 2003, Testimony of Treasury Secretary Before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing
and Urban Affairs, October 30.

Taylor, John B., 2003, "China’s Exchange Rate Regime and its Effects on the U.S. Economy," Under
Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs’ Testimony before the Subcommittee on Domestic and
International Monetary Policy, Trade, and Technology House Committee on Financial Services, October 1.

U.S. Treasury Department, 2005, “Semiannual Report on International Economic and Exchange Rate
Policies,” November.


                                                                                                       36
U.S. Treasury Department, 2006, “Semiannual Report on International Economic and Exchange Rate
Policies,” May.

Yamazaki, Kazuo, 2006, “Inside the Currency Basket,” Columbia University and Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and
Banking Corp., December.

Zhou, Xiaochuan, 2005, Governor’s speech at the opening of the Shanghai headquarters of the People’s
Bank of China (in Chinese), www.hexun.com, August 10 (accessed 8/25/05). Speech (in English) on
PBoC website: http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english//detail.asp?col=6500&ID=82.




                                                                                                       37
                      Tables for Part II:
    Explaining findings of Treasury Department biannual
     Report to Congress on International Economics and
                    Exchange Rate Policy


                 Table 1: Different samples using pooled OLS
                                       Excluding
                                       major oil      15 Asian 8 named in
                        Full sample exporters1 economies2       reports3
US bilateral goods      -0.9185*** -0.9245*** -0.9850*** -0.6928 ***
trade balance with       0.0603        0.0655         0.1548   0.2045
partner country

Partner country’s         0.0034***     0.0144***      0.0284***    0.0114
Current account/GDP       0.0010        0.0021         0.0069       0.0111
ratio

Partner’s Exchange       -0.1271*** -0.1829*** -0.2322**           -0.6939 ***
rate relative to PPP      0.0253     0.0291     0.1115              0.1569

Ratio of partner          0.0070***     0.0032        -0.0117      -0.0214 *
country’s change in       0.0027        0.0034         0.0091       0.0124
reserves/GDP

US unemployment rate      0.0167*       0.0224**       0.0826**     0.0873
                          0.0089        0.0102         0.0374       0.0645
Constant                  0.0236        0.0538        -0.1555       0.5366
                          0.0525        0.0596         0.2129       0.3876
R squared                 0.1273        0.1546         0.1112       0.1059

Observations              1946          1667           458            241

1
  Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United
Arab Emirates and Venezuela.
2
  Includes Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, South
Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan,
Province of China and Thailand.
3
  Includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Russia, Singapore
and Taiwan, Province of China.




                                                                            38
                         Table 2: Full sample including US domestic variables

US bilateral goods     -0.9185 ***   -0.9090 ***    -0.9100 ***       -0.9104 ***       -0.9186       ***     -0.9124 ***
trade balance with      0.0603        0.0602         0.0602            0.0602            0.0604                0.0602
partner country
Partner country’s       0.0034 ***    0.0032 ***        0.0032 ***        0.0032 ***        0.0034    ***     0.0033 ***
Current                 0.0010        0.0010            0.0010            0.0010            0.0010            0.0010
account/GDP ratio
Partner’s Exchange     -0.1271 ***   -0.1245 ***    -0.1241 ***       -0.1244 ***       -0.1274       ***     -0.1251 ***
rate relative to PPP    0.0253        0.0252         0.0252            0.0252            0.0253                0.0252
Ratio of partner        0.0070 ***    0.0077 ***        0.0076 ***        0.0075 ***        0.0070    ***     0.0072 ***
country’s change in     0.0027        0.0027            0.0027            0.0027            0.0027            0.0027
reserves/GDP
US unemployment         0.0167 *                                                            0.0160    *
rate                    0.0089                                                              0.0090

US GDP growth                         0.0056
                                      0.0060
Presidential                                            0.0112                                                -0.0922
election year                                           0.0189                                                 0.0912
US unemployment                                                           0.0027            0.0019            0.0183
rate interacted                                                           0.0033            0.0033            0.0158
with election year

Constant                0.0236        0.0993 ***        0.1122 ***     0.1112 ***           0.0247            0.1131 ***
                        0.0525        0.0260            0.0203         0.0203               0.0525            0.0204
R squared               0.1273        0.1261            0.1259         0.1260               0.1275            0.1265

Observations            1946          1946           1946             1946                  1946              1946




                Table 3: Full sample using different denominators for reserves variable
                                                                                               Percentage
                                         Ratio to $US Ratio to GDP                  Ratio to    change in
                                             GDP         (PPP)                      Imports      reserves
        US bilateral goods trade balance -0.9185 *** -0.9381 ***                   -0.9291 *** -0.9331 ***
        with partner country               0.0603       0.0601                     0.0609            0.0602
        Partner country’s Current              0.0034 ***        0.0027 **         0.0037 ***        0.0038 ***
        account/GDP ratio1                     0.0010            0.0012            0.0010            0.0010
        Partner’s Exchange rate relative     -0.1271 ***      -0.1373 ***          -0.1316 *** -0.1327 ***
        to PPP                                 0.0253            0.0254            0.0255            0.0252
        Partner country’s change in            0.0070 ***        0.0104 ***        0.0004            0.0115
        reserves                               0.0027            0.0037            0.0007            0.0179
                                               0.0167 *          0.0159 *          0.0186 **         0.0188 **
        US unemployment rate
                                               0.0089            0.0089            0.0089            0.0089
                                               0.0236            0.0346            0.0220            0.0223
        Constant
                                               0.0525            0.0526            0.0526            0.0526
        R squared                              0.1273            0.1242            0.1244            0.1244
        Observations                          1946           1946           1946           1946
        1
          Also uses GDP(PPP) in denominator for current account when using GDP(PPP) for reserves.




                                                                                                                  39
                                                  Table 4: Different samples using panel estimators
                                 Full sample        Excluding major oil exporters1             15 Asian economies2          8 named in reports3
                             Fixed        Random         Fixed                                  Fixed       Random             Fixed        Random
                            Effects        Effects      Effects   Random Effects               Effects       Effects          Effects        Effects
US bilateral goods       -0.1218         -0.2453 *** -0.1108        -0.2451 **              -0.1654        -0.2467         -0.1961        -0.2559
trade balance with        0.0965          0.0907      0.1098         0.1025                  0.2385         0.2263          0.3309         0.3158

partner country
Partner country’s         0.0012            0.0012        0.0075 ***        0.0071    ***    0.0256 ***       0.0241 ***    0.0367    ***    0.0338 ***
Current account/          0.0008            0.0008        0.0022            0.0021           0.0067           0.0065        0.0111           0.0109

GDP ratio
Partner’s Exchange        0.0555            0.0145        0.1191 *          0.0464           0.5408 *         0.3452        0.5249           0.2266
Rate relative to          0.0563            0.0490        0.0696            0.0584           0.2961           0.2407        0.4229           0.3722
PPP
Ratio of partner    -0.0063 ***            -0.0059 ***    -0.0107 ***      -0.0101    ***   -0.0225 ***      -0.0228 ***   -0.0274    **    -0.0279 ***
country’s change in 0.0021                  0.0021         0.0027           0.0027           0.0072           0.0072        0.0106           0.0105
reserves to GDP
US unemployment           0.0077            0.0094        0.0121            0.0144    *      0.0617 **        0.0633 **     0.1018    *      0.1023 *
Rate                      0.0064            0.0064        0.0074            0.0074           0.0281           0.0281        0.0527           0.0525

Constant                  0.0022           0.0144         -0.0459          -0.0158          -0.2905          -0.2141       -0.4006          -0.2063
                          0.0507           0.0572          0.0598           0.0659           0.2203           0.2473        0.4376           0.5085
R squared                 0.0080           0.0603          0.0075           0.0541           0.0315           0.0454        0.0116           0.0003

Hausman test                               0.0000                           0.0000                            0.3620                         0.7433
            2
(prob > χ )
Observations              1946             1946           1667              1667             458              458             241             241
1
 Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Venezuela.
2
 Includes Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan,
Province of China, and Thailand.
3
    Includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Russia, Singapore and Taiwan, Province of China.




                                                                                                                                                           40
   Explaining the Treasury Department’s biannual Report to Congress on
       International Economics and Exchange Rate Policy, continued


                          Table 5: Avoidance of naming a country in isolation

US bilateral goods trade balance    -0.9185 ***   -1.1791 ***   -0.5454 ***   -0.8585 ***   0.1369
with partner country                 0.0603        0.0877        0.0612        0.0612       0.1078
Partner country’s Current            0.0034 ***   0.0033 ***    0.0033 ***    0.0034 ***    0.0034 ***
account/GDP ratio                    0.0010       0.0010        0.0009        0.0010        0.0009
Partner’s Exchange rate relative    -0.1271 ***   -0.1272 ***   -0.1275 ***   -0.1266 ***   -0.1266 ***
to PPP                               0.0253        0.0252        0.0237        0.0251        0.0232
Ratio of partner country’s           0.0070 ***   0.0067 **     0.0075 ***    0.0059 **     0.0064 **
change in reserves to GDP            0.0027       0.0027        0.0025        0.0027        0.0025

US unemployment rate                 0.0167 *      0.0194 **    0.0126        0.0164 *      0.0060
                                     0.0089        0.0089       0.0084        0.0088        0.0082
Prediction ranked first                           -0.4079 ***                               0.7331 ***
                                                   0.1001                                   0.1111
Prediction ranked second                                        1.1211 ***                  1.4441 ***
                                                                0.0696                      0.0798
                                                                              0.3494 ***    0.6200 ***
Prediction ranked third
                                                                              0.0698        0.0689

Constant                             0.0236       0.0039        0.0458        0.0239        0.0881 *
                                     0.0525       0.0525        0.0493        0.0522        0.0486
R squared                            0.1273       0.1347        0.2302        0.1384        0.2663

Observations                         1946         1946          1946          1946          1946




                                                                                                     41
    Table 6: Probabilities for April 2006, as predicted by Probit model (dichotomous dependent variable)
                                                                                                 Probability policy changes
                                             Probability of being reported as                         recommended or
                                              “manipulating” exchange rate                         conducting discussions
                                                              Excluding major oil                                Excluding major
                                            Full sample            exporters1                 Full sample          oil exporters1
US bilateral goods trade balance               -1.7096 ***               -1.8011 ***              -2.6135 ***          -2.4896 ***
with partner country                            0.4458                   0.4864                    0.2921               0.2940
Partner country’s Current                       0.0628 ***               0.1310 ***                0.0362 ***           0.0729 ***
account/GDP ratio                               0.0183                   0.0303                    0.0105               0.0144
Partner’s Exchange rate relative               -0.9714 **                -1.2594 ***              -0.7656 ***          -0.8916 ***
to PPP                                          0.4016                   0.4407                    0.2004               0.2045
Ratio of partner country’s change              -0.0206                   -0.0703 *                 0.0184               0.0018
in reserves to GDP                              0.0301                   0.0366                    0.0173               0.0194
                                                0.4810 ***               0.6189 ***                0.1919 ***           0.2227 ***
US unemployment rate
                                                0.1407                   0.1654                    0.0663               0.0707
                                               -5.1493 ***               -5.8606 ***              -2.8380 ***          -2.8525 ***
Constant
                                                0.9491                   1.0998                    0.4056               0.4258
Pseudo R squared                                0.2402                   0.3159                    0.2192               0.2497
Observations                                      1946                      1667                     1946                   1667


          Rank for April 2006                            Prob.                    Prob.                     Prob.                  Prob.
                    1                  China             0.44    China             0.40   China             0.99    China          0.99
                    2                  Saudi Arabia 0.08         Singapore         0.18   Japan             0.17    Malaysia       0.24
                    3                  Kuwait            0.07    Gabon             0.01   Malaysia          0.16    Singapore      0.21
                    4                  Algeria           0.02    Malaysia          0.01   Saudi Arabia 0.16         Japan          0.18
                    5                  Singapore         0.01    Trinidad          0.01   Canada            0.15    Canada         0.14
                                                                 Hong Kong
                    6                  Venezuela         0.01    SAR               0.00   Algeria           0.13    Trinidad       0.13
                    7                  Malaysia          0.01    Japan             0.00   Nigeria           0.10    Germany        0.08
                    8                  Russia            0.01    Canada            0.00   Venezuela         0.09    Gabon       0.06
                                                                                                                    Taiwan,
                                                                                                                    Province of
                    9                  Japan             0.00    Switzerland       0.00   Kuwait            0.08    China       0.05
                   10                  Canada            0.00    Germany           0.00   Russia            0.08    Egypt          0.04

1
    Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Venezuela.




                                                                                                                                 42
           Explaining the Treasury Department’s biannual Report to Congress on
           International Economics and Exchange Rate Policy (updated 5/6/2006)


    Table 7: Countries with highest probabilities over 1988-2006 (dichotomous dependent variable)

         Probability of being reported as “manipulating” exchange            Probability policy changes recommended or
                                    rate                                                conducting discussions
                                          Excluding major oil                                          Excluding major oil
                Full sample                   exporters1                     Full sample                    exporters1
Rank                    Report Prob.                  Report Prob.                  Report Prob.                 Report Prob.
    1     China         04/06 0.44     China          04/06 0.40     China          04/06 0.99     China          04/06 0.99
    2     Nigeria       12/92 0.16     Singapore      10/03 0.35     Japan          10/88 0.45     Japan          10/88 0.42
    3     Kuwait        04/90 0.12     Argentina      05/03 0.16     Canada         05/02 0.18     Singapore      04/04 0.40
                                                                                                   Taiwan,
                                                                                                   Province of
    4     Japan         12/92 0.08     Malaysia       10/03 0.15     Nigeria        05/05 0.17     China          10/88 0.25
    5     Saudi Arabia 04/06 0.08      Japan          12/92 0.12     Malaysia       05/05 0.17     Malaysia       10/03 0.25
    6     UAE           05/91 0.07     Colombia       12/92 0.10     Venezuela      05/91 0.17     Canada         05/02 0.21
    7     Algeria       12/92 0.06     Gabon          05/02 0.10     Kuwait         04/90 0.16     Argentina      10/03 0.16
    8     Russia        12/92 0.06     South Africa   12/92 0.09     Saudi Arabia 04/06 0.16       Thailand       10/03 0.15
                                                                     Taiwan,
                                                                     Province of
    9     Colombia      12/92 0.06     Trinidad       12/92 0.08     China        10/88 0.15       Egypt          12/92 0.14
    10    Venezuela     05/91 0.06     Egypt          12/92 0.08     Algeria        04/06 0.13     Gabon          06/01 0.14

1
    Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Venezuela.




                                                                                                                       43
Table 8: Ordered Probit Results
                                                         (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                                                         full             no_oil          asian15         asian8
US bilateral goods trade                                 -2.695***        -2.695***       -1.850**        -1.406*
balance with partner country                             (0.546)          (0.618)         (0.853)         (0.766)
(tb)
                                                         0.063***         0.121***        0.093**         0.060
Partner country’s Current
                                                         (0.021)          (0.032)         (0.038)         (0.038)
account/GDP ratio (ca)
                                                         -0.824*          -1.071**        -0.546          -0.925
Partner’s Exchange               rate
                                                         (0.428)          (0.468)         (0.763)         (0.698)
relative to PPP (ppp)
                                                         0.027            -0.005          -0.021          -0.022
Partner country’s change in
                                                         (0.017)          (0.023)         (0.028)         (0.029)
reserves/GDP ratio (res)
Period Dummies                                           Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Observations                                             2009             1721            473             281
Pseudo R2                                                0.24             0.29            0.17            0.13

Notes:
a) Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by country)
b) * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
(1) Using all the 63 countries;
(2) Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Venezuela;
(3) Includes Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Province of China and Thailand;
(4) Includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Russia, Singapore and Taiwan, Province of China.




                                                                                                                        44
Table 9a: Ordered Probit Results, Adding Previous Report’s Findings

                                 (1)                          (2)               (3)              (4)
                                 full                         no_oil            asian15          asian8
                                 -0.960***                    -1.213***         -0.810***
US bilateral goods trade balance
                                 (0.341)                      (0.294)           (0.269)
with partner country (tb)
                                                                                                     not
                                            0.050***          0.082***          0.063**           converged
Partner country’s Current
                                            (0.016)           (0.030)           (0.031)
account/GDP ratio (ca)
                                            -0.573***         -0.686***         -0.500*
Partner’s Exchange rate relative
                                            (0.222)           (0.227)           (0.265)
to PPP (ppp)
                                            0.069***          0.056***          0.041**
Partner country’s change in
                                            (0.017)           (0.019)           (0.021)
reserves/GDP ratio (res)
Lastpos                                     4.012***          4.025***          3.618***
                                            (0.352)           (0.389)           (0.353)

Period Dummies                              Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                                2009              1721              473
Pseudo R2                                   0.70              0.71              0.61
Notes:
a) Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by country).
b) * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

(1) Using all the 63 countries;
(2) Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Venezuela;
(3) Includes Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Province of China and Thailand;
(4) Includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Russia, Singapore and Taiwan, Province of China;
(5) “lastpos” is a dummy which equals to one if a country was investigated during last report.




                                                                                                                        45
Table 9b: Ordered Probit Results, Adding More Interaction Terms

                                 (1)                   (2)            (3)             (4)
                                 full                  no_oil         asian15         asian8
US bilateral goods trade balance -3.479***             -3.742***      -3.280***       -2.797**
with partner country (tb)        (0.898)               (1.118)        (1.183)         (1.272)

Partner   country’s    Current 0.076***                0.134***       0.124**         0.102*
account/GDP ratio (ca)         (0.022)                 (0.051)        (0.051)         (0.053)

Partner’s Exchange rate relative -1.500***             -1.900***      -1.831***       -1.876***
to PPP (ppp)                     (0.502)               (0.671)        (0.601)         (0.599)

Partner country’s change in 0.109***                   0.088***       0.083***        0.070***
reserves/GDP ratio (res)    (0.023)                    (0.021)        (0.022)         (0.025)

lastpos                                5.209***        5.039***       4.808***        4.402***
                                       (0.428)         (0.496)        (0.564)         (0.687)

lastpos*tb                             3.644***        3.667***       3.311***        2.904**
                                       (0.959)         (1.100)        (1.213)         (1.300)

lastpos*ca                             -0.094***       -0.140***      -0.139***       -0.118***
                                       (0.019)         (0.037)        (0.042)         (0.046)

lastpos*ppp                            0.444           0.851          0.803           0.802
                                       (0.572)         (0.723)        (0.651)         (0.689)

lastpos*res                            -0.087***       -0.063***      -0.059***       -0.050**
                                       (0.026)         (0.019)        (0.018)         (0.021)

Period Dummies                         Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                           2009            1721           473             281
Pseudo R2                              0.70            0.71           0.61            0.55

Notes:
a) Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered by country)
b) * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
(1) Using all the 63 countries;
(2) Excludes Algeria, Kuwait, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and
Venezuela;
(3) Includes Bangladesh, China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Province of China and Thailand;
(4) Includes China, Hong Kong SAR, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Russia, Singapore and Taiwan, Province
of China;
(5) “lastpos” is a dummy which equals to one if a country was investigated during last report.




                                                                                                       46
Table 10: In-sample prediction for the 8 Asian countries: two reports at the end of
sample


                                     Estimated Probability Full        Estimated Probability
                          Report              Sample                        8 Asian Countries
  Country      Period
                           (RT)        Table 14, Column (1),           Table 14, Column (4)
                                   RT=0    RT=1    RT=2     RT=3    RT=0     RT=1     RT=2      RT=3
                Nov
                2005
                            2      0.109   0.188    0.634   0.068   0.068     0.182   0.684     0.066
   China
                May
                2006
                            2      0.020   0.068    0.660   0.251   0.005     0.035   0.627     0.332
                Nov
Hong Kong,      2005
                            0      1.000   0.000    0.000   0.000   0.998     0.002   0.000     0.000

   SAR          May
                2006
                            0      0.999   0.001    0.000   0.000   0.974     0.023   0.003     0.000
                Nov
                2005
                            0      0.998   0.002    0.000   0.000   0.996     0.004   0.000     0.000
   Japan
                May
                2006
                            0      0.970   0.025    0.005   0.000   0.923     0.065   0.013     0.000
                Nov
   South        2005
                            0      1.000   0.000    0.000   0.000   0.999     0.001   0.000     0.000

   Korea        May
                2006
                            0      0.999   0.001    0.000   0.000   0.989     0.010   0.001     0.000
                Nov
                2005
                            2      0.115   0.193    0.627   0.064   0.083     0.202   0.662     0.054
 Malaysia
                May
                2006
                            2      0.038   0.103    0.686   0.173   0.013     0.066   0.699     0.222
                Nov
                2005
                            0      0.983   0.014    0.002   0.000   0.924     0.063   0.012     0.000
  Russia
                May
                2006
                            2      0.932   0.053    0.014   0.000   0.686     0.217   0.096     0.000
                Nov
                2005
                            0      0.948   0.042    0.010   0.000   0.755     0.179   0.066     0.000
 Singapore
                May
                2006
                            0      0.960   0.033    0.007   0.000   0.586     0.263   0.150     0.001
                Nov
  Taiwan                    0      0.998   0.001    0.000   0.000   0.991     0.008   0.001     0.000
                2005
  Prov. of
                May
                2006
                            0      0.993   0.006    0.001   0.000   0.934     0.056   0.010     0.000
   China


Notes:
RT = 0: not investigated
RT = 1: examined as potential manipulator
RT = 2: policy changes recommended/conducting discussions
RT = 3: manipulating exchange rate




                                                                                                        47
DATA APPENDIX for Part 2

Treasury Department Report to Congress on International Economic and Exchange Rate
Policy: 31 reports have been released since 1988. Recent reports are available on the Treasury
website while older reports were obtained from the American Statistics Index (ASI) Microfiche
Library held in the Government Documents section of the Lamont Library at Harvard. They are
catalogued under the number 8002-14 for each year.

We classify as zero countries that are not identified in the Treasury reports as having been examined
at all. Potential exchange rate manipulators can be broken into three categories. (1) “economies were
closely examined as potential exchange rate manipulators if they had significant global current
account surpluses and bilateral surpluses with the United States and maintained a fixed or actively
managed exchange rate system during the period of this report” (this is the language used in the
reports from 1999-2001). For some of these economies, (2) Treasury recommends policy changes or
indicates that it has commenced discussions with their governments. Finally, (3) Treasury can
escalate to officially designating an economy as a currency “manipulator”. These categories have
been applied to eight economies since publication of the reports commenced in 1988: China, Taiwan,
Province of China, South Korea, Singapore, Hong Kong SAR, Malaysia, Japan and Russia. The data
are included in the following table:

                     Economies Examined as Potential Currency Manipulators
                       1 = examined as potential manipulator
                       2 = policy changes recommended/conducting discussions
                       3 = "manipulating" exchange rate

                     Taiwan
Date of              Prov of                                   Hong Kong
release      China    China     South Korea    Singapore          SAR      Malaysia    Japan     Russia
 Oct 1988      0        3            3              2              2           0         0         0

 Apr 1989      0        3            3              0              0           0         0         0

 Oct 1989      0        2            3              0              0           0         0         0

 Apr 1990      0        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Nov 1990      2        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 May 1991      2        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Nov 1991      2        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 May 1992      3        3            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Dec 1992      3        3            2              0              0           0         0         0

 May 1993      3        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Nov 1993      3        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

  Jul 1994     3        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Jan 1995      2        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Aug 1995      2        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Dec 1995      2        2            2              0              0           0         0         0

 Aug 1996      1        1            0              1              0           0         0         0




                                                                                                  48
 Feb 1997       2        1             0              1            0             0           0         0

 Jan 1999       1        1             0              1            0             2           0         0

 Sep 1999       1        1             1              1            0             1           0         0

 Mar 2000       1        1             1              0            0             1           0         0

 Jan 2001       2        2             2              0            0             2           0         0

 Jun 2001       2        2             2              0            0             2           0         1

 Oct 2001       1        1             1              0            0             1           0         1

 May 2002       0        0             0              0            0             0           0         0

 Oct 2002       0        0             0              0            0             0           0         0

 May 2003       0        0             0              0            0             0           0         0

 Oct 2003       2        0             0              0            0             0           2         0

 Apr 2004       2        0             0              0            0             0           2         0

 Dec 2004       2        0             0              0            0             0           2         0

 May 2005       2        0             0              0            0             2           0         0

 Nov 2005       2        0             0              0            0             2           0         0




In the Probit specification in Table 6, the limited dependent variable is defined in two ways. In the
first two columns of the table, the dependent variable is whether the economy has been named as an
exchange rate manipulator (mapping from the classification in the data appendix table: value of 0 if 0,
1 or 2; value of 1 if 3). In the last two columns of the table, the dependent variable is whether
Treasury has at least recommended policy changes or is conducting discussions with the government
(value of 0 if 0 or 1; value of 1 if 2 or 3). The ranks for April 2006 are based on the predicted values
using data for the period up to December 2005. The probability next to each ranked country refers to
the probability of a positive outcome in April 2006. Table 7 reports that China is generally a higher
probability target than any other country.

Explanatory variables:

The 63 countries/economies included in the dataset are: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Germany, Finland, France, Gabon, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica,
Japan, Korea, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Province of China, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom and Venezuela.

The data are for the period reviewed by a particular report rather than the release date of the report to
acknowledge the lags in real time data release. For example, the November 2005 report covers the
first half of 2005, so the data corresponding to this report are for the period ending June 2005.

US bilateral goods trade balance with partner country: US goods exports minus US goods
imports by country over 12 months as a ratio to US GDP. The trade data are obtained from the U.S.



                                                                                                      49
Census Bureau and the GDP data from Global Financial Data. The series for Russia includes data for
the USSR prior to 1993.
Partner country’s current account: The current account (surplus is positive) of the partner country
over 12 months as a ratio to the partner country’s GDP. The Current account data was obtained from
the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (IFS) Database. Where data were unavailable in the IFS,
data from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) Database were used. The series for Russia
prior to 1992 is a Commonwealth of Independent States and Mongolia series from the WEO
Database.

Partner’s Exchange rate relative to PPP: The PPP conversion rate to official exchange rate ratio, so
a number less than 1 reflects undervaluation relative to PPP. The PPP conversion rate data were
obtained from the WEO Database. The national currency per US dollar official exchange rate were
obtained from the IFS Database. The official exchange rate for Taiwan, Province of China was
obtained from Global Financial Data. Data for Argentina (prior to 1991), Brazil (prior to 1996),
Ecuador (prior to 2005) and Peru (prior to 1993) are the PPP conversion factor to official exchange
rate ratio from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) Database.

Partner country’s change in reserves: The 12 month change in the stock of foreign exchange
reserves of the partner country. The foreign exchange reserves data were obtained from the IFS
Database. Data for Taiwan, Province of China are for total reserves minus gold, also from the IFS
database. Data for Russia prior to 1992 are for the USSR from BIS Annual Reports 1989-1994. Data
for Hong Kong SAR are unavailable prior to 1990.

Partner country’s GDP and GDP (PPP): The data were obtained from the WEO Database. The
series for Russia prior to 1992 is a Commonwealth of Independent States and Mongolia series from
the WEO database.

Partner country’s imports: Imports C.I.F. data were obtained from the IFS database. The series for
Russia prior to 1992 is a USSR/Commonwealth of Independent States merchandise imports series
from the WTO.

US unemployment rate: data obtained from BLS.

US GDP growth: Year ended growth in US real GDP. Data obtained from BEA.

Presidential election year: A dummy variable where the two reports prior to a Presidential Election
receive a 1 while other reports receive a zero.




                                                                                                 50
                                                             Figures and Tables for Part 3:
                                              Estimating the Implicit Weights in the Chinese RMB Basket

Figure 3: Fluctuations in CNY/USD exchange rate

                                                    Changes in CNY per USD over Time: 07/22/05-1/8/2007
                    .002.004
   ln(cny)-ln(cny[_n-1])
       0                -.002




                                01 Jul 05                        01 Jan 06                 01 Jul 06         01 Jan 07
                                                                                date




Figure 4: Variability in Yuan/Dollar Exchange Rate

                                                             Std. Dev. of Changes in CNY/USD
                                                                 Every 20 days over 07/01/05-01/08/07
                                       .001
       Std. Dev. of Changes in CNY/USD
   .0002    .0004     .0006    .0008




                                              0              5                   10                     15       20
                                                                                Period




                                                                                                                      51
Figure 5: Cumulative Complaints by US Treasury and other Government Officials

   Time plots of cumulative US Treasury and Non-Treasury Complaints
  20
  15
  10
  5
  0




  01 Jul 05                    01 Jan 06              01 Jul 06                      01 Jan 07
                                               date

              cumulative non-treasury report            cumulative treasury report




                                                                                          52
                   Table 11: Estimating the Implicit Basket Weights
               Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency = SDR)

                              (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                             CNY          JPY          HKD         SGD         MYR         KRW
           US Dollar      0.904**      -0.406**     0.970**     0.335**     0.507**     -0.209**
                          (0.021)      (0.126)      (0.008)     (0.044)     (0.055)     (0.096)
              Euro        -0.006       0.268**      -0.008      0.123**     -0.039      -0.111
                          (0.014)      (0.081)      (0.005)     (0.048)     (0.059)     (0.100)
         Japanese Yen     0.008                     0.010**     0.162**     0.045       0.041
                          (0.009)                   (0.003)     (0.020)     (0.027)     (0.046)
          Korean Won      0.002        0.052        0.004       0.064**     0.033
                          (0.009)      (0.055)      (0.004)     (0.025)     (0.031)
        Singapore Dollar -0.018        0.913**      0.009                   0.004       0.305**
                          (0.021)      (0.113)      (0.008)                 (0.065)     (0.103)
         British Pound    -0.004       0.172**      0.005       -0.003      0.030       -0.146**
                          (0.011)      (0.064)      (0.004)     (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.059)
        Malaysia Ringgit 0.053**       0.079        0.001       0.036                   0.125
                          (0.015)      (0.091)      (0.006)     (0.041)                 (0.086)
          Russia Ruble    -0.018       0.000        -0.002
                          (0.021)      (0.128)      (0.008)
        Australian Dollar -0.003       0.014        -0.002      0.075**     -0.000      0.060
                          (0.008)      (0.048)      (0.003)     (0.018)     (0.023)     (0.039)
         Thailand Baht    0.006        0.011        0.003       0.151**     -0.022
                          (0.010)      (0.058)      (0.004)     (0.023)     (0.030)
        Canadian Dollar 0.003          -0.057       0.003
                          (0.008)      (0.045)      (0.003)
          Swiss Franc                                           -0.044      -0.034      0.078
                                                                (0.045)     (0.056)     (0.094)
         Taiwan Dollar                                          0.051       0.141**     0.496**
                                                                (0.036)     (0.044)     (0.070)
        Philippines Peso                                                    0.095**     0.034
                                                                            (0.017)     (0.030)
         Indian Rupee                                           0.034       0.123**
                                                                (0.028)     (0.034)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                         0.039       -0.006
                                                                (0.032)     (0.039)
           Constant        0.00009**   -0.00048**   -0.00001    0.00012     0.00016*    0.00020
                           (0.00003)   (0.00017)    (0.00001)   (0.00007)   (0.00009)   (0.00015)
         Observations      382         382          382         382         382         382
          Root MSE         0.00055     0.00331      0.00021     0.00139     0.00171     0.0029
          R-squared        0.95        0.54         0.99        0.76        0.62        0.32

Notes: 1). Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2). Change in the log foreign exchange value of the target currency is regressed
       on changes in the log foreign exchange values of other currencies;
       3). Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.


                                                                                                    53
      Table 12: First Subperiod (07/22 – 10/31/2005, numeraire currency = SDR)

                             (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
                            CNY       JPY       HKD       SGD       MYR        KRW
             US Dollar     0.997**    -0.208   1.002**   0.468**   0.964**    0.559*
                           (0.034)   (0.348)   (0.030)   (0.149)   (0.127)    (0.294)
               Euro         -0.008     0.053    -0.013     0.085    -0.057     0.172
                           (0.015)   (0.154)   (0.013)   (0.111)   (0.126)    (0.234)
         Japanese Yen        0.010               0.015     0.088    -0.058     0.179
                           (0.013)             (0.011)   (0.057)   (0.065)    (0.120)
         Korean Won         -0.001   0.255**     0.016    -0.001    -0.050
                           (0.013)   (0.127)   (0.011)   (0.061)   (0.068)
       Singapore Dollar     -0.043   0.547*      0.005              -0.098     -0.157
                           (0.028)   (0.282)   (0.025)             (0.146)    (0.245)
         British Pound      -0.007   0.415**     0.005   -0.028      0.042    -0.242*
                           (0.013)   (0.127)   (0.012)   (0.063)   (0.071)    (0.128)
       Malaysia Ringgit     -0.015    -0.251    -0.021   -0.077                -0.186
                           (0.026)   (0.261)   (0.023)   (0.117)              (0.240)
         Russia Ruble        0.005     0.055    -0.029
                           (0.027)   (0.276)   (0.024)
       Australian Dollar    0.012     -0.014    -0.004    0.005    -0.008     0.212**
                           (0.010)   (0.107)   (0.009)   (0.044)   (0.049)    (0.086)
         Thailand Baht      0.010      0.310    -0.011   0.365**    0.119
                           (0.019)   (0.192)   (0.017)   (0.087)   (0.112)
        Canadian Dollar     -0.011     0.003    -0.002
                           (0.008)   (0.082)   (0.007)
         Swiss Franc                                      0.111      0.029     -0.048
                                                         (0.110)    (0.127)   (0.234)
         Taiwan Dollar                                    0.084      0.013   0.386**
                                                         (0.089)    (0.100)   (0.169)
        Philippines Peso                                             0.005     0.012
                                                                    (0.023)   (0.042)
         Indian Rupee                                      -0.092    0.069
                                                          (0.079)   (0.090)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                    0.087    -0.066
                                                          (0.081)   (0.091)
            constant     0.00005   -0.00058 0.00004    -0.00017 -0.00007 0.00028
                         (0.00003) (0.00035) (0.00003) (0.00017) (0.00020) (0.00034)
         Observations         72        72        72         72        72        72
          Root MSE         0.00027   0.00276   0.00024   0.00124   0.00138   0.00262
           R-squared         0.99      0.65      0.99       0.81      0.83      0.46

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         54
   Table 13: Second Subperiod (11/1/2005 – 1/31/2006, numeraire currency = SDR)

                               (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)
                              CNY         JPY       HKD         SGD       MYR        KRW
             US Dollar      0.968**      -1.056    0.965**    0.634**    0.794**    -0.718
                            (0.031)     (0.634)    (0.016)    (0.178)    (0.084)    (0.473)
               Euro          -0.006     0.653**      0.006     0.048       0.048     0.123
                            (0.011)     (0.212)    (0.006)    (0.115)    (0.079)    (0.271)
         Japanese Yen        -0.008                  0.004    0.098**     0.060*     0.042
                            (0.006)                (0.003)    (0.043)    (0.031)    (0.109)
         Korean Won         0.019**       0.054     -0.006     0.017       0.003
                            (0.007)     (0.145)    (0.004)    (0.056)    (0.038)
       Singapore Dollar      -0.005     0.937**    0.021*                 -0.084      0.291
                            (0.021)     (0.415)    (0.011)               (0.095)    (0.329)
         British Pound        0.010      -0.011     -0.007      0.024    0.104**     -0.253
                            (0.009)     (0.186)    (0.005)     (0.063)   (0.041)    (0.151)
       Malaysia Ringgit       0.032       0.904      0.022     -0.135                 0.464
                            (0.028)     (0.574)    (0.015)     (0.198)              (0.449)
         Russia Ruble        -0.016      -0.171     -0.003
                            (0.013)     (0.276)    (0.007)
       Australian Dollar     -0.006      -0.111     -0.004    0.102**     0.026      0.119
                            (0.007)     (0.154)    (0.004)    (0.046)    (0.033)    (0.116)
         Thailand Baht       -0.014      -0.083      0.000    0.181**    0.162**
                            (0.012)     (0.241)    (0.006)    (0.076)    (0.050)
        Canadian Dollar       0.005      -0.179     -0.001
                            (0.008)     (0.156)    (0.004)
          Swiss Franc                                           -0.019   -0.182**   -0.074
                                                               (0.126)    (0.083)   (0.276)
         Taiwan Dollar                                          -0.035     0.070   0.760**
                                                               (0.083)    (0.056)   (0.164)
        Philippines Peso                                                   0.036    -0.011
                                                                          (0.024)   (0.088)
         Indian Rupee                                            -0.002    0.056
                                                                (0.052)   (0.035)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                          0.024    -0.055
                                                                (0.077)   (0.053)
             Constant      0.00004     -0.00077 -0.00002     0.00052** -0.00008 0.00036
                           (0.00003)   (0.00060) (0.00002)   (0.00018) (0.00013) (0.00048)
         Observations           66          66        66           66       66        66
          Root MSE            0.0002     0.00415    0.0001     0.00133   0.00091   0.00333
          R-squared            1.00        0.56      1.00         0.82     0.93      0.42

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                              55
     Table 14: Third Subperiod (2/1/2006 – 4/28/2006, numeraire currency = SDR)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD        SGD       MYR       KRW
             US Dollar     0.695**    -0.589    0.975**      0.259   0.563**   -0.523
                            (0.050)   (0.544)    (0.018)   (0.176)   (0.079)   (0.453)
               Euro        -0.049**   -0.015    -0.018**    -0.005     0.027   -0.127
                            (0.023)   (0.248)    (0.008)   (0.100)   (0.059)   (0.238)
         Japanese Yen        -0.017                0.001   0.135**    -0.013   -0.039
                            (0.013)              (0.004)   (0.041)   (0.026)   (0.109)
         Korean Won        0.033**     0.026      -0.003   0.113**    -0.008
                            (0.016)   (0.171)    (0.006)   (0.055)   (0.034)
       Singapore Dollar     -0.065*   1.212**      0.021               0.118   0.629*
                            (0.037)   (0.361)    (0.013)             (0.081)   (0.318)
         British Pound        0.012   0.336*    0.017**    -0.145*    -0.031   -0.159
                            (0.018)   (0.191)    (0.006)   (0.078)   (0.048)   (0.191)
       Malaysia Ringgit    0.239**     0.009      -0.008    0.387*              0.078
                            (0.058)   (0.636)    (0.021)   (0.227)             (0.563)
         Russia Ruble      0.126**     0.304     -0.003
                            (0.040)   (0.437)    (0.014)
       Australian Dollar     -0.008    0.034       0.000    0.012     0.024     0.029
                            (0.012)   (0.133)    (0.004)   (0.040)   (0.023)   (0.096)
         Thailand Baht     0.047**     0.122      0.007    0.106*    -0.025
                            (0.016)   (0.173)    (0.006)   (0.058)   (0.035)
        Canadian Dollar      -0.005    -0.280      0.005
                            (0.016)   (0.168)    (0.006)
         Swiss Franc                                        0.170    -0.024     0.046
                                                           (0.104)  (0.063)    (0.250)
         Taiwan Dollar                                     0.193*     0.064    0.426*
                                                           (0.096)  (0.058)    (0.231)
        Philippines Peso                                            0.059**     0.140
                                                                    (0.028)    (0.116)
         Indian Rupee                                      -0.094     0.039
                                                          (0.065)   (0.040)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                    -0.085   0.134**
                                                          (0.112)   (0.063)
            Constant     -0.00008 -0.00027 0.00000     0.00000    0.00047** -0.00010
                         (0.00006) (0.00060) (0.00002) (0.00022) (0.00011) (0.00050)
         Observations         63        63        63         63        63        63
          Root MSE         0.00037   0.00404   0.00013   0.00133    0.00078   0.00327
           R-squared         0.98      0.44      1.00       0.76      0.91      0.37

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         56
    Table 15: Fourth Subperiod (5/1/2006 – 7/31/2006, numeraire currency = SDR)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD       SGD       MYR       KRW
             US Dollar     0.947**    -0.419*   0.970**   0.232**   0.423**   -0.199
                            (0.045)   (0.222)   (0.014)   (0.077)   (0.142)   (0.187)
               Euro           0.005    0.193     -0.013   0.271**    -0.242   -0.027
                            (0.040)   (0.203)   (0.012)   (0.134)   (0.196)   (0.250)
         Japanese Yen       0.052*              0.021**   0.236**     0.035   -0.068
                            (0.026)             (0.008)   (0.057)   (0.096)   (0.127)
         Korean Won        -0.076**    -0.117    -0.006    0.102      0.027
                            (0.029)   (0.148)   (0.009)   (0.072)   (0.105)
       Singapore Dollar       0.002   0.909**     0.007              -0.059   0.510**
                            (0.055)   (0.256)   (0.017)             (0.195)   (0.243)
         British Pound       -0.043   0.285*     -0.007   -0.019     0.096     -0.188
                            (0.032)   (0.162)   (0.010)   (0.081)   (0.116)   (0.157)
       Malaysia Ringgit    0.076**     -0.177     0.010    -0.029               0.171
                            (0.033)   (0.166)   (0.010)   (0.087)             (0.183)
         Russia Ruble        -0.030    -0.127     0.024
                            (0.053)   (0.273)   (0.016)
       Australian Dollar     0.003     0.013     -0.001   0.090*    -0.036    -0.049
                            (0.020)   (0.104)   (0.006)   (0.045)   (0.068)   (0.093)
         Thailand Baht       0.036      0.203    -0.004   0.149**    0.040
                            (0.031)   (0.157)   (0.009)   (0.073)   (0.109)
        Canadian Dollar    -0.040**     0.044     0.002
                            (0.017)   (0.090)   (0.005)
         Swiss Franc                                       -0.168     0.217    0.062
                                                          (0.131)    (0.189)  (0.233)
         Taiwan Dollar                                     0.086     0.247*  0.455**
                                                          (0.096)    (0.138)  (0.178)
        Philippines Peso                                            0.198**    0.026
                                                                     (0.055)  (0.074)
         Indian Rupee                                      0.075      0.145
                                                          (0.075)    (0.107)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                    0.106     -0.168
                                                          (0.080)    (0.124)
            constant     0.00009   -0.00027 -0.00003 0.00015      -0.00005 0.00003
                         (0.00008) (0.00039) (0.00002) (0.00019) (0.00027) (0.00036)
         Observations         66        66        66         66         66      66
          Root MSE         0.00061   0.00314   0.00018   0.00145    0.00206  0.00283
           R-squared         0.97      0.77      1.00       0.89       0.62    0.42

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses;* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         57
       Table 16: Fifth Subperiod (8/1/2006 – 10/31/2006, numeraire currency = SDR)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD       SGD      MYR        KRW
             US Dollar     0.867**   -1.074**   0.960**    0.210      0.062   -0.121
                           (0.134)    (0.386)   (0.045)   (0.138)   (0.135)   (0.263)
               Euro          0.005    -0.067     -0.008    0.209     -0.205    -0.210
                           (0.100)    (0.309)   (0.034)   (0.159)   (0.152)   (0.324)
         Japanese Yen        0.019                0.015   0.198**     0.107    0.065
                           (0.044)              (0.015)   (0.067)   (0.069)   (0.148)
         Korean Won         -0.024     -0.019     0.001    0.044      0.069
                           (0.040)    (0.123)   (0.014)   (0.069)   (0.066)
       Singapore Dollar     -0.054   0.464**      0.038              0.125      0.078
                           (0.077)    (0.229)   (0.026)             (0.132)   (0.271)
         British Pound       0.003     0.016     -0.001    0.042    -0.074     -0.116
                           (0.041)    (0.125)   (0.014)   (0.072)   (0.069)   (0.144)
       Malaysia Ringgit      0.122     0.174      0.011    0.142               0.377
                           (0.084)    (0.258)   (0.029)   (0.143)             (0.273)
         Russia Ruble       -0.165    1.242*     -0.029
                           (0.217)    (0.649)   (0.074)
       Australian Dollar    -0.013   0.269**      0.000    0.016     0.052     0.093
                           (0.033)    (0.096)   (0.011)   (0.056)   (0.054)   (0.111)
         Thailand Baht      -0.023    -0.016     -0.010    0.090    0.126*
                           (0.040)    (0.122)   (0.013)   (0.069)   (0.066)
        Canadian Dollar      0.014   -0.243**     0.008
                           (0.034)    (0.098)   (0.011)
         Swiss Franc                                       -0.071     -0.009   0.137
                                                          (0.125)    (0.120)  (0.252)
         Taiwan Dollar                                     0.031      0.104    -0.002
                                                          (0.119)    (0.113)  (0.235)
        Philippines Peso                                              0.012     0.229
                                                                     (0.079)  (0.156)
         Indian Rupee                                    0.161**      0.064
                                                          (0.079)    (0.081)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                    0.014     0.172*
                                                          (0.099)    (0.093)
            Constant     0.00022** -0.00047 -0.00001 0.00011      -0.00012 0.00028
                         (0.00010) (0.00031) (0.00004) (0.00019) (0.00018) (0.00036)
         Observations         66        66        66         66         66       66
          Root MSE          0.0008   0.00245   0.00027   0.00137    0.00131  0.00279
           R-squared         0.81      0.63      0.98       0.70       0.62     0.24

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.



                                                                                         58
    Table 17: Sixth Subperiod (10/1/2006 – 01/08/2007, numeraire currency = SDR)

                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
                              CNY         JPY         HKD         SGD        MYR          KRW
             US Dollar   0.886**       -0.566      0.938**     0.331**     0.207       -0.348
                         (0.087)       (0.371)     (0.043)     (0.137)     (0.183)     (0.255)
             Euro        0.039         0.302       -0.005      0.073       0.136       -0.537*
                         (0.064)       (0.275)     (0.032)     (0.143)     (0.185)     (0.299)
        Japanese Yen     0.007                     0.015       0.156**     0.290**     0.009
                         (0.030)                   (0.015)     (0.071)     (0.090)     (0.160)
         Korean Won      -0.002        0.013       0.024*      0.085       0.085
                         (0.029)       (0.125)     (0.014)     (0.060)     (0.079)
       Singapore Dollar -0.108*        0.636**     -0.009                  -0.164      0.447*
                         (0.061)       (0.251)     (0.030)                 (0.171)     (0.254)
        British Pound    -0.026        0.003       0.022       0.021       0.008       0.262
                         (0.041)       (0.180)     (0.020)     (0.091)     (0.124)     (0.199)
       Malaysia Ringgit 0.057          0.304*      0.014       -0.035                  0.191
                         (0.041)       (0.171)     (0.020)     (0.091)                 (0.215)
         Russia Ruble    -0.108        0.345       -0.034
                         (0.124)       (0.537)     (0.062)
       Australian Dollar 0.012         0.083       -0.004      0.094       -0.167**    -0.049
                         (0.028)       (0.120)     (0.014)     (0.059)     (0.080)     (0.132)
        Thailand Baht    0.017         -0.085      0.014       0.082**     0.036
                         (0.020)       (0.086)     (0.010)     (0.039)     (0.054)
       Canadian Dollar 0.025           0.008       0.019
                         (0.028)       (0.123)     (0.014)
         Swiss Franc                                           -0.030      -0.221      0.156
                                                               (0.126)     (0.162)     (0.277)
         Taiwan Dollar                                         -0.067      0.302**     0.265
                                                               (0.090)     (0.110)     (0.192)
        Philippines Peso                                                   0.350**     0.222
                                                                           (0.091)     (0.166)
         Indian Rupee                                          0.263**     0.098
                                                               (0.103)     (0.140)
       Indonesia Rupiah                                        -0.008      -0.157*
                                                               (0.072)     (0.092)
             Constant      0.00015*    -0.00072*   -0.00001    0.00023     0.00065**   -0.00030
                           (0.00009)   (0.00037)   (0.00004)   (0.00018)   (0.00023)   (0.00039)
         Observations      71          71          71          71          71          71
          Root MSE         0.00064     0.00278     0.00032     0.00135     0.00175     0.00297
          R-squared        0.90        0.50        0.98        0.72        0.63        0.28

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                                   59
                         Table 11A: Estimating the Implicit Weights
                  Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =gold)

                          (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                          CNY         JPY          HKD         SGD         MYR         KRW
      US Dollar           0.910**     -0.444**     0.970**     0.328**     0.555**     -0.113
                          (0.022)     (0.127)      (0.008)     (0.044)     (0.053)     (0.097)
      Euro                -0.004      0.282**      -0.008      0.125**     -0.056      -0.150
                          (0.014)     (0.082)      (0.005)     (0.048)     (0.060)     (0.102)
      British Pound       0.006       0.162**      0.006       -0.005      0.045       -0.119*
                          (0.011)     (0.063)      (0.004)     (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.061)
      Australian Dollar   -0.007      0.036        -0.002      0.077**     -0.024      0.031
                          (0.009)     (0.049)      (0.003)     (0.019)     (0.024)     (0.042)
      Japanese Yen        0.006                    0.010**     0.163**     0.044       0.033
                          (0.009)                  (0.003)     (0.020)     (0.027)     (0.047)
      Swiss Franc                                              -0.048      -0.012      0.158*
                                                               (0.045)     (0.055)     (0.095)
      Taiwan Dollar                                            0.045       0.181**     0.624**
                                                               (0.035)     (0.042)     (0.066)
      Singapore Dollar    -0.019      0.906**      0.009                   0.002       0.319**
                          (0.021)     (0.113)      (0.008)                 (0.065)     (0.105)
      Indian Rupee                                                         0.090**     0.030
                                                                           (0.017)     (0.030)
      Malaysia Ringgit    0.072**     0.088        0.003       0.034                   0.177**
                          (0.016)     (0.090)      (0.006)     (0.041)                 (0.088)
      Korean Won          0.020**     0.044        0.006*      0.061**     0.049
                          (0.009)     (0.051)      (0.003)     (0.024)     (0.030)
      Thailand Baht       0.009       0.010        0.003       0.150**     -0.019
                          (0.010)     (0.058)      (0.004)     (0.023)     (0.030)
      Philippines Peso                                         0.036       0.116**
                                                               (0.028)     (0.034)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                         0.035       0.012
                                                               (0.031)     (0.039)
      Russia Ruble        0.005       -0.013       0.000
                          (0.022)     (0.125)      (0.008)
      Canadian Dollar     0.004       -0.048       0.003
                          (0.008)     (0.045)      (0.003)
      Constant            0.00008**   -0.00046**   -0.00001    0.00012     0.00015*    0.00021
                          (0.00003)   (0.00017)    (0.00001)   (0.00007)   (0.00009)   (0.00016)
      Observations        382         382          382         382         382         382
      Root MSE            0.00057     0.0033       0.00021     0.00139     0.00172     0.00297
      R-squared           1.00        0.94         1.00        0.99        0.98        0.95

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses;* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.


                                                                                                   60
     Table 12A: First Subperiod (07/22 – 10/31/2005, numeraire currency = gold)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD       SGD       MYR       KRW
      US Dollar            1.003**    -0.172    1.001**   0.502**   0.998**    0.533*
                           (0.036)   (0.351)    (0.032)   (0.151)   (0.129)    (0.294)
      Euro                  -0.012     0.013     -0.010     0.076    -0.076      0.204
                           (0.016)   (0.158)    (0.014)   (0.113)   (0.127)    (0.235)
      British Pound          0.005   0.428**      0.008    -0.016     0.060   -0.272**
                           (0.014)   (0.130)    (0.013)   (0.066)   (0.074)    (0.131)
      Australian Dollar     0.005     -0.023     -0.006    -0.006    -0.021   0.232**
                           (0.011)   (0.109)    (0.010)   (0.046)   (0.051)    (0.088)
      Japanese Yen          0.002                 0.012   0.096*     -0.078      0.176
                           (0.013)              (0.012)   (0.057)   (0.064)    (0.118)
      Swiss Franc                                           0.080     0.065    -0.010
                                                          (0.108)   (0.122)    (0.226)
      Taiwan Dollar                                         0.048     0.057   0.445**
                                                          (0.082)   (0.092)    (0.143)
      Singapore Dollar     -0.056*    0.527*     0.003               -0.131     -0.121
                           (0.030)    (0.286)   (0.027)             (0.146)    (0.247)
      Indian Rupee                                                    0.003     0.003
                                                                    (0.022)    (0.041)
      Malaysia Ringgit      -0.017    -0.290    -0.018     -0.104              -0.141
                           (0.027)    (0.262)   (0.024)   (0.117)              (0.238)
      Korean Won            0.009     0.245*    0.021*     -0.002    -0.034
                           (0.013)    (0.126)   (0.012)   (0.062)   (0.069)
      Thailand Baht         0.025      0.268    -0.001    0.350**     0.149
                           (0.019)    (0.188)   (0.017)   (0.087)   (0.109)
      Philippines Peso                                     -0.090     0.044
                                                          (0.079)   (0.090)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                      0.046   -0.055
                                                          (0.081)   (0.090)
      Russia Ruble            0.038     -0.034    -0.008
                             (0.026)    (0.258)  (0.024)
      Canadian Dollar        -0.013     -0.004    -0.002
                             (0.008)    (0.083)  (0.008)
      constant            0.00001    -0.00063* 0.00004   -0.00024 -0.00009 0.00041
                          (0.00004) (0.00036) (0.00003) (0.00018) (0.00020) (0.00034)
      Observations             72         72        72        72       72        72
      Root MSE              0.00028    0.00277   0.00025   0.00124  0.00139   0.00261
      R-squared               1.00       0.88      1.00      0.98     0.98      0.91

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         61
   Table 13A: Second Subperiod (11/1/2005 – 1/31/2006, numeraire currency = gold)

                             (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
                            CNY         JPY       HKD        SGD       MYR        KRW
      US Dollar            0.980**    -1.089*    0.966**    0.644**   0.774**     -0.623
                           (0.032)    (0.623)    (0.016)    (0.176)    (0.081)   (0.479)
      Euro                  -0.011    0.688**      0.006      0.038     0.040      0.084
                           (0.012)    (0.211)    (0.006)    (0.114)    (0.077)   (0.278)
      British Pound         0.014      -0.034     -0.007     0.025    0.106**     -0.244
                           (0.009)    (0.183)    (0.005)    (0.063)    (0.040)   (0.156)
      Australian Dollar     -0.009     -0.065     -0.004    0.105**     0.013      0.101
                           (0.008)    (0.159)    (0.004)    (0.048)    (0.033)   (0.124)
      Japanese Yen          -0.007                 0.004    0.089**   0.065**      0.040
                           (0.007)               (0.003)    (0.044)    (0.030)   (0.112)
      Swiss Franc                                            0.005    -0.187**    -0.024
                                                            (0.123)    (0.078)   (0.280)
      Taiwan Dollar                                          -0.038     0.081    0.844**
                                                            (0.083)    (0.056)   (0.160)
      Singapore Dollar       0.002    0.897**    0.021*                -0.068      0.400
                            (0.021)   (0.409)    (0.011)               (0.093)   (0.330)
      Indian Rupee                                                      0.025     -0.002
                                                                       (0.025)   (0.093)
      Malaysia Ringgit      0.019     1.024*      0.022      -0.115                0.433
                           (0.030)    (0.578)    (0.015)    (0.204)              (0.470)
      Korean Won           0.023**     0.048     -0.005       0.023     0.001
                           (0.007)    (0.138)    (0.003)    (0.055)   (0.037)
      Thailand Baht         -0.008     -0.064     0.001     0.190**   0.152**
                           (0.012)    (0.231)    (0.006)    (0.075)   (0.049)
      Philippines Peso                                       -0.004     0.050
                                                            (0.052)   (0.035)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                       0.050     -0.070
                                                            (0.074)   (0.049)
      Russia Ruble            -0.010    -0.184   -0.002
                             (0.013)   (0.267)   (0.007)
      Canadian Dollar         0.006     -0.170   -0.001
                             (0.008)   (0.155)   (0.004)
      Constant            0.00002    -0.00062 -0.00002     0.00053** -0.00011 0.00025
                          (0.00003) (0.00061) (0.00002)    (0.00019) (0.00013) (0.00050)
      Observations              66        66       66           66        66        66
      Root MSE              0.00021    0.00411   0.0001      0.00133   0.00088   0.00339
      R-squared                1.00      0.91     1.00         0.99      1.00      0.94

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                           62
    Table 14A: Third Subperiod (2/1/2006 – 4/28/2006, numeraire currency = gold)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD        SGD       MYR      KRW
      US Dollar            0.683**    -0.499    0.971**      0.249   0.591**    -0.628
                            (0.051)   (0.557)    (0.018)   (0.179)   (0.079)   (0.444)
      Euro                 -0.053**    0.029    -0.020**    -0.007    0.030     -0.257
                            (0.023)   (0.250)    (0.008)   (0.101)   (0.060)   (0.233)
      British Pound          0.009    0.304*    0.018**    -0.157*    -0.016    -0.172
                            (0.016)   (0.177)    (0.006)   (0.078)   (0.049)   (0.186)
      Australian Dollar      -0.011    0.041     -0.000      0.008     0.031    -0.063
                            (0.012)   (0.135)    (0.004)   (0.042)   (0.025)   (0.101)
      Japanese Yen           -0.016               0.001    0.137**    -0.017    -0.003
                            (0.013)              (0.004)   (0.041)   (0.027)   (0.108)
      Swiss Franc                                            0.167    -0.018     0.226
                                                           (0.104)   (0.064)   (0.241)
      Taiwan Dollar                                         0.194*     0.065   0.617**
                                                           (0.097)   (0.059)   (0.223)
      Singapore Dollar     -0.064*    1.216**    0.021                 0.117    0.541*
                           (0.036)    (0.361)   (0.013)              (0.082)   (0.313)
      Indian Rupee                                                   0.062**     0.145
                                                                     (0.029)   (0.113)
      Malaysia Ringgit     0.250**    -0.145    -0.002      0.376                0.506
                           (0.057)    (0.633)   (0.020)    (0.225)             (0.539)
      Korean Won            0.027*     0.016    -0.003     0.100*      0.012
                           (0.015)    (0.164)   (0.005)    (0.058)   (0.035)
      Thailand Baht        0.052**     0.095     0.008     0.109*     -0.030
                           (0.016)    (0.179)   (0.006)    (0.059)   (0.036)
      Philippines Peso                                      -0.093     0.037
                                                           (0.065)   (0.041)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                      -0.087   0.141**
                                                           (0.112)   (0.064)
      Russia Ruble          0.130**     0.207     0.001
                             (0.038)   (0.424)   (0.014)
      Canadian Dollar         -0.010   -0.240     0.004
                             (0.016)   (0.176)   (0.006)
      Constant            -0.00009* -0.00014 -0.00000 -0.00001 0.00049** -0.00038
                          (0.00006) (0.00062) (0.00002) (0.00022) (0.00011) (0.00049)
      Observations              63       63        63        63        63        63
      Root MSE              0.00037   0.00404   0.00013   0.00133   0.00079    0.0032
      R-squared                1.00     0.95      1.00      0.99      1.00      0.96

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         63
   Table 15A: Fourth Subperiod (5/1/2006 – 7/31/2006, numeraire currency = gold)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD       SGD       MYR       KRW
      US Dollar            0.941**    -0.341    0.959**   0.183**   0.447**    -0.051
                           (0.046)    (0.234)   (0.013)   (0.079)   (0.139)   (0.181)
      Euro                  0.006      0.182     -0.011   0.297**    -0.256    -0.112
                           (0.040)    (0.206)   (0.011)   (0.136)   (0.196)   (0.250)
      British Pound         -0.041    0.305*     -0.008    -0.021    0.104     -0.178
                           (0.033)    (0.163)   (0.009)   (0.082)   (0.116)   (0.161)
      Australian Dollar     0.008     -0.031      0.005   0.122**    -0.066    -0.117
                           (0.021)    (0.110)   (0.006)   (0.048)   (0.072)   (0.099)
      Japanese Yen         0.061**              0.021**   0.233**     0.033    -0.065
                           (0.026)              (0.007)   (0.058)   (0.096)   (0.130)
      Swiss Franc                                          -0.205     0.225     0.162
                                                          (0.130)   (0.186)   (0.227)
      Taiwan Dollar                                         0.041   0.284**   0.607**
                                                          (0.093)   (0.127)   (0.158)
      Singapore Dollar      -0.013   0.919**     0.003               -0.064   0.523**
                           (0.056)   (0.260)    (0.016)             (0.192)   (0.250)
      Indian Rupee                                                  0.182**     0.016
                                                                    (0.056)   (0.077)
      Malaysia Ringgit     0.107**    -0.133     0.014    -0.018                0.193
                           (0.032)    (0.162)   (0.009)   (0.090)             (0.186)
      Korean Won           -0.047*    -0.070    -0.003     0.094     0.020
                           (0.028)    (0.141)   (0.008)   (0.074)   (0.105)
      Thailand Baht         0.022      0.204    -0.008    0.141*     0.060
                           (0.032)    (0.160)   (0.009)   (0.076)   (0.110)
      Philippines Peso                                     0.050     0.174
                                                          (0.076)   (0.105)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                     0.092    -0.157
                                                          (0.081)   (0.120)
      Russia Ruble            0.003     -0.082   0.028*
                             (0.053)    (0.272)  (0.015)
      Canadian Dollar       -0.039**     0.035    0.004
                             (0.018)    (0.091)  (0.005)
      Constant            0.00010    -0.00024 -0.00003 0.00010    -0.00002 0.00015
                          (0.00008) (0.00040) (0.00002) (0.00019) (0.00026) (0.00036)
      Observations             66         66       66        66        66        66
      Root MSE              0.00062    0.00317  0.00018 0.000147 0.00205      0.00288
      R-squared               1.00       0.97     1.00      0.99      0.99      0.98

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         64
    Table 16A: Fifth Subperiod (8/1/2006 – 12/5/2006, numeraire currency = gold)

                             (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                            CNY        JPY       HKD       SGD       MYR       KRW
      US Dollar            1.027**   -0.990**   0.952**    0.192      0.166    -0.040
                           (0.145)    (0.394)   (0.045)   (0.136)   (0.141)   (0.266)
      Euro                  0.119      0.024     -0.009    0.168     -0.062    -0.145
                           (0.104)    (0.298)   (0.032)   (0.159)   (0.165)   (0.332)
      British Pound         0.033      0.040     -0.001    0.021      0.006    -0.078
                           (0.043)    (0.124)   (0.013)   (0.071)   (0.074)   (0.146)
      Australian Dollar    -0.059*   0.240**      0.002    0.046     -0.056     0.078
                           (0.035)    (0.095)   (0.011)   (0.060)   (0.063)   (0.125)
      Japanese Yen          0.038                 0.016   0.193**   0.135*      0.040
                           (0.047)              (0.015)   (0.068)   (0.075)   (0.154)
      Swiss Franc                                          -0.043    -0.094     0.221
                                                          (0.134)   (0.138)   (0.276)
      Taiwan Dollar                                        -0.009   0.295**     0.083
                                                          (0.117)   (0.113)   (0.236)
      Singapore Dollar      -0.061    0.447*     0.033                0.126     0.035
                           (0.085)    (0.235)   (0.026)             (0.142)   (0.277)
      Indian Rupee                                                    0.001     0.180
                                                                    (0.085)   (0.159)
      Malaysia Ringgit     0.257**     0.323     0.020     0.121              0.650**
                           (0.077)    (0.218)   (0.024)   (0.134)             (0.256)
      Korean Won            0.001      0.010     0.003     0.031    0.143**
                           (0.042)    (0.121)   (0.013)   (0.068)   (0.067)
      Thailand Baht         -0.043    -0.029    -0.009     0.100     0.111
                           (0.043)    (0.124)   (0.013)   (0.069)   (0.073)
      Philippines Peso                                    0.166**    0.052
                                                          (0.078)   (0.087)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                     0.025     0.149
                                                          (0.098)   (0.101)
      Russia Ruble            -0.358   1.147*    -0.018
                             (0.238)   (0.664)   (0.074)
      Canadian Dollar         0.042   -0.204**    0.013
                             (0.036)   (0.100)   (0.011)
      Constant            0.00023** -0.00049 -0.00002 0.00009     -0.00007 0.00026
                          (0.00011) (0.00032) (0.00004) (0.00019) (0.00020) (0.00037)
      Observations              66       66        66        66        66        66
      Root MSE              0.00086   0.00248   0.00027   0.00137   0.00141   0.00285
      R-squared                1.00     0.97      1.00      0.99      0.99      0.96

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                         65
   Table 17A: Sixth Subperiod (11/1/2006 – 01/08/2007, numeraire currency =gold)

                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                          CNY         JPY         HKD         SGD         MYR         KRW
      US Dollar           0.949**     -0.571      0.939**     0.321**     0.280       -0.246
                          (0.096)     (0.365)     (0.042)     (0.130)     (0.179)     (0.250)
      Euro                0.031       0.327       -0.008      0.095       0.144       -0.569*
                          (0.076)     (0.290)     (0.033)     (0.142)     (0.189)     (0.304)
      British Pound       0.033       -0.018      0.025       0.005       0.067       0.426**
                          (0.044)     (0.171)     (0.020)     (0.087)     (0.121)     (0.186)
      Australian Dollar   -0.005      0.095       -0.005      0.118*      -0.184**    -0.123
                          (0.032)     (0.123)     (0.014)     (0.061)     (0.086)     (0.140)
      Japanese Yen        0.005                   0.015       0.139*      0.300**     0.040
                          (0.033)                 (0.015)     (0.071)     (0.092)     (0.164)
      Swiss Franc                                             -0.002      -0.229      0.103
                                                              (0.126)     (0.168)     (0.287)
      Taiwan Dollar                                           -0.055      0.346**     0.321*
                                                              (0.087)     (0.107)     (0.190)
      Singapore Dollar    -0.120*     0.625**     -0.008                  -0.169      0.465*
                          (0.069)     (0.256)     (0.031)                 (0.176)     (0.259)
      Indian Rupee                                                        0.379**     0.287*
                                                                          (0.091)     (0.166)
      Malaysia Ringgit    0.115**     0.289*      0.016       -0.037                  0.258
                          (0.043)     (0.160)     (0.019)     (0.087)                 (0.215)
      Korean Won          0.029       0.010       0.025*      0.090       0.111
                          (0.031)     (0.120)     (0.014)     (0.058)     (0.078)
      Thailand Baht       0.018       -0.080      0.013       0.085**     0.037
                          (0.023)     (0.088)     (0.010)     (0.039)     (0.055)
      Philippines Peso                                        0.258**     0.071
                                                              (0.100)     (0.141)
      Indonesia Rupiah                                        0.010       -0.149
                                                              (0.072)     (0.095)
      Russia Ruble        -0.104      0.327       -0.032
                          (0.140)     (0.541)     (0.062)
      Canadian Dollar     0.045       0.007       0.019
                          (0.031)     (0.122)     (0.014)
      Constant            0.00014     -0.00072*   -0.00001    0.00021     0.00066**   -0.00033
                          (0.00010)   (0.00037)   (0.00004)   (0.00018)   (0.00023)   (0.00040)
      Observations        71          71          71          71          71          71
      Root MSE            0.00072     0.00278     0.00032     0.00133     0.00177     0.00301
      R-squared           1.00        0.94        1.00        0.99        0.98        0.94

Notes: 1).   Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).   Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log   values of other currencies;
       3).   Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                                  66
Table 18: Trend appreciation and trend change in the dollar weight
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =SDR)

                   (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
                   CNY      CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY
US Dollar         0.904**   0.990**    0.991** 0.926** 1.017** 1.017** 0.891** 0.979** 0.980**
                  (0.021)   (0.029)    (0.029) (0.011) (0.020) (0.020) (0.015) (0.026) (0.026)
Euro              -0.006    -0.006     -0.006    -0.022** -0.015** -0.015** -0.018** -0.014** -0.014**
                  (0.014)   (0.013)    (0.013) (0.008) (0.006) (0.006) (0.008) (0.006) (0.006)
Japanese Yen      0.009     0.009      0.009     0.009                         0.005
                  (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.008) (0.008)                         (0.008)
Korean Won        0.003     0.000      0.001                                   0.001     0.001     0.001
                  (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)                                 (0.009) (0.008) (0.008)
Singapore Dollar -0.020     -0.017     -0.019
                  (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.020)
British Pound     -0.004    -0.008     -0.008
                  (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit 0.052**    0.036**    0.035**                                 0.050** 0.036** 0.034**
                  (0.015)   (0.015)    (0.015)                                 (0.015) (0.015) (0.015)
Russia Ruble      -0.017    -0.014     -0.013
                  (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.021)
Australian Dollar -0.004    -0.001     -0.002
                  (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Thailand Baht     0.006     0.008      0.008
                  (0.010)   (0.009)    (0.009)
Canadian Dollar 0.004       0.001      0.003
                  (0.008)   (0.007)    (0.007)
Trend             0.004                0.004     0.004               0.004     0.004               0.004
                  (0.003)              (0.003) (0.003)               (0.002) (0.003)               (0.002)
dollar * Trend               -4.473** -4.459**             -5.106** -5.089**             -4.407** -4.409**
                             (1.058) (1.056)               (1.007) (1.005)               (1.041) (1.040)
Constant           0.00001 0.00009**0.00001 0.00002 0.00009**0.00001 0.00001 0.00008**0.00001
                   (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006)
Observations       383       383       383       383       383       383       383       383       383
Root MSE            0.00055 0.00054 0.00054 0.00056 0.00054 0.00054 0.00055 0.00054 0.00054
R-squared          0.954     0.955     0.956     0.952     0.954     0.955     0.953     0.955     0.955


           Note: Trend =observation/10,000

Notes: 1).     Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).     Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log     values of other currencies;
       3).     Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                                        67
Table 18A: Trend appreciation and trend change in the dollar weight
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =Gold)

                   (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
                   CNY      CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY       CNY
US Dollar         0.911**   0.910**    0.910** 0.993** 0.998** 0.997** 0.911** 0.910** 0.911**
                  (0.022)   (0.023)    (0.023) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008) (0.015) (0.016) (0.016)
Euro              -0.004    -0.004     -0.005    -0.007    0.004     0.003     -0.002    0.001     0.001
                  (0.014)   (0.014)    (0.014) (0.009) (0.007) (0.007) (0.008) (0.007) (0.007)
Japanese Yen      0.007     0.006      0.007     0.015*                        0.004
                  (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009) (0.008)                         (0.008)
Korean Won        0.021**   0.020**    0.021**                                 0.019** 0.019** 0.019**
                  (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)                                 (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
Singapore Dollar -0.020     -0.019     -0.020
                  (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.021)
British Pound     0.006     0.006      0.006
                  (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit 0.071**    0.072**    0.071**                                 0.071** 0.073** 0.072**
                  (0.016)   (0.016)    (0.016)                                 (0.015) (0.015) (0.015)
Russia Ruble      0.006     0.005      0.006
                  (0.022)   (0.022)    (0.022)
Australian Dollar -0.008    -0.007     -0.008
                  (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)
Thailand Baht     0.009     0.009      0.009
                  (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.010)
Canadian Dollar 0.005       0.004      0.005
                  (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Trend             0.004                0.004     0.004               0.004     0.003               0.003
                  (0.003)              (0.003) (0.003)               (0.003) (0.003)               (0.003)
dollar * Trend               -0.001    0.034               -0.017    0.021               -0.039    -0.008
                             (0.267) (0.268)               (0.276) (0.277)               (0.263) (0.264)
Constant           0.00000 0.00008**0.00000 0.00002 0.00010**0.00001 0.00001 0.00008**0.00001
                   (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006)
Observations       383       383       383       383       383       383       383       383       383
Root MSE            0.00057 0.00057 0.00057 0.0006 0.0006             0.0006 0.00057 0.00057 0.00057
R-squared          0.998     0.998     0.998     0.998     0.998     0.998     0.998     0.998     0.998


           Note: Trend=observation/10,000

Notes: 1).     Standard errors in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
       2).     Change in the log value of the target currency is regressed on changes in the
       log     values of other currencies;
       3).     Data Source: Bloomberg daily closing price, New York.




                                                                                                         68
Table 19: Pressure from the US as a Determinant of the Chinese Exchange Rate
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =SDR)

                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
                      CNY          CNY           CNY           CNY          CNY         CNY
US Dollar           0.904**        0.978**       0.979**       0.904**      0.983**     0.983**
                    (0.021)        (0.033)       (0.033)       (0.021)      (0.030)     (0.030)
Euro                -0.006         -0.006        -0.006        -0.006       -0.006      -0.006
                    (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.014)
Japanese Yen        0.009          0.009         0.010         0.009        0.009       0.010
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Korean Won          0.003          0.000         0.001         0.003        0.000       0.001
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Singapore Dollar    -0.020         -0.018        -0.020        -0.020       -0.018      -0.019
                    (0.021)        (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.020)     (0.020)
British Pound       -0.004         -0.008        -0.007        -0.004       -0.008      -0.007
                    (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit    0.053**        0.037**       0.037**       0.053**      0.037**     0.037**
                    (0.015)        (0.016)       (0.016)       (0.015)      (0.016)     (0.016)
Russia Ruble        -0.017         -0.015        -0.014        -0.017       -0.015      -0.014
                    (0.021)        (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.021)
Australian Dollar   -0.004         -0.001        -0.002        -0.004       -0.001      -0.002
                    (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)
Thailand Baht       0.006          0.009         0.009         0.006        0.009       0.009
                    (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
Canadian Dollar     0.004          0.001         0.003         0.004        0.002       0.003
                    (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.007)
Treasury Complaint 0.010                         0.009
                    (0.024)                      (0.024)
Other Complaint     -0.001                       -0.001
                    (0.025)                      (0.025)
Treasury* US Dollar                -7.541        -7.309
                                   (9.198)       (9.229)
Other* US Dollar                   -1.354        -1.621
                                   (9.471)       (9.502)
US Complaint                                                   0.004                    0.004
                                                               (0.003)                  (0.003)
US Complaint* USD                                                           -4.493**    -4.508**
                                                                            (1.219)     (1.217)
Constant              0.00002      0.00009**     0.00002       0.00002      0.00009**   0.00001
                      (0.00007)    (0.00003)     (0.00007)     (0.00006)    (0.00003)   (0.00006)
Observations          383          383           383           383          383         383
Root MSE               0.00055      0.00054       0.00054       0.00055      0.00054     0.00054
R-squared             0.95         0.95          0.96          0.95         0.95        0.96

Notes: 1. Standard errors in parentheses;* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%
       2. “Treasury” in columns (1)-(6) ≡ Cumulative Treasury report/1000,
       3. “Other” in Columns (1)-(6) ≡ Cumulative Other report/1000
       4. US Complaint ≡ Treasury Complaint + Other Complaint




                                                                                                    69
Table 19A: Pressure from the US as a Determinant of the Chinese Exchange Rate
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =Gold)

                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                      CNY          CNY           CNY          CNY          CNY         CNY
US Dollar           0.910**        0.904**       0.904**      0.910**      0.907**     0.907**
                    (0.022)        (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.022)      (0.024)     (0.023)
Euro                -0.004         -0.005        -0.006       -0.004       -0.004      -0.005
                    (0.014)        (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.015)     (0.014)
Japanese Yen        0.007          0.006         0.007        0.007        0.006       0.007
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Korean Won          0.021**        0.020**       0.021**      0.021**      0.020**     0.021**
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Singapore Dollar    -0.021         -0.020        -0.022       -0.021       -0.019      -0.021
                    (0.021)        (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.021)
British Pound       0.006          0.006         0.007        0.006        0.006       0.007
                    (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit    0.071**        0.073**       0.072**      0.071**      0.072**     0.071**
                    (0.016)        (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.016)
Russia Ruble        0.006          0.007         0.008        0.006        0.006       0.007
                    (0.022)        (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.022)     (0.022)
Australian Dollar   -0.008         -0.007        -0.008       -0.008       -0.007      -0.008
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Thailand Baht       0.009          0.008         0.008        0.009        0.009       0.009
                    (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
Canadian Dollar     0.005          0.004         0.005        0.005        0.004       0.005
                    (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)
Treasury Complaint 0.004                         -0.000
                    (0.025)                      (0.025)
Other Complaint     0.004                        0.010
                    (0.026)                      (0.026)
Treasury* US Dollar                -1.777        -1.932
                                   (2.004)       (2.040)
Other* US Dollar                   2.035         2.284
                                   (2.081)       (2.121)
US Complaint                                                  0.004                    0.004
                                                              (0.003)                  (0.003)
US Complaint* USD                                                          0.092       0.134
                                                                           (0.305)     (0.306)
Constant              0.00001      0.00008**     -0.00001     0.00001      0.00008**   0.00000
                      (0.00007)    (0.00003)     (0.00007)    (0.00006)    (0.00003)   (0.00006)
Observations          383          383           383          383          383         383
Root MSE               0.00057      0.00057       0.00057      0.00057      0.00057     0.00057
R-squared             1.00         1.00          1.00         1.00         1.00        1.00

Notes: 1. Standard errors in parentheses;* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%
       2. Treasury in columns (1)-(6) are: Cumulative Treasury report/1000,
       3. Other in Columns (1)-(6) are: Cumulative Other report/1000
       4. US Complaint = Treasury Complaint + Other Complaint



                                                                                                   70
Table 20: Weight sum constrained to 1, with trends in dollar weight and appreciation
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =SDR)

                    (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)       (8)        (9)
                    CNY       CNY        CNY      CNY       CNY        CNY      CNY       CNY        CNY
Euro                -0.006    -0.006     -0.006   -0.008    -0.015** -0.015** -0.005      -0.014** -0.015**
                    (0.014)   (0.013)    (0.013) (0.008) (0.006)       (0.006) (0.008) (0.006)       (0.006)
Japanese Yen        0.007     0.009      0.009    0.015*                        0.004
                    (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.008) (0.008)                        (0.008)
Korean Won          0.021**   0.000      0.001                                  0.018** 0.001        0.001
                    (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)                                (0.008) (0.008)      (0.008)
Singapore Dollar    -0.020    -0.017     -0.019
                    (0.021)   (0.020)    (0.020)
British Pound       0.007     -0.008     -0.008
                    (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit    0.068**   0.036**    0.035**                                0.069** 0.036** 0.034**
                    (0.015)   (0.015)    (0.015)                                (0.015) (0.015)      (0.015)
Russia Ruble        0.006     -0.013     -0.013
                    (0.022)   (0.021)    (0.021)
Australian Dollar   -0.010    -0.001     -0.002
                    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Thailand Baht       0.009     0.008      0.008
                    (0.010)   (0.009)    (0.009)
Canadian Dollar     0.004     0.001      0.003
                    (0.008)   (0.007)    (0.007)
Trend               0.004                0.004    0.004                0.004    0.004                0.004
                    (0.003)              (0.003) (0.003)               (0.002) (0.003)               (0.002)
dollar * Trend                -4.500** -4.483**             -5.045** -5.031**             -4.376** -4.372**
                              (0.656)    (0.655)            (0.539)    (0.538)            (0.629)    (0.628)
Constant            -0.00000 0.00009** 0.00001 0.00002 0.00009** 0.00001 0.00001 0.00008** 0.00001
                    (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00005)
Observations        383       383        383      383       383        383      383       383        383
Root MSE             0.00057      0.00054 0.00054 0.0006        0.00054 0.00054 0.00057       0.00054 0.00054
R-squared           0.111     0.206      0.211    0.016     0.187      0.193    0.103     0.200      0.205


           Note: Trend =observation/10,000




                                                                                                     71
  Table 20A: Weight sum constrained to 1, with trends in dollar weight and appreciation
  Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =Gold)

                    (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)       (8)       (9)
                    CNY       CNY        CNY      CNY        CNY        CNY     CNY       CNY       CNY
Euro                -0.006    -0.005     -0.005   -0.008     0.003      0.003   -0.005    0.000     -0.000
                    (0.014)   (0.014)    (0.014) (0.008) (0.007)        (0.007) (0.008) (0.006)     (0.006)
Japanese Yen        0.007     0.006      0.007    0.015*                        0.004
                    (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009) (0.008)                        (0.008)
Korean Won          0.021**   0.020**    0.021**                                0.018** 0.019** 0.019**
                    (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)                                (0.008) (0.008)     (0.008)
Singapore Dollar    -0.020    -0.019     -0.021
                    (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.021)
British Pound       0.007     0.006      0.007
                    (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit    0.068**   0.071**    0.070**                                0.069** 0.073** 0.072**
                    (0.015)   (0.016)    (0.016)                                (0.015) (0.015)     (0.015)
Russia Ruble        0.006     0.006      0.007
                    (0.022)   (0.022)    (0.022)
Australian Dollar   -0.010    -0.007     -0.008
                    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Thailand Baht       0.009     0.009      0.009
                    (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.010)
Canadian Dollar     0.004     0.004      0.005
                    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.008)
Trend               0.004                0.004    0.004                 0.004   0.004               0.004
                    (0.003)              (0.003) (0.003)                (0.003) (0.003)             (0.003)
dollar * Trend                0.115      0.108               0.039      0.033             0.131     0.125
                              (0.110)    (0.110)             (0.109)    (0.108)           (0.104)   (0.104)
Constant            -0.00000 0.00008** -0.00000 0.00002 0.00010** 0.00001 0.00001 0.00008** 0.00001
                    (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006) (0.00006) (0.00003) (0.00006)
Observations        383       383        383      383        383        383     383       383       383
Root MSE             0.00057      0.00057 0.00057     0.0006      0.0006 0.0006   0.00057 0.00057 0.00057
R-squared           0.111     0.108      0.114    0.016      0.001      0.007   0.103     0.101     0.106


           Note: Trend=observation/10,000




                                                                                                       72
Table 21: Weight sum constrained to 1, with US pressure
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =SDR)

                    (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                    CNY             CNY           CNY          CNY          CNY         CNY
Euro                -0.006          -0.006        -0.006       -0.006       -0.006      -0.006
                    (0.014)         (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.014)
Japanese Yen        0.007           0.009         0.010        0.007        0.009       0.010
                    (0.009)         (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Korean Won          0.021**         0.001         0.001        0.021**      0.001       0.001
                    (0.009)         (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Singapore Dollar    -0.020          -0.018        -0.020       -0.020       -0.018      -0.019
                    (0.021)         (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.020)     (0.020)
British Pound       0.007           -0.007        -0.007       0.007        -0.007      -0.007
                    (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit    0.069**         0.037**       0.036**      0.069**      0.037**     0.036**
                    (0.015)         (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.016)     (0.015)
Russia Ruble        0.006           -0.013        -0.013       0.006        -0.014      -0.013
                    (0.022)         (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.021)     (0.021)
Australian Dollar   -0.010          -0.001        -0.002       -0.010       -0.001      -0.002
                    (0.008)         (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)
Thailand Baht       0.009           0.009         0.009        0.009        0.009       0.009
                    (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.009)
Canadian Dollar     0.004           0.001         0.003        0.004        0.001       0.003
                    (0.008)         (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.007)
Treasury Complaint 0.005                          0.009
                    (0.025)                       (0.024)
Other Complaint     0.004                         -0.001
                    (0.026)                       (0.025)
Treasury* US Dollar                 -5.953        -5.824
                                    (8.502)       (8.530)
Other* US Dollar                    -3.777        -3.884
                                    (7.825)       (7.855)
US Complaint                                                   0.005                    0.004
                                                               (0.003)                  (0.003)
US Complaint* USD                                                           -4.819**    -4.809**
                                                                            (0.742)     (0.740)
Constant              0.00000       0.00009**     0.00002      0.00000      0.00009**   0.00001
                      (0.00007)     (0.00003)     (0.00007)    (0.00006)    (0.00003)   (0.00006)
Observations          383           383           383          383          383         383
Root MSE              0.00057       0.00054       0.00054      0.00057      0.00054     0.00054
R-squared             0.11          0.20          0.20         0.11         0.20        0.20

Notes: 1. Standard errors in parentheses;* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%
       2. Treasury in columns (1)-(6) are: Cumulative Treasury report/1000,
       3. Other in Columns (1)-(6) are: Cumulative Other report/1000
       4. US Complaint = Treasury Complaint + Other Complaint




                                                                                                    73
Table 21A: Weight sum constrained to 1, with US pressure
Whole Sample (07/22/2005 – 01/08/2007, Numeraire currency =Gold)

                    (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
                    CNY            CNY           CNY          CNY           CNY         CNY
Euro                -0.006         -0.005        -0.005       -0.006        -0.005      -0.005
                    (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)     (0.014)
Japanese Yen        0.007          0.006         0.007        0.007         0.006       0.007
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.009)
Korean Won          0.021**        0.020**       0.021**      0.021**       0.020**     0.021**
                    (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.009)
Singapore Dollar    -0.020         -0.020        -0.022       -0.020        -0.019      -0.021
                    (0.021)        (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.021)     (0.021)
British Pound       0.007          0.006         0.006        0.007         0.006       0.007
                    (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)     (0.011)
Malaysia Ringgit    0.069**        0.073**       0.072**      0.069**       0.072**     0.071**
                    (0.015)        (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.015)       (0.016)     (0.016)
Russia Ruble        0.006          0.007         0.007        0.006         0.007       0.007
                    (0.022)        (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.022)       (0.022)     (0.022)
Australian Dollar   -0.010         -0.006        -0.007       -0.010        -0.007      -0.008
                    (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)
Thailand Baht       0.009          0.008         0.008        0.009         0.009       0.009
                    (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.010)     (0.010)
Canadian Dollar     0.004          0.004         0.006        0.004         0.004       0.005
                    (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.008)
Treasury Complaint 0.005                         0.000
                    (0.025)                      (0.025)
Other Complaint     0.004                        0.008
                    (0.026)                      (0.026)
Treasury* US Dollar                -1.604        -1.614
                                   (1.894)       (1.922)
Other* US Dollar                   1.718         1.714
                                   (1.711)       (1.736)
US Complaint                                                  0.005                     0.004
                                                              (0.003)                   (0.003)
US Complaint* USD                                                           0.142       0.135
                                                                            (0.121)     (0.121)
Constant              0.00000      0.00008**     0.00000      0.00000       0.00008**   0.00000
                      (0.00007)    (0.00003)     (0.00007)    (0.00006)     (0.00003)   (0.00006)
Observations          383          383           383          383           383         383
Root MSE               0.00057      0.00057       0.00057      0.00057       0.00057     0.00057
R-squared             0.11         0.11          0.12         0.11          0.11        0.11

Notes: 1. Standard errors in parentheses;* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%
       2. Treasury in columns (1)-(6) are: Cumulative Treasury report/1000,
       3. Other in Columns (1)-(6) are: Cumulative Other report/1000
       4. US Complaint = Treasury Complaint + Other Complaint




                                                                                                    74
Table 22: Allowing for trends in level and (nonlinearly) in the currency weights,
while imposing throughout the constraints that the weights sum to 1
                                    (1)             (2)          (3)                   (4)
                                    OLS             OLS          Non-linear LS         Non-linear LS
USD                                 0.982**         0.982**      0.982***              0.982***
                                    (0.042)         (0.042)      (0.042)               (0.042)
Japanese Yen                        0.0004          0.0004       0.0004                0.0004
                                    (0.0165)        (0.0165)     (0.0165)              (0.0165)
Korea Won                           0.0114          0.0114       0.0114                0.0114
                                    (0.0179)        (0.0179      (0.0179)              (0.0179)
Malaysia Ringgit                    0.0155          0.0154       0.0155                0.0154
                                    (0.039)         (0.039)      (0.039)               (0.039)
USD*Trend                           -0.00029*       -28.91*      Not identified        -28.9
                                    (0.00017)       (16.79)                            (imposed)
Japanese Yen*Trend                  0.00002         1.946        6.874                 1.945
                                    (0.00008)       (8.284)      (29.5)                (8.341)
Korea Won*Trend                     0.00004         4.005        14.2                  4.003
                                    (0.00009)       (8.750)      (29.7)                (8.409)
Malaysia Ringgit*Trend              0.0002          20.2         71.5*                 20.2*
                                    (0.0001)        (15.0)       (29.7)                (8.4)
Trend2*10E+6                        0.3             0.3          0.3                   0.3
                                    (0.3)           (0.3)        (0.3)                 (0.3)
Constant*10E+4                      0.167           0.167        0.167                 0.167
                                    (0.592)         (0.592)      (0.592)               (0.592)
d*10E+4                                                          0.028                 0.100 **
                                                                 (0.016)               (0.058)
Observations                    383           383     383                 383
R-squared                       0.987         0.987   0.987               0.987
Notes:   * significant at 10%; ** at 5%; ** at 1% (Standard errors reported in parentheses.)
The constraint that the weights sum to 1 is imposed by subtracting the change in € from all exchange rates.
Eqn (1). OLS, Trend = Trend2 =t(j), t= 0 (for July 22, 2005), 1, 2, etc
Eqn.(2). OLS, Trend=1-exp(-d *t), where d is set to be 0.00001, Trend2=t
Eqn. (3) Non-linear least squared estimation
Eqn. (4) Non-linear LS. Set the coefficient on USD*trend =-28.9 (which is the point estimate in Column 2)




                                                                                                              75
 Table 23: Intra-day Regressions for RMB (15 minute intervals, numeraire currency = SDR)

                      (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)     (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)         (10)
                      All data               7/21-8/25/2005          2/16-3/16/2006         3/17-4/17/2006       4/18-5/17/2006
US Dollar             0.867**     0.921**    0.702**       1.000**  0.754**     0.842**    1.012       0.954**   0.507*      0.968**
                      (0.033)     (0.009)    (0.186)       (0.007)  (0.072)     (0.013)    (1.085)     (0.027)   (0.282)     (0.021)
Euro                  -0.048*     -0.010     -0.270        0.004   -0.096*      -0.035**   0.068       -0.026    -0.361      -0.024
                      (0.026)     (0.008)    (0.168)       (0.007)  (0.052)     (0.013)    (0.853)     (0.023)   (0.232)     (0.020)
Japanese Yen          -0.024**   -0.010**    -0.102*       -0.002  -0.046**     -0.022**   0.020       -0.011    -0.123*     -0.011*
                      (0.009)     (0.003)    (0.061)       (0.003)  (0.018)     (0.005)    (0.268)     (0.007)   (0.073)     (0.006)
Korean Won            0.063**     0.063**    -0.000        -0.000   0.110**     0.110**    0.013**     0.012**   -0.001      0.004
                      (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)  (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.003)     (0.003)
Singapore Dollar      -0.000                 0.000                 -0.014**                -0.006                0.016**
                      (0.003)                (0.002)                (0.005)                (0.007)               (0.005)
British Pound         -0.015*                -0.092                -0.032*                 0.031                 -0.113
                      (0.009)                (0.056)                (0.018)                (0.270)               (0.075)
Malaysia Ringgit      0.010**                -0.008**               0.019**                0.063**               0.036**
                      (0.004)                (0.003)                (0.008)                (0.011)               (0.007)
Russia Ruble          0.005                  0.002                  0.011**                0.007                 -0.001
                      (0.003)                (0.002)                (0.005)                (0.009)               (0.007)
Australian Dollar     0.003**                0.001                  0.002                  0.005*                -0.001
                      (0.001)                (0.001)                (0.003)                (0.003)               (0.003)
Thailand Baht         -0.003*                -0.000                 -0.003                 0.001                 0.005
                      (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.004)               (0.004)
Canadian Dollar       -0.002                 -0.001                 0.001                  0.000                 -0.001
                      (0.002)                (0.001)                (0.003)                (0.004)               (0.004)
Observations          12087       12087      3428          3428    2748         2748       2976        2976      2935        2935
R-squared             0.96        0.96       0.99          0.99     0.99        0.99       0.87        0.87      0.93        0.93
 Notes: 1). Standard errors in parentheses;
          2). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
          3). All currencies are valued in units of SDR;
          4). Data Source: Bloomberg intra-day closing price, New York.




                                                                                                                               76
 Table 23A: Intra-day Regressions for RMB (15 minute intervals, numeraire currency = Swiss franc)

                       (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)         (10)
                       All data                7/21-8/25/2005          2/16-3/16/2006         3/17-4/17/2006        4/18-5/17/2006
US Dollar              0.931**     0.937**     1.004**       0.999**   0.895**     0.887**    0.918**     0.987**   0.946**     0.996**
                       (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.001)   (0.009)     (0.002)    (0.016)     (0.006)   (0.010)     (0.004)
Euro                   0.005       0.006       0.006*        0.006**   0.008       0.006      -0.005      0.001     0.013       0.016**
                       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.003)       (0.003)   (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.009)     (0.008)
Japanese Yen           -0.007**    -0.005**    -0.002*       -0.002*   -0.011**    -0.006**   -0.003      -0.003    -0.008**    -0.003
                       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.003)     (0.003)
Korean Won             0.063**     0.063**     -0.000        -0.000    0.110**     0.110**    0.013**     0.012**   -0.001      0.004
                       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.003)     (0.003)
Singapore Dollar       -0.002                  -0.000                  -0.020**               -0.006                0.016**
                       (0.003)                 (0.002)                 (0.004)                (0.007)               (0.005)
British Pound          0.002                   -0.000                  0.002                  0.008                 0.006
                       (0.003)                 (0.002)                 (0.004)                (0.006)               (0.005)
Malaysia Ringgit       0.009**                 -0.008**                0.013*                 0.063**               0.036**
                       (0.004)                 (0.003)                 (0.008)                (0.011)               (0.007)
Russia Ruble           0.003                   0.003                   0.008                  0.007                 0.000
                       (0.003)                 (0.002)                 (0.005)                (0.009)               (0.007)
Australian Dollar      0.003**                 0.001                   0.003                  0.005*                -0.001
                       (0.001)                 (0.001)                 (0.003)                (0.003)               (0.003)
Thailand Baht          -0.004**                -0.000                  -0.005**               0.000                 0.005
                       (0.002)                 (0.002)                 (0.002)                (0.004)               (0.004)
Canadian Dollar        -0.002                  -0.000                  -0.001                 0.000                 -0.001
                       (0.002)                 (0.001)                 (0.003)                (0.004)               (0.004)
Observations           12087       12087       3428          3428      2748        2748       2976        2976      2935        2935
R-squared              0.99        0.99        1.00          1.00      1.00        1.00       0.97        0.97      0.98        0.98

 Notes: 1).     Standard errors in parentheses;
        2).     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
        3).     All currencies are valued in units of Swiss franc;
        4).     Data Source: Bloomberg intra-day closing price, New York.




                                                                                                                                  77
Figure 6: Extrapolation of the estimated nonlinear time trend in the weight on the dollar in the Chinese basket


                                            Weight on the dollar
     1
  0.98
  0.96
  0.94
  0.92
   0.9
  0.88
  0.86
  0.84
  0.82
   0.8




                                                                                           10


                                                                                                     10
                                   07


                                            07


                                                      08


                                                               08


                                                                        09


                                                                                  09
     05


                06


                         06




                                                                                         20


                                                                                                   20
                                          20


                                                    20


                                                             20


                                                                      20


                                                                                20
                       20


                                 20
   20


              20




                                                                                       1-


                                                                                                 7-
                                        7-


                                                  1-


                                                           7-


                                                                    1-


                                                                              7-
                               1-
 7-


            1-


                     7-




                                                   month-year


         Weight on the dollar over time = b0(usd) + b1(usd) [1- exp(-d*t)]
         where b0(usd) = 0.982, b1(usd) = -28.9, and d = 0.00001,
         based on the estimates from a non-linear regression, reported in the column (4) of Table 22.




                                                                                                                  78
                                                       Frequency of Chinese Yuan Exchange Rate Quotes, 15 Minute Intervals
                                                                (2/16/2006 - 5/17/2006; Data Source: Bloomberg)


            60




            50




            40
Frequency




            30




            20




            10




             0
                 0:00   1:00   2:00   3:00   4:00   5:00   6:00   7:00   8:00   9:00 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00 15:00 16:00 17:00 18:00 19:00 20:00 21:00 22:00 23:00
                                                                                      US Easte rn Standard Time




                                                                                                                                                                           79
