NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COINTEGRATION AND CONSUMPTION RISKS IN ASSET RETURNS
Ravi Bansal
Robert Dittmar
Dana Kiku
Working Paper 13108
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13108

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

An earlier draft of this paper was circulated with the title "Long Run Risks and Equity Returns." We
would like to thank George Tauchen, Jessica Wachter, Vivian Wang, Amir Yaron, and the seminar
participants at Arizona State University, Duke University, Simon Fraser University, Stanford University,
University of British Columbia, University of Michigan, University of North Carolina, University
of Pennsylvania, Vanderbilt University, Federal Reserve Board of Governors Conference on Risk
Premiums: Time Variation and Macroeconomic Links, and 2007 American Finance Association Meetings
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Ravi Bansal, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Cointegration and Consumption Risks in Asset Returns
Ravi Bansal, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku
NBER Working Paper No. 13108
May 2007
JEL No. C01,C13,G00,G1,G12
ABSTRACT
We argue that the cointegrating relation between dividends and consumption, a measure of long run
consumption risks, is a key determinant of risk premia at all investment horizons. As the investment
horizon increases, transitory risks disappear, and the asset's beta is dominated by long run consumption
risks. We show that the return betas, derived from the cointegration-based VAR (EC-VAR) model,
successfully account for the crosssectional variation in equity returns at both short and long horizons;
this is not the case when the cointegrating restriction is ignored. Our evidence highlights the importance
of cointegration-based long run consumption risks for financial markets.
Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu
Robert Dittmar
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
rdittmar@bus.umich.edu

Dana Kiku
Finance Department
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
kiku@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction
How does the riskiness of equity returns change with investment horizon? We show that at
long horizons risks are dominated by long run consumption risks in dividends, while at short
horizons, additional price risks may also matter. The cointegrating relation between dividends
and consumption measures long-run covariance consumption risks in dividends. We show that
this cointegrating relation has important conceptual and empirical implications for the risks
at all horizons. Empirically, we document that consumption asset betas determined by the
cointegration based vector-autoregression (EC-VAR) can very well account for the mean equity
returns in the cross-section at both short and long horizons. This is not the case when the
cointegration restriction, as is traditionally done, is ignored. Hence, our evidence underscores
the economic importance of the cointegrating relation in understanding sources of risks and
explaining equity risk premia across all investment horizons.
Our focus on the cointegrating relation is motivated by Bansal and Yaron (2004), Bansal,
Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001, 2005), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005), and Bansal, Gallant,
and Tauchen (2005) who show that long run risks can be important in explaining risk premia.
Cointegration, as made clear by the representation theorem of Granger and Engle (1987),
has sharp implications for predictability. In the context of dividends and consumption, the
representation theorem implies that the deviation of the level of dividends from consumption
(the error-correction variable) is important for predicting dividend growth rates and returns
at all horizons. As the error-correction variable alters the information set used to predict
future returns, it also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the return innovation and, hence, the conditional
consumption betas.
The empirical literature frequently imposes the implicit assumption of no cointegration by
modeling returns with a standard vector autoregression (VAR). We show that this traditional
approach leads to a signiﬁcant deterioration in the ability of consumption-based models to
3

explain risk premia at both short and long horizons relative the the cointegration-based
speciﬁcation. In this “standard VAR”, consumption and dividend growth rates are stationary,
however the levels of consumption and dividends are not cointegrated. Deviations of dividends
from consumption contain a unit root and, thus, the two series can drift far apart — there
is no error-correction mechanism, which ties dividends and consumption together in the long
run. Cointegration, and the implied EC-VAR framework, ties these two series together in the
long run; for this reason, the error-correction term can be quite important for predicting future
returns and growth rates. The inclusion of the error-correcting mechanism can signiﬁcantly
alter the transition dynamics of returns and asset betas relative to the standard growth-rate
based VAR speciﬁcation.
We ﬁrst document that the error-correction term in the dividend-consumption cointegrating
relation contains important information for predicting future dividend growth and returns.
Imposing cointegration, we are able to predict on average 11.5% of the variation in one-year
returns, compared to 7.5% when we do not impose cointegration. This diﬀerence is even starker
at longer horizons: at the 10-year horizon, the EC-VAR speciﬁcation results in an average 44.0%
adjusted R2 , compared to 9.9% for the standard growth-rate VAR speciﬁcation. That is, at
longer horizons, we are able to predict far more variation in returns using the cointegration
speciﬁcation than when we do not impose cointegration on the return dynamics.

This

predictability evidence suggests that cointegration has important implications for measuring
return innovations and, consequently, conditional consumption betas.
Using the EC-VAR, we ﬁnd that the cointegrating relation indeed signiﬁcantly inﬂuences
the conditional consumption betas and resulting prices of risk at all investment horizons. The
estimated market price of consumption risks is always positive and signiﬁcant. For example, at
the short horizon, the market price of risk is 1.19 (SE=0.41); at the long horizon, it continues
to be highly signiﬁcant of 0.72 (SE=0.25). Our conditional consumption betas account for
about 75% of the cross-sectional variation in risk premia at the one-year horizon, and are able
4

to explain over 85% of the the cross-section of mean returns at long horizons. In contrast,
VAR models traditionally used in the literature ignore the cointegrating relation in measuring
conditional betas and, hence, are unable to account for the diﬀerences in risk premia across
assets. The unconditional consumption CAPM also fails to explain the variation in average
returns across assets. To conﬁrm our ﬁndings we conduct a series of Monte Carlo experiments
and show that our empirical evidence is statistically signiﬁcant and robust.
The unique dimension of our paper is to show that after accounting for the long-run
relation between dividends and consumption, conditional consumption betas contain important
information about risk premia at all investment horizons. At long horizons, transitory risks
vanish and only long-run risks drive risk compensations. Our approach, therefore, allows us to
analyze the size of the compensation for long-run versus transitory risks in accounting for risk
premia. Quantitatively, we ﬁnd that long-run consumption risks are the dominant source of
risk premia at all investment horizons. Conceptually, we provide a framework for linking the
cointegration parameter to the conditional consumption betas by horizon and show that they
can explain the cross-sectional variation in expected returns at both short and long horizons.
Earlier work has pursued a very diﬀerent approach to account for the cross-sectional variation in
short-horizon (one period) returns. In particular, Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001, 2005)
and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005) focus on cash-ﬂow betas and inquire if these betas can
account for short horizon expected returns. Parker and Julliard (2005) measures covariance
risk between current returns and future consumption, while Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) and
Jagannathan and Wang (1996) rely on time-varying betas to justify the cross-sectional pattern
in one period expected returns.
A rich array of speciﬁcations for dividends have been used in earlier asset pricing models.
In Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Bansal and Yaron (2004) models, consumption and
dividend growth rates have the same unconditional mean but are not cointegrated. Cochrane,
Longstaﬀ, and Santa-Clara (2006) develop a theoretical model where the average growth rates
5

of aggregate dividends diﬀer across sectors and analyze the implications for risk premia. Menzly,
Santos, and Veronesi (2004) consider a speciﬁcation where dividends and consumption across
all sectors have unit cointegration, while Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001) and Hansen,
Heaton, and Li (2005) entertain speciﬁcations that permit heterogeneity in the cointegrating
relation between dividends and consumption. The economic implications of these alternative
speciﬁcations of dividends for the risk-return relation are empirically evaluated in this paper. As
stated above, the heterogeneity in the cointegrating relation is found to be empirically important
for understanding risk premia across assets at all investment horizons. Speciﬁcations which do
not allow for this heterogeneity are not supported in the data. The empirical evidence in this
paper, therefore, suggests that developing dynamic models that permit heterogeneity in the
cointegrating relation would be very valuable.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we discuss a brief and simple
theoretical framework and present our econometric speciﬁcation for return dynamics. Section
2 describes the data. Section 3 contains the results of our empirical analysis. Monte Carlo
evidence that supports our data ﬁndings is discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 provides
concluding remarks.

1

Cointegration and Risk Premia

In this section, we discuss a simple theoretical framework that we employ and implications
of cointegration for risk measures and risk premia. Throughout our discussion, we utilize a
Taylor series approximation for log returns (see Campbell and Shiller (1988)). Let zt = pt − dt
represent the log of the price-dividend ratio. The return approximation is given by

rt+1 = κ0 + dt+1 − dt + κ1 zt+1 − zt ,

6

(1)

where the log-linearization constants κ0 and κ1 are,

κ1 =

exp(z̄)
,
1 + exp(z̄)

(2)

κ0 = log(1 + exp(z̄)) − κ1 z̄,
and z̄ is the mean of the log price-dividend ratio. Using ∆zt+s = zt+s − zt , equation (1) also
implies
rt+1 = κ0 + ∆dt+1 + ∆zt+1 + (κ1 − 1)zt+1 .

(3)

We further assume that the log price-dividend ratio, zt , and dividend growth rates, ∆dt+1 ,
are covariance stationary processes. To model long-horizon returns, it is useful to deﬁne the

summed level of the price-dividend ratio as zt+1→t+s ≡ sj=1 zt+j , the accumulated change in
it as ∆zt+1→t+s ≡ zt+1→t+s − zt→t+s−1 , and accumulated s-period growth rate as ∆dt+1→t+s ≡
s
j=1 ∆dt+j . Using the return expression (3), it follows that s-horizon compounded return,

rt+1→t+s ≡ sj=1 rt+j , is completely characterized by these three components.

1.1

Risk Premia

We assume, as in Lucas (1978), that a representative agent prices assets across various
investment horizons. The Euler equation associated with this agent will therefore determine
the risk-return relation at all horizons.

To keep the analysis simple, we further assume

that the representative agent’s preferences are characterized by the standard power utility
of aggregate consumption. Hence, the log of the one-step-ahead stochastic discount factor
is mt = ln() − γ∆ct , where ∆ct is the growth rate of log aggregate consumption, γ is the
parameter of risk aversion, and  determines time preferences. The standard asset pricing

7

condition for any horizon s is,

Et [exp(mt+1→t+s + rt+1→t+s )] = 1,

where mt+1→t+s =

s
j=1

(4)

mt+j . We assume that the log of the stochastic discount factor and log

returns are jointly conditionally normal and homoskedastic, and ∆ct is a covariance stationary
process. Our preference and distributional assumptions are similar to those used by Hansen
and Singleton (1983).1
Let ηt+1 ≡ ∆ct+1 − Et [∆ct+1 ] be the one-step ahead innovation in consumption growth
and ηt+1→t+s be the innovation in the cumulative growth in consumption, ∆ct+1→t+s . The
conditional variance of the cumulative consumption growth corresponds to the variance of this
2
s-period innovation, which we denote as σc,s
. Similarly, ηr,t+1→t+s is the innovation in s-horizon
2
return, rt+1→t+s , σr,s
denotes its conditional variance, and Cov [ηt+1→t+s , ηr,t+1→t+s ] corresponds

to the conditional covariance between consumption and return innovations for horizon s.
Given our distributional assumption of homoscedasticity, all conditional second moments are
constants. The asset pricing condition in eq.(4) along with distributional assumptions implies
that the conditional expected return at any horizon s is given by,

1 
1
f
2
Et rt+1→t+s + 0.5σr,s − srt,s =
γ Cov [ηt+1→t+s , ηr,t+1→t+s ]
s
s
=

1
2 Cov [ηt+1→t+s , ηr,t+1→t+s ]
γ σc,s
2
s
σc,s

(5)

= λ s βs ,
f
where rt,s
is the yield on an s-period discount bond known at date t.
1

λs ≡

1
2
γ σc,s
is
s

It is straightforward to extend the presented framework to a more general framework such as in Bansal and
Yaron (2004). This, however, would entail estimation of a larger set of parameters in the cross-section of assets.
To avoid this, we conﬁne our attention to the case of power utility, which is suﬃcient for addressing questions
about the cross-sectional dispersion in mean returns that are the focus of this paper.

8

the price of risk that is determined by the agent’s risk aversion and the conditional variance
of consumption growth for the corresponding investment horizon, and βs is the conditional
consumption risk measure for horizon s. We scale expression (5) by s to ensure that moments
exist and to provide the interpretation of the risk premium as per unit of time.
The expected return is obtained by taking unconditional expectations of (5). Let µr be the
one-period-ahead geometric mean return,

E


2

0.5σr,s
1 
f
2
Et rt+1→t+s + 0.5σr,s = µr +
= E[rt,s
] + βs λ s .
s
s

(6)

As shown in expression (6), expected returns per unit of time are determined by the the market
price of horizon risk, λs , and the horizon-dependent beta, βs .
If returns are Gaussian i.i.d. processes, then conditional expected returns per unit time
2
2
at all horizons will be identical, as σr,s
= sσr,1
. On the other hand, if there is predictable
2
2
variation in returns, then σr,s
need not equal sσr,1
, leading to variation in expected returns

per unit time across diﬀerent investment horizons. Below we provide an empirical method for
2
measuring σr,s
, which allows us to construct expected returns at various horizons.

1.2

Betas by Horizon

The return expression (3) implies that the innovation in s-horizon return is determined by the
innovations to ∆dt+1→t+s , ∆zt+1→t+s and zt+1→t+s , which we respectively denote as ηd,t+1→t+s ,
η∆z,t+1→t+s and ηz,t+1→t+s . The covariance of these components with consumption growth will
determine the overall risk compensation. Speciﬁcally, note that the asset beta, βs , can be
expressed as the sum of three covariances:

βs =

Cov (ηt+1→t+s , ηd,t+1→t+s ) Cov (ηt+1→t+s , η∆z,t+1→t+s )
+
2
2
σc,s
σc,s
9

(7)

+ (κ1 − 1)

Cov (ηt+1→t+s , ηz,t+1→t+s )
,
2
σc,s

which we write compactly as,

βs = [βd,s + β∆z,s + (κ1 − 1)βz,s ].

(8)

Thus, the asset beta is determined by risks in both dividend growth rates and price-dividend
ratios. We refer to the ﬁrst component, βd,s , as the cash-ﬂow beta, β∆z,s as the price change
beta, and βz,t as the level beta associated with the risk in the cumulative price-dividend ratio.
Equation (8) suggests that the joint dynamics of consumption growth, dividend growth, and
price-dividend ratios contribute to the determination of assets’ risk. We discuss the implications
of modeling these dynamics in the next section.
The expression for risk exposures (equation (8)) also suggests that risks faced by a longrun investor are quite diﬀerent than those faced by a single-period investor. While at short
horizons, transitory movements in price-dividend ratios may be important, their contribution
to asset betas and risk compensations is virtually washed out in the long run. As the change
in the price-dividend ratio represents a change in a stationary variable, its covariance with
consumption growth (see the second term in eq.(7)) is gradually swamped by the variance of
the cumulative growth in consumption; in the limit (i.e., as s = ∞), β∆z,s = 0. Further, as
the approximation parameter κ1 is close to one,2 the ﬁnal term in expression (8), (κ1 − 1)βz,s ,
is quite close to zero. Consequently, for a long-run investor, an asset’s risk is dominated by
the long-run covariance risk in dividends, which the cointegration parameter between dividends
and aggregate consumption measures. In particular, as the investment horizon increases,

lims→∞ βs ≡ βlr = δ + (κ1 − 1)βz,lr
2

In the data, the value of the log-linearization parameter, κ1 , varies between 0.96 and 0.99.

10

(9)

where δ is the parameter of cointegration between dividends and consumption (see equation
(19) below). In our empirical work, we show that the long-run risk measure δ has important
information about expected returns at short horizons as well.

1.3

Cointegration Speciﬁcation

A number of recent papers (e.g., Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001) and Hansen, Heaton,
and Li (2005)) suggest that consumption and dividends are stochastically cointegrated (see
Campbell and Perron (1991)). In this section, we examine the implications of cointegration for
the calculation of the risk measures outlined in the preceding section.
We focus on the per-share dividends series traditionally used in the literature. Dividends
per share are constructed as follows. The total return per dollar invested is

Rt+1 = Ht+1 + Yt+1 ,

(10)

where Ht+1 is the price appreciation and Yt+1 is the dividend yield. The level of dividends per
share and the price per share can then be computed as

Dt+1 = Yt+1 Vt ,

(11)

Vt+1 = Ht+1 Vt ,

given V0 , which equals the price per share of portfolio at the initiation date. Note that the
present value of dividends per share is price per share. These dividend series correspond to the
series commonly used in empirical work, as in Campbell and Shiller (1988), Bansal, Dittmar,
and Lundblad (2005), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005) amongst others.
If two non-stationary variables are cointegrated, a linear combination of the variables is

11

stationary. We express the relation between two such variables, dividends and consumption, as

dt = τ0 + τ t + δ ct +

d,t ,

(12)

where the level of dividends and consumption in logs is dt and ct respectively and E[

d,t ]

= 0.

From equation (12) it also follows that τ = µd − δµc , where µc and µd are the average growth of
consumption and dividends respectively. Substituting for τ , the above equation can equivalently
be stated as
dt − µd t = τ0 + δ(ct − µc t) +

d,t

(13)

That is, the cointegration parameter δ can be estimated via the projection of deterministically
de-trended dividends on de-trended consumption (as in Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001)).
The Granger and Engle (1987) representation theorem states that the error-correction variable,
d,t ,

will forecast future dividend growth rates, and consequently, perhaps returns. As we show

below, this predictability has important implications for the calculations of risk measures in
standard models.
Several features of our cointegration speciﬁcation are worthy of further discussion. In
particular, the speciﬁcation in (12) includes a time trend and the cointegration parameter, δ, is
unrestricted as in Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001) — we refer to this as our “preferred
speciﬁcation”. Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2005) also entertain a speciﬁcation with τ = 0 and
unrestricted δ, and another with τ unrestricted while δ is restricted to one, while Menzly,
Santos, and Veronesi (2004) consider a speciﬁcation with τ = 0 and δ = 1 parameter. In our
empirical analysis, we consider and discuss the implications of these alternative speciﬁcations
as well.
It is important to note that it is not time trend but the cross-sectional heterogeneity in δ
that is important for capturing diﬀerences in risks across assets. Note, without the time trend

12

in equation (12) the cointegration parameter simply equals the ratio of average dividend growth
to average growth in aggregate consumption (see Hamilton (1994)). In this case, cross-sectional
diﬀerences in δ’s will tautologically reﬂect diﬀerences in average dividend growth (and average
capital gains) and, therefore, average ex-post returns. Including the time trend purges the
eﬀect of mean growth rates in dividends on the cointegration parameter, and ensures that longrun risk measures do not mechanically replicate cross-sectional diﬀerences in ex-post average
returns.

1.4

Deriving Mean Returns and Betas by Horizon

This section provides the details for estimating assets’ consumption betas for diﬀerent
investment horizons. We ﬁrst estimate the cointegrating relation (12) between dividends and
consumption via OLS, that is by regressing the de-trended portfolio’s cash ﬂows onto the
stochastic trend in consumption. Using the resulting cointegrating residual,

d,t ,

we model its

dynamics jointly with the portfolio’s price-dividend ratio, zt , and consumption growth, ∆ct , via
the ﬁrst-order error-correction VAR (EC-VAR) structure:

Xt = AXt−1 + Gut ,
where Xt = ( ∆ct

d,t

zt

∆dt

(14)

∆zt ), A is a 5 × 5 matrix of coeﬃcients, G is a 5 × 3 matrix,

and u is a three by one matrix of shocks, ut = ( ηt

η,t

ηz,t ).3 All the variables are de-

meaned throughout our discussion. While details of the EC-VAR speciﬁcation are provided in
the Appendix, below we highlight some of its salient features. The ﬁrst three variables form
the basis of the EC-VAR process. The last two variables provide no additional information;
they are included into the EC-VAR to facilitate the description and discussion of consumption
3

We have also considered speciﬁcations that include more lags in the vector error-correction model. As this
does not materially change the results, we only report evidence based on the ﬁrst-order EC-VAR.

13

betas by horizon. The dynamics of ∆dt and ∆zt are derived from the dynamics of the ﬁrst
three variables by exploiting ∆dt = ∆

d,t

+ δ∆ct , and ∆zt = zt − zt−1 .

Note that the EC-VAR speciﬁcation reduces to the standard growth-rate based VAR if
the error-correction term,

d,t ,

is excluded from the set of variables that predict future growth

rates and returns. In this “standard VAR”, ct and dt are each integrated, that is, the growth
rates of consumption and dividends are stationary; however, ct and dt are not cointegrated.
Thus, deviations of dividends from consumption contain a unit root and these two series can
arbitrarily drift far apart — there is no error-correction mechanism which ties dividends and
consumption together in the long run. Cointegration, and the implied EC-VAR framework,
ties the long-run dynamics of the two series together. For this reason the error-correction term,
d,t ,

can be quite important for predicting future dividend growth rates and returns and its

inclusion can signiﬁcantly alter the transition dynamics of returns. In sum, there can be large
diﬀerences between the standard VAR and the EC-VAR implications for risks measures and
expected returns, which we subsequently highlight in our empirical work.
Using the recursive structure of the EC-VAR, we can compute the conditional variance of
2
2
returns, σr,s
, the conditional variance of consumption growth, σc,s
, and the conditional beta,

βs , for any given horizon s. Speciﬁcally, let Bj = Bj−1 + Aj−1 , j = 1, 2, ..., and B0 = 0. The
horizon-s covariance matrix of the above variables satisﬁes the recursion
Σ∗s = Bs Σe Bs + Σ∗s−1 ,

(15)

where Σe = GΣu G , and Σ∗0 = 0. As s increases, Σ∗s grows without a bound; hence we consider
Σs ≡

Σ∗s
.
s

In the long-run limit, this covariance matrix becomes:


Σlr = [I − A]−1 Σe [I − A]−1 .

14

(16)

Details of the derivation of the covariance matrix are provided in the Appendix.
The s-period covariance matrix, Σs , allows us to calculate the s-period beta of an asset
using the appropriate covariance and variance terms. For a given horizon s, the covariance risk
in the asset is
βs =

Σs (1, 5)
Σs (1, 4)
Σs (1, 3)
+
+ (κ1 − 1)
,
Σs (1, 1)
Σs (1, 1)
Σs (1, 1)

where Σs (i, j) is the (i, j)-element of the covariance matrix Σs .

(17)

Note that computations

in equation (17) correspond to various components in equation (8). In particular, the ﬁrst
component corresponds to the cash-ﬂow risk, βd,s , the second component, β∆z,s , corresponds to
the price change risk, and βz,s corresponds to the level risk.
There are several implications of expression (17) that are worthy of note.

First, the

cointegration parameter will be an important determinant of the asset’s risk at any investment
horizon. To illustrate this point, consider the beta for one-period investment. Given the
equation above,

β1 = δ +



Σ1 (1, 2) + Σ1 (1, 5) + (κ1 − 1)Σ1 (1, 3) Σ1 (1, 1)−1 .

(18)

Notice that the cointegration parameter is one of the four components of the consumption
beta at the one-period horizon. Further, the presence of cointegration not only alters betas
directly (via the ﬁrst term), it also alters the beta through the other terms (via its impact
on the transition matrices A and G). Thus, the parameter of cointegration that reﬂects longrun consumption risks in the asset’s cash ﬂows is an important determinant of the risk-return
relation at all investment horizons.
At long horizons, cash-ﬂow cointegration risks are especially important. As noted above,
variation in transitory components in returns die out in the long run. Thus, variation in the
error-correction term and the growth in the price-dividend ratio will vanish in the limit. This

15

means that, in the long run, lr, the beta will become
βlr = δ + (κ1 − 1)Σ1 (1, 3)Σ1 (1, 1)−1 .

(19)

That is, the beta becomes the cointegration parameter plus a term related to the accumulated
price-dividend level risk.
Expression (17) characterizes conditional consumption betas by horizon and highlights
important implications of the cointegrating relation for risk measures. For example, when δ is
assumed to be one, as in Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), the cross-sectional dispersion in
betas will be signiﬁcantly reduced at both short and long horizons. Further, when cointegration
is not imposed,

d,t

is not a predictive variable for dividend growth rates and returns, and the

permanent term δ is absent from the term structure of betas. This predictive power is an
empirical consideration which we investigate below.
The proﬁle of expected returns by horizon can be read from the above EC-VAR speciﬁcation
by adding half the variance on return innovation for a given horizon,

2
σr,s
,
s

to the mean log return.

We use betas and mean returns by horizon, implied by the EC-VAR dynamics, to analyze
the cross-sectional relation in risk and return at various investment horizons. Speciﬁcally, we
investigate the relation by considering cross-sectional regressions for diﬀerent horizons s,

σr2 ,s 
E ri + 0.5 i = λ0,s + λ1,s βi,s .
s

(20)

Evidence on the sources of betas at various horizons and the explanatory power of these betas
for the cross-section of mean returns is presented in Section 3.

16

2

Data

The portfolios employed in our empirical tests sort ﬁrms on dimensions that lead to crosssectional dispersion in measured risk premia. The particular characteristics that we consider
are ﬁrms’ market value and book-to-market ratio. Our rationale for examining portfolios
sorted on these characteristics is that size and book-to-market based sorts are the basis for
factor models used in Fama and French (1993) to explain the risk premia on other assets.
Consequently, understanding the risk premia on these assets is an economically important step
toward understanding the risk compensation of a wider array of assets.
We construct the set of portfolios formed on the basis of market capitalization by ranking
all ﬁrms covered by CRSP on the basis of their market capitalization at the end of June of
each year using NYSE capitalization breakpoints. We form annual returns on these portfolios
over the period 1929 through 2002. In Table 1, we present means and standard deviations of
market value-weighted returns for size decile portfolios. The data evidence a substantial size
premium over the sample period; the mean real annual return on the lowest decile ﬁrms is
13.45%, contrasted with a return of 7.58% for the highest decile.
Book-to-market portfolios are formed by ranking ﬁrms on their book-to-market ratios as
of the end of June of each year using NYSE book-to-market breakpoints. Book values are
computed using Moody’s data prior to 1955 and Compustat data in the post-1955 period. The
book-to-market ratio at year t is computed as the ratio of book value at ﬁscal year end t − 1 to
CRSP market value of equity at calendar year t − 1. Average value-weighted portfolio returns
are also presented in Table 1. The data evidence a book-to-market spread of similar magnitude
to the size spread; the highest book-to-market ﬁrms earn average real annual returns of 13.37%,
whereas the lowest book-to-market ﬁrms average 7.01%.
We utilize the dividends paid on these value-weighted portfolios to explore the relations

17

between portfolio cash ﬂows and consumption. Our construction of the dividend series is
standard; details of the construction can be found in Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Bansal,
Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005). We construct the level of cash dividends per share, Dt , for the
size and book-to-market portfolios on a monthly basis as described above. From this series, we
construct the annual levels of dividends by summing the cash ﬂows within the year. These series
are converted to real by the personal consumption deﬂator. Log growth rates are constructed by
taking the log ﬁrst diﬀerence of the cash-ﬂow series. Summary statistics for the cash dividend
growth rates of the portfolios under consideration are presented in Table 1. Earlier work shows
that alternative measures of dividends, such as including repurchases, do not aﬀect the results.4

3

Empirical Results

In this section, we investigate the implications of the preceding framework for the measurement
of assets’ risks. We ﬁrst analyze the cointegration of assets’ dividends with consumption and
investigate the implications of the cointegrating relation for the predictability of assets’ growth
rates and returns. We then compute the proﬁle of consumption betas and expected returns
for diﬀerent investment horizons, implied by our EC-VAR framework, and analyze the crosssectional implications of the model.

3.1

Cointegration Evidence

In Table 2, we present point estimates of the cointegration parameters between portfolios’
cash ﬂows and consumption, the sample autocorrelation functions (ACF) of the cointegrating
residuals, and unit root tests of the stationarity of the cointegrating residuals. As discussed
4

Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005)) show that alternative dividend measures, which include share
repurchases do not make a big diﬀerence to their cash-ﬂow risk measures. We ﬁnd the same is true for the
empirical evidence in this paper.

18

earlier, we estimate cointegration parameters via OLS by regressing the deterministically detrended dividends on de-trended consumption. We ﬁrst note that, for the majority of portfolios
analyzed, the sample autocorrelations of the resulting cointegrating residuals exhibit a relatively
rapid decline. This supports our assumption that the long-run dynamics of portfolios’ dividends
and aggregate consumption are governed by the same permanent component that can be
eliminated by the appropriate linear combination of the levels. In addition, large cross-sectional
variation in the estimated cointegration parameters, presented in the ﬁrst column, suggests that
assets’ cash ﬂows diﬀer in their exposures to this low-frequency component. The unit root tests
suggest cointegration in 10 of the 20 portfolios, and a number of portfolios’ test statistics are
close to the Mackinnon critical value of -3.59. Because of the low power of this test in samples
of the size that we analyze (74 observations), we conclude that the results in the table provide
reasonable support for the cointegration speciﬁcation.
We now examine the point estimates of the cointegration parameters more closely. Note
that for the size portfolios, the parameters exhibit a near-monotonic decreasing pattern across
the market capitalization deciles. The estimate for the small size portfolio is 9.62 compared
to 0.82 for the large size portfolio, mirroring the pattern in observed risk premia. For the
book-to-market portfolios, the cointegration parameters exhibit an increasing relation in the
book-to-market decile. The point estimate for the highest book-to-market portfolio is 10.25,
compared to -0.27 for the growth portfolio. Again, this result is broadly consistent with the
pattern of observed risk premia. Indeed, we ﬁnd that the cointegration parameter by itself
explains about 81% of the cross-sectional variation in average one-period returns on size and
book-to-market sorted assets. The price of risk of 0.486 (SE=0.053) is positive and statistically
signiﬁcant. This evidence suggests that long-run risks embodied in assets’ cash ﬂows are able
to account for a signiﬁcant portion of the diﬀerences in risk premia. The fact that small and
high book-to-market stocks have large exposures to permanent risks in consumption implies
that the performance of these ﬁrms is linked to the permanent risks in the economy, while that
19

of large and low book-to-market portfolio ﬁrms is not. As consumption is largely dominated
by permanent shocks, risks in large market-capitalization and low book-to-market stocks are
largely unrelated to the long-run evolution of the economy. This, as we document further below,
is exactly why large and low book-to-market portfolios should bear a low ex-ante risk premium
and already highlights the importance of long-run risks.

3.2

Predictability Evidence

As stated above, cointegration implies that dividend growth rates are predicted by the
cointegrating residuals. That is, the current deviations of an asset’s cash ﬂows from their
long-run relation with consumption should forecast the dynamics of dividend growth rates
while dividends are moving back towards the equilibrium.

For example, if dividends are

unusually high today, dividend growth is expected to fall in order for cash ﬂows to adjust
to the stochastic trend in consumption. Given the approximation for the log return in equation
(3), the predictability of dividend growth rates potentially translates into return predictability.
The variation in the cointegrating residuals, therefore, may also be able to account for the
variation in expected future returns.
We explore the ability of our EC-VAR speciﬁcation to predict future dividend growth rates
and returns at various horizons. To emphasize the importance of the cointegrating relation, we
compare the adjusted-R2 ’s for dividend growth and return projections implied by the EC-VAR
model outlined above with the corresponding R̄2 ’s from the growth-rate VAR speciﬁcation.
The latter simply excludes the cointegrating residuals from a set of VAR variables. Results for
dividend growth are presented in Table 3. We examine results at horizons of 1, 5, and 10 years.
As shown in the table, at the one-year horizon, the diﬀerences between the EC-VAR speciﬁcation
and the simple growth-rate VAR are quite stark. The mean (median) adjusted R2 for the ECVAR speciﬁcation is 0.19 (0.16), compared to 0.15 (0.11) for the growth rates speciﬁcation.

20

At longer horizons, the inclusion of the error-correction term becomes less important; at the
ten-year horizon the mean (median) adjusted R2 for the EC-VAR and VAR speciﬁcation are
0.20 (0.17) and 0.26 (0.24) respectively. This is not surprising, as the error-correction term
captures transitory variation in dividend growth rates.
Further, asset return predictability is also altered by the cointegration between dividends
and consumption. Return projections’ R̄2 ’s for horizons 1, 5 and 10 years implied by the ECVAR model as well as the alternative, growth-rate speciﬁcation are reported in Table 4. The
EC-VAR speciﬁcation, on average, is able to explain an average (median) of 11.5% (10.5%) of
return variation at one year horizon, and 44.0% (43.5%) of the variation in ten-year returns.
Excluding the cointegrating residual signiﬁcantly lowers the predictability of asset returns and
alters the conditional mean of returns. We illustrate this point in Figure 1 by plotting one and
ten-year returns predicted by the EC-VAR speciﬁcation along with the forecasts implied by
the alternative VAR model. Predicted conditional means are displayed for the top and bottom
market capitalization and book-to-market portfolios. It can be seen that the two speciﬁcations
produce quite diﬀerent predictions of future expected returns, especially at longer horizons.
That is, the cointegrating residual, included in the error-correction speciﬁcation, contains
distinct information about future returns beyond that in the growth-rate based model. Return
innovations, therefore, also diﬀer across the two speciﬁcations, and most importantly so will
the consumption betas measured from the two alternative models.
As a robustness check, we have also examined direct projections of multi-period compounded
dividend growth rates and returns on the EC-VAR versus growth-rate VAR information sets.
We do not entertain this method beyond 5-7 years as the number of independent observations
in such direct projections decreases rapidly with the horizon. Predictability evidence from these
projections is very similar to that discussed above and, for brevity, is not reported. In sum, we
ﬁnd cointegrating residuals to be a signiﬁcant predictor of both future growth rates and future

21

returns at short and intermediate horizons.5
The results of this section underscore the importance of cointegration in the measurement
of risk and return. As emphasized in this section, temporary deviations of cash ﬂows from
the permanent component in consumption, that is cointegration residuals, contain valuable
information for predicting dividend growth rates and returns, and thus represent an important
component in the calculation of expected returns and betas by horizon. We turn to this point
in the following section, and analyze how the risk-return relation changes with the investment
horizon.

3.3

Betas and Expected Returns by Horizon

Mean returns for the portfolios at the one-, ﬁve-, and ten-year horizons, implied by the ECVAR, are presented in Table 5. As shown in the table, the general pattern observed in expected
returns is preserved across the various horizons. Small ﬁrm portfolios tend to earn higher mean
returns than do large ﬁrm portfolios, and low book-to-market portfolios earn lower expected
returns than high book-to-market portfolios. Further, at all horizons, the mean returns exhibit
considerable cross-sectional variation; the dispersion in mean returns at the ten-year horizon is
though slightly less than that at the one-year horizon.
We now explore the implications of cointegration for the determination of assets’
consumption risks. Table 6 presents betas at various horizons for each of the portfolios; Newey
and West (1987) standard errors are given in parentheses. Similarly to mean returns, risk
measures implied by the EC-VAR exhibit substantial cross-sectional variation. At the 1-year
horizon, the small-ﬁrm portfolio beta (4.12) exceeds the large-ﬁrm portfolio beta (1.54), and
5

In particular, at the one-year horizon, t-statistics on the cointegrating residual in dividend growth
projections are signiﬁcant for 11 out of 20 portfolios. As the horizon increases, the predictive power of the
error-correction variable considerably improves: at the ﬁve-year horizon, robust t-statistics in dividend growth
and return projections become statistically signiﬁcant for virtually all the portfolios.

22

the high book-to-market beta (3.89) exceeds the low book-to-market beta (1.81). Further,
there is a generally declining pattern in the size dimension and increasing pattern in the bookto-market dimension that is consistent with the pattern observed in mean returns. As the
horizon increases, the cross-sectional pattern in these risk measures generally remains the same,
although the precision of the estimates suﬀers. At the 10-year horizon, the small-ﬁrm beta (6.54)
continues to exceed the large-ﬁrm beta (0.34) and the high book-to-market beta (4.33) exceeds
the low book-to-market beta (-0.83).
As argued in Section 1, the cointegration parameter is one of the components of the overall
consumption beta at each horizon, along with risks arising from transitory ﬂuctuations in
dividends and prices. The relative importance of price risks and short-run dividend risks,
however, decreases over time, and in the long run, systematic risks in returns should be
dominated by permanent risks in assets’ cash ﬂows. We ﬁnd that this theoretical proposition is
strongly supported in the data. While at the one-year horizon, the correlation between assets’
betas and cointegration parameters is about 0.87, by the ﬁve-year horizon it already exceeds
0.90, reaching virtually 1 in the limit. Thus, the contribution of the cash-ﬂow component
of risks to the beta dominates in the long run. Moreover, even at short horizons, long-run
consumption risks in dividends are an important determinant of assets’ betas.
To illustrate the importance of the cointegrating relation between dividends and
consumption for measuring expected returns and conditional consumption betas, we compare
the evidence discussed above with that implied by the alternative growth-rate based VAR
speciﬁcation.

We ﬁnd that the magnitude of mean returns for the growth-rate VAR

speciﬁcation, reported in Table 5, is somewhat higher relative to the EC-VAR speciﬁcation
but their cross-sectional pattern by horizon is very comparable to that impled by the ECVAR. However, the betas in the VAR speciﬁcation, reported in Table 6, signiﬁcantly diﬀer
from the EC-VAR based betas. For comparison, in Table 6 we also present the unconditional
C-CAPM betas. Both the unconditional betas and those based on the VAR do not reﬂect the
23

cross-sectional diﬀerences in mean returns on size and book-to-market sorted portfolios. This
evidence underscores the importance of conditioning information contained in the cointegrating
residual in computing assets’ exposures to consumption risks.
Below, we more formally analyze the relation between mean returns and risk measures in
the cross-section across various investment horizons.

3.4

Cross-Sectional Risk and Return

In this section we investigate the cross-sectional risk-return relation and explore the ability
of various speciﬁcations to account for cross-sectional diﬀerences in mean returns across
various investment horizons. We report and discuss evidence based on our preferred EC-VAR
speciﬁcation, as well as alternative speciﬁcations: the standard growth-rate based VAR and the
unconditional C-CAPM. Table 7 presents results of estimating the cross-sectional regression
(20) for diﬀerent investment horizons. The market prices of risk are estimated jointly with the
time-series parameters via one-step GMM. The reported standard errors of the cross-sectional
parameters, therefore, are robust to the estimation error in betas.6
As shown in the table, at the one-year horizon, betas impled by our EC-VAR speciﬁcation
explain 75% of the cross-sectional variation in mean returns with a positive price of risk of 1.19
(SE=0.41). This explanatory power is maintained at the 5- and 10-year horizons, with adjusted
R2 of 0.73 and 0.84 respectively, and prices of risk of 0.73 (SE=0.32) and 0.65 (SE=0.24)
respectively. At the very long horizon, i.e., s = ∞, the estimate of the market price of risk
remains strongly signiﬁcant of 0.72 (SE=0.25), and the cross-section of long-run consumption
betas accounts for a sizeable portion of the variation in long-run risk premia (R̄2 =87%). The
ﬁt for the one-period and the very long horizon is plotted in Figure 2. Thus, at all horizons,
6

In addition, we have constructed bootstrap distributions of time-series and cross-sectional parameters of
interest. As bootstrap-based standard errors are very similar to the above-discussed standard errors, for brevity,
they are not reported.

24

the EC-VAR speciﬁcation explains most of the cross-sectional variation in mean returns across
assets. This evidence manifests the empirical importance of the cointegrating relation between
dividends and consumption in determining assets’ risk premia not only at long but also at short
horizons.
Table 7 also provides the cross-sectional risk-return tradeoﬀ comparison of the EC-VAR
relative to the VAR-based speciﬁcation. As we might expect, given the estimates in the
preceding section, the VAR betas have almost no power in explaining the cross-sectional
variation in mean returns. In particular, at the one-year horizon, it explains just about 22% of
the cross-sectional variation in mean returns and implies although positive, but insigniﬁcant,
price of risk of 1.278 (SE=1.57). As the horizon extends, however, the ability of the VAR
speciﬁcation deteriorates substantially. At both ﬁve and ten-year horizons, it produces negative
prices of risks and completely fails to account for the diﬀerences in risk premia across assets,
as indicated by adjusted R2 ’s of -0.02 and -0.05 respectively.7
In addition to the conditional beta regressions, Table 7 presents the cross-sectional evidence
for the unconditional C-CAPM for the one-year horizon. In contrast to our preferred EC-VAR
speciﬁcation, the unconditional C-CAPM is not able to account for the variation of average
returns across the portfolios — the market price of risk is insigniﬁcant and the R̄2 is negative.
As the horizon increases, the cross-sectional ﬁt of these unconditional betas remains quite low.
For example, at the ﬁve-year horizon, the explanatory power of the C-CAPM is only 23%.
We do not look beyond the 5-year horizon, as the number of independent observations in such
multi-period regressions shrinks rapidly with horizon.
To ensure our results are robust, we consider standard misspeciﬁcation tests as in
7

We ﬁnd that this evidence is fairly robust if we instead employ a double-sorted set of portfolios. In particular,
using 9 portfolio sorted on size and book-to-market characteristics delivers virtually the same magnitudes of
market prices of risks as for single-sorted collections of assets, which we discussed in details. The same is true
for the cross-sectional R̄2 ’s — while the EC-VAR is able to account for more than 50% of the cross-sectional
variation in risk premia across various investment horizons, the adjusted-R2 ’s are virtually zero in the growthrate VAR setting.

25

Jagannathan and Wang (1998). Speciﬁcally, in addition to our EC-VAR betas, we also include
commonly used portfolio attributes: size and book-to-market. We ﬁnd that the EC-VAR
betas remain highly signiﬁcant, while t-statistics on portfolio-speciﬁc characteristics are largely
insigniﬁcant. In particular, at the ﬁrst-year horizon, the robust t-statistic on the EC-VAR beta
is 2.5; for size and book-to-market characteristics the corresponding statistics are -1.9 and 0.4
respectively. As the horizon increases, the explanatory power of the EC-VAR betas increases,
while the signiﬁcance of both characteristics diminishes. For example, at the ten-year horizon,
the t-statistic for our betas is 2.6, and for size and book-to-market attributes are -0.6 and 0.2
respectively. In sum, this ﬁnding shows that our EC-VAR based betas are very important for
capturing the dispersion in risks across assets.
Our empirical evidence highlights the importance of the cointegration-based speciﬁcation
for understanding the risk-return tradeoﬀ at all investment horizons. The EC-VAR relative to
alternative speciﬁcations, such as the growth-rate based VAR, incorporates the error-correction
term

d,t

as a predictive variable. This error-correction state variable alters the information set

used to predict future returns relative to other speciﬁcations of return dynamics, and hence
signiﬁcantly alters the return innovation and conditional betas.
It is worth noting that the implicit assumption (the null hypothesis) behind the EC-VAR
speciﬁcation is that the error-correction term is stationary — all the eigenvalues of the A matrix
are all inside the unit circle. At the point estimates, this critical restriction is satisﬁed for all
20 portfolios. If this restriction were not satisﬁed, then our betas could not be constructed for
the entire cross-section of assets and the cross-sectional price of risks could not be computed
at all horizons. Hence, for evaluating the cross-sectional implications, the null hypothesis that
EC-VAR speciﬁcation leads to stationary dynamics is an important input. In contrast, in the
standard VAR, the error-correction mechanism is absent as dividends and consumption are not
cointegrated and deviations between them contain a permanent component. This, as discussed
earlier, is the key economic diﬀerence between these two speciﬁcations.
26

3.5

Long-Run Risks Compensation

Since consumption growth is a covariance-stationary process, its level satisﬁes a Beveridge and
Nelson (1981) decomposition. That is, the consumption process can be presented as a sum of
a deterministic trend, a random walk component and a transitory (stationary) component:

c t = µc t + Tt + S t ,

(21)

where Tt is the stochastic trend of log consumption, and St is a transitory (or short-run)
component. The covariance of the return with consumption (i.e., the beta) can, therefore,
be broken into two parts: the covariance with trend shocks (βT,s ) and the covariance with
transitory shocks in consumption (βS,s ),

βT,s =

Covt (rt+1→t+s , Tt+1→t+s )
Covt (rt+1→t+s , St+1→t+s )
, and βS,s ≡
.
2
2
σT,s
σS,s

(22)

The overall beta is just a weighted combination of the two risk measures,
2
2
σT,s
σS,s
βs ≡ βT,s 2 + βS,s 2 .
σc,s
σc,s

(23)

Consequently, at each horizon, the market price of risk reﬂects the premium for both very long
risks and short-run ﬂuctuations in consumption:

1 
f
2
≡ λs βs = λT,s βT,s + λS,s βS,s .
Et rt+1→t+s + 0.5σr,s
− srt,s
s

(24)

As the horizon increases, transitory consumption shocks die out, and the transitory risk
compensation shrinks to zero. Thus, the total risk compensation in the long-run limit (when
s = ∞) provides a measure of the compensation solely for long-run consumption risks, i.e.,
λ∞ = λT,∞ . We isolate and estimate this long-run compensation by considering the long27

run risk-return relation in the cross-section of assets. Subtracting it from the overall risk
compensation for a given horizon s allows us to construct the time-horizon proﬁle of risk premia
for transitory consumption risks.
We ﬁnd that the compensation for long-run risks in consumption is about 60% of the
overall compensation at the one-year horizon. Speciﬁcally, the estimate of the long-run risk
compensation is 0.72 per annum compared to 1.19 at the one-period horizon. Figure 3 plots
the compensation for short-run consumption risks along with the total market price of risks
for investment horizons up to 15 years. The compensation for transitory ﬂuctuations is small
relative to the premium for long-run risks and exhibits a rapid decline as the time horizon grows,
starting at about 50 basis points at the ﬁrst horizon and falling to zero by the 5th year. That is,
long-run ﬂuctuations in consumption are the dominant source of the premium for consumption
risks in asset markets.

4
4.1

Robustness of Evidence
Alternative Cointegration Speciﬁcations

In this section, we discuss the implications of various restrictions on the cointegration
speciﬁcation presented above. In particular, we focus on three alternative speciﬁcations relative
to our preferred cointegration speciﬁcation where both δ and τ are unrestricted. In the ﬁrst,
we estimate (12) and (14) under the restriction δ = 1 for all assets and τ is unrestricted. In the
second speciﬁcation, we impose the restriction that τ = 0 (no time trend) but δ is unrestricted.
In the third case, we impose a joint restriction of τ = 0 and δ = 1 across all assets.8
8
It the time-series dimension, these restrictions are sharply rejected for the majority of assets. In particular,
according to Park (1992) test statistics, single hypotheses of τ = 0 and δ = 1 are rejected for 13 and 14 portfolios,
respectively. The joint null of no time trend and a unit cointegration parameter is rejected for all 20 assets (for
all but one portfolio, at the 1% level). Empirical evidence provided in this section reinforces this analysis. We
show that imposing restrictions on the long-run dynamics of assets’ dividends and consumption signiﬁcantly

28

Results for cross-sectional regressions incorporating these restrictions are presented in Table
8. The ﬁrst set of columns present results for the ﬁrst speciﬁcation, where δ = 1 for all assets
(while still allowing for diﬀerences in time trends). The results at the one-period horizon are
somewhat weaker relative to our preferred case; the price of risk is 1.58 (S.E. = 0.39) and
the betas explain 45% of the cross-sectional variation in average returns, as indicated by the
R̄2 . However, as the horizon increases, the explanatory power of the speciﬁcation deteriorates
rapidly. At the two- and ﬁve-year horizons, the prices of risk are no longer statistically signiﬁcant
and the explanatory power of the regression is near zero. These results indicate that allowing
for heterogeneity in the long-run risk in dividends is important for capturing variation in risk
premia not only in the long run, but also the short term.
In the second set of columns, we report results for the second speciﬁcation, where δ is
unrestricted and τ = 0 (no time trend) for all assets. These results represent an improvement
over the case in which the cointegration parameter is restricted to be one, and are mostly
comparable to our preferred speciﬁcation. At the ﬁrst horizon, the estimated price of risk is
positive and statistically signiﬁcant and R̄2 is of 62%. The price of risk and the explanatory
power of the regression remain high as the horizon lengthens. Finally, we have also considered
a speciﬁcation with τ = 0 and δ = 1 for all assets as in Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004).
This speciﬁcation, however, is sharply rejected in the data and, for brevity, we do not report
the detailed evidence.
A comparison of our preferred case (unrestricted time trend and cointegration parameter),
to the second case where the time trend is eliminated highlights that it is not the time trend perse but cross-sectional heterogeneity that is important for capturing diﬀerences in risks across
assets at long and short horizons. This is further reinforced by the evidence that when δ = 1,
the speciﬁcation cannot account for the diﬀerences in risks at various horizons. As mentioned
limits the ability of the cointegration-based betas to account for the cross-sectional variation in risk premia at
all investment horizons.

29

previously, in the second case (τ = 0 and δ unrestricted) the cointegration parameter equals
the ratio of the mean growth rate in the portfolio dividends to the mean growth of aggregate
consumption, and hence may tautologically reﬂect average ex-post returns. Including the time
trend purges the eﬀect of mean growth rates in dividends on the cointegration parameter, and
ensures that long-run risk measures (that is, δ’s) do not mechanically replicate cross-sectional
diﬀerences in ex-post average returns. Despite this, if one chooses to restrict τ = 0 for all
assets and estimate δ’s under this restriction, this speciﬁcation produces cross-sectional results
that are comparable to our preferred case. This, once again, underscores that it is appropriate
heterogeneity in δ that is critical and not merely the inclusion or exclusion of time trends in the
cointegration speciﬁcation. Below, we further highlight the importance of the cross-sectional
dispersion in long-run dividend risks, δ’s, using Monte Carlo simulations.

4.2

Monte Carlo Analysis

The results presented above show that the price of risk and R̄2 are highly signiﬁcant for our
preferred EC-VAR speciﬁcation. In this section, by means of Monte Carlo simulations, we
show that our empirical evidence is robust to alternative speciﬁcations and is not likely to be
an outcome of a lucky draw. We consider four diﬀerent Monte Carlos which highlight diﬀerent
aspects of our empirical evidence.
As noted earlier, the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the cointegration parameter is
important.

Our ﬁrst Monte Carlo experiment (MC-1) is designed to evaluate if this

heterogeneity could arise in a set-up where, in fact, there is none due to either small sample
errors or overﬁtting in small samples.

In this experiment, the population value of the

cointegration parameter is set at 1 for all assets. We ask the question if such an economy
is capable of replicating the cross-sectional evidence that we ﬁnd across various investment
horizons. We simulate all the data, of the sample length, from the EC-VAR speciﬁcation

30

that imposes the restriction δ = 1. Using the simulated data we estimate the cointegration
parameter and the unrestricted EC-VAR, as we have done in the data. We then use the
constructed betas to run cross-sectional regressions and to compute the prices of consumption
risk and the R̄2 ’s by horizon. Table 9 reports the cross-sectional evidence from this simulation
exercise. The table shows that the conditional consumption betas in this case fail to explain the
cross-sectional diﬀerences in mean returns across almost all investment horizons — the crosssectional R̄2 ’s are very small and the cross-sectional slope coeﬃcients are mostly insigniﬁcant.
This Monte Carlo experiment, therefore, suggests that our empirical evidence is unlikely to come
from a world where long-run cross-sectional dividend heterogeneity is absent. In addition, it
underscores the importance of cross-sectional diﬀerences in the cointegration parameter for
explaining diﬀerences in mean returns across all horizons.
In the second Monte Carlo (MC-2), we highlight the importance of the EC-VAR speciﬁcation
relative to the standard VAR speciﬁcation.

As is well known (see Granger and Engle

(1987)), imposing a growth-rate based VAR structure when dividends and consumption are
cointegrated entails loss of information that emanates from the error-correction mechanism.
This can substantially aﬀect the transition dynamics of dividend growth rates and returns and,
consequently, the asset’s consumption betas that interest us. The null model that we simulate
from is the EC-VAR; we then estimate the standard growth-rate based VAR (using the same
speciﬁcation as discussed earlier) to measure asset betas, price of risk, and the cross-sectional
R̄2 ’s. The evidence reported in Table 10 shows that the VAR loses considerable information
and, on average, cannot account for the cross-sectional diﬀerences in mean returns. In all,
this suggests that if the data indeed have an EC-VAR structure then, as documented in our
empirical section, the standard-VAR speciﬁcation (commonly used in empirical work) will fail
to measure asset risks.
The third Monte Carlo (MC-3) sets the standard growth-rate VAR as the null model, and

31

asks what would one ﬁnd if one estimates our preferred EC-VAR model.9 It is important to
note that under the null of the VAR speciﬁcation, consumption and dividend growth rates are
stationary. However the level of dividend is not cointegrated with the consumption level as
they do not share a common stochastic trend. A stationary error-correction variable does not
exist as the deviation between dividends and consumption contains a unit root (see Granger
and Newbold (1974), and Phillips (1986) and Hamilton (1994)). As the number of time-series
observations increases, this unit root will become easier to detect (technically, one of the roots
of A matrix will be outside the unit circle for all the assets). This implies that our EC-VAR
based consumption betas will not exist in large enough samples. Our focus here, though, is on
the modest sample length we observe in the data. We simulate sample lengths of data for 20
portfolios and then attempt to estimate our preferred EC-VAR speciﬁcation.
We ﬁnd, that in every each of samples we simulate, the A matrix for at least one of the
portfolios implies an explosive path for the estimated error-correction variable. On average,
about 3 assets have explosive dynamics and, thus, the EC-VAR conditional betas do not exit
for the whole cross-section. Hence, the cross-sectional regression of mean returns on the asset
betas cannot be conducted. That is, in this set-up, the distribution of various cross-sectional
statistics of interest does not exist even in our modest length samples.10 In addition, we
have examined the Monte Carlo distribution of the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation (ACF(1)) of the
estimated cointegration residual from MC-3. We ﬁnd that the ACF(1) coeﬃcient, even in our
modest samples, is very high relative to the data, suggesting as to why some portfolios in a given
draw have explosive dynamics. More speciﬁcally, for all the portfolios but one, the estimates
of the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation coeﬃcient in the data, reported in Table 2, are well in the left
tail (below the 2.5% percentile) of the Monte Carlo distribution. This evidence, and the fact
9

Notice that a special case of the null is the i.i.d. growth rates speciﬁcation. This nested case brings us back
to the unconditional C-CAPM speciﬁcation that, as we have shown, is strongly rejected in the data.
10
In particular, the fraction of draws without at least one portfolio having explosive dynamics is zero; the
percentage of draws with at least 1 explosive portfolio is 17%, with at least 2 explosive portfolios is 35%, and at
least 3 explosive portfolios is 25%. Additionally, probabilities of observing at least 4, 5 and 6 explosive portfolios
are 16%, 5%, 2%; for 7 portfolios and above, it is essentially zero.

32

that in the data not a single asset has an explosive path at our point estimates, suggest that
the population model of a standard growth-rate based VAR is an unlikely description of the
observed data. Thus, our ﬁndings based on the EC-VAR speciﬁcation are not a lucky draw.
Finally, to ensure that we do not have a lot of degrees of freedom with the considered
collection of assets, we have constructed a Monte Carlo based distribution for the cross-sectional
R̄2 and t-statistics (MC-4). We simulate consumption growth rates of the sample size we observe
and replace the observed consumption data with these simulated draws; the rest of the data
(returns, pd ratios, etc.) are identical to what we observe. The EC-VAR based consumption
betas estimated using this simulated consumption should provide no information about the
cross-sectional distribution of mean returns as the simulated consumption is just a random
factor (this is our counterpart to the exercise considered in Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken
(2006)). We ﬁnd that our point estimate for the R̄2 and the t-stat on the slope coeﬃcient lie
above the 95% probability cut-oﬀ of the corresponding Monte Carlo distributions. This Monte
Carlo evidence, therefore, shows that the empirical ﬁndings, using our asset menu, are both
statistically and economically signiﬁcant and cannot simply be regarded as good luck.
To summarize, the Monte Carlo results corroborate the empirical evidence presented in the
paper and show that these ﬁndings are robust against many alternatives.

5

Conclusion

We show that the long-run relation between consumption and dividends, that is, the
cointegration, is important for understanding the dynamics of asset returns and their risk
compensations across investment horizons. Cointegration measures the long-run covariance
consumption risk in dividends and implies that deviations between dividends and consumption
(i.e., the error-correction) are temporary. An important implication of cointegrating relation is

33

that returns can be characterized by an EC-VAR, in which returns can be predicted by the errorcorrection variable. Hence, the error-correction mechanism alters the transition dynamics of
returns and, hence, the conditional consumption betas by horizon in interesting ways relative to
a commonly used standard VAR setup. We demonstrate that the cointegration vastly improves
the consumption-based model’s ability to explain risk premia on size and book-to-market-sorted
assets at both short and long horizons.
At the one-year horizon, the cross-sectional explanatory power rises from an adjusted-R2
of less than zero for the unconditional C-CAPM and 22% for a growth-rate based conditional
C-CAPM, to 75% for a C-CAPM based on a cointegration speciﬁcation. At long horizons these
diﬀerences in favor of the EC-VAR framework are even more dramatic. At a conceptual level,
we show that the conditional consumption betas at long horizons are largely determined by
the cointegration parameter between dividends and consumption. Alternative dividend growth
models, which do not impose cointegration or impose unit cointegration across assets are not
supported in the data. This points to the importance of cross sectional diﬀerences in long run
consumption risks for explaining the risk return tradeoﬀ.
Our approach allows us to assess the importance of long-run consumption risks relative to
the overall consumption uncertainty. At all but the very long horizon, the cross-sectional slope
coeﬃcient from projecting mean returns on consumption betas reﬂects the risk compensation
for both short- and long-run ﬂuctuations in aggregate consumption. In the limit, on the other
hand, it provides a market measure of risk compensation solely for long-run consumption risks.
We ﬁnd it to be a dominant source of the total risk premium, which, once again, points strongly
towards the importance of long-run consumption risks in asset markets. This, along with the
cross-sectional evidence, suggests that a more primitive production based multi-sector model,
which yields diﬀerences in long run cointegration risks across assets, would be a very valuable
contribution to the literature.

34

Appendix
In this appendix, we provide the details of the EC-VAR structure employed in the paper and
the calculation of the horizon-dependent covariance matrix. Given estimates of the parameters
and residuals in the the cointegrating relation (12) between dividends and consumption, we
model the dynamics of the resulting cointegrating residual,

d,t ,

jointly with the portfolio’s

price-dividend ratio, zt , and consumption growth, ∆ct , by the following EC-VAR structure:
⎛

∆ct

⎞

⎛

0

0

0

ρ

az

ad

az

ρz

azd

(ρ − 1)

az

ad

ρc

⎟ ⎜
⎜
⎜ d,t ⎟ ⎜ ac
⎟ ⎜
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜ zt ⎟ = ⎜ azc
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎜ ∆dt ⎟ ⎜ ac + δρc
⎝
⎠ ⎝
∆zt

(ρz − 1) azd

az

azc

0

⎞⎛

∆ct−1

⎞

⎛

ηt

⎞

⎟⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
0 ⎟
⎟ ⎜ d,t−1 ⎟ ⎜ η,t ⎟
⎟⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎟⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
0 ⎟ ⎜ zt−1 ⎟ + ⎜ ηz,t ⎟ .
⎟⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎟⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜ ∆dt−1 ⎟ ⎜ η,t + δηt ⎟
0 ⎟
⎠⎝
⎠ ⎝
⎠
∆zt−1

0

(A-1)

ηz,t

The ﬁrst three variables form the basis of the EC-VAR process. The last two variables provide
no additional information; they are included into the EC-VAR to simplify the computation of
long-run covariances. The dynamics of ∆dt and ∆zt are derived from the dynamics of the ﬁrst
three variables by exploiting ∆dt = ∆
Denoting Xt = ( ∆ct

d,t

zt

d,t

∆dt

+ δ∆ct , and ∆zt = zt − zt−1 .
∆zt ), we can rewrite the EC-VAR compactly as

Xt = AXt−1 + Gut ,

(A-2)

where the matrix A is deﬁned above, G is a 5 × 3 matrix, and u is a three by one matrix of
shocks, ut = ( ηt

η,t

ηz,t ), that is

Xt − AXt−1

⎛

1 0 0

⎞

⎟
⎜
⎜0 1 0⎟⎛ η ⎞
t
⎟
⎜
⎟⎜
⎜
⎟
⎟⎜
⎜
= Gut ≡ ⎜ 0 0 1 ⎟ ⎝ η,t ⎟
⎠.
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎜ δ 1 0 ⎟ ηz,t
⎠
⎝
0 0 1

35

(A-3)

Given this structure and a horizon s ≥ 1, the innovation in the sum of s consecutive X’s can
be extracted as follows,

s


Xt+j − Et [

j=1

s


Xt+j ] ≡ ζt,t+s ,

(A-4)

j=1

where ζt,t+s is
ζt,t+s =

s


Bj et+1+s−j ,

(A-5)

j=1

with et ≡ Gut , Bj = Bj−1 + Aj−1 and B0 = 0, for j = 1, ..., s.
Exploiting the fact that the errors are identically distributed and uncorrelated, the
covariance matrix of ζt,t+s for any given horizon s is
Σ∗s = Bs Σe Bs + Σ∗s−1 ,

(A-6)

where Σe = GΣu G , and Σ∗0 = B0 Σe B0 = 0. As s increases, Σ∗s grows without bound; hence we
consider Σs ≡

Σ∗s
,
s

that is the covariance matrix of ζt,t+s scaled by the horizon. Given Σe and

Bs , the evolution of Σs is given by
1
1
Σs = Bs Σe Bs + (1 − )Σs−1 .
s
s

(A-7)

Equation (A-7) provides a direct recursive algorithm for the construction of the covariance
matrix of interest. For large s, the long-run matrix is determined by the limit of Bs , which is
[I − A]−1 , i.e.,


Σlr = [I − A]−1 Σe [I − A]−1 .

36

(A-8)

References
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian Lundblad, 2001, Consumption, dividends, and
the cross-section of equity returns, Working paper, Duke University.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, Consumption, dividends, and
the cross-section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Bansal, Ravi, A. Ronald Gallant, and George Tauchen, 2005, Rational pessimism, rational
exuberance, and asset pricing models, Working paper, Duke University.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.
Beveridge, S., and C. R. Nelson, 1981, A new approach to decomposition of economic time
series into permanent and transitory components with particular attention to measurement
of the business cycle, Journal of Monetary Economics 7, 151–174.
Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends,
Journal of Finance 43, 661–676.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
axplanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–255.
Campbell, John Y, and Pierre Perron, 1991, Pitfalls and opportunities: What macroeconomists
should know about unit roots, NBER Macroeconomics Annual pp. 141–201.
Cochrane, John, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2006, Two trees, Working paper,
University of Chicago, and NBER.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
37

Granger,

Clive W.,

and Robert Engle,

1987,

Co-integration and error-correction:

representation, estimation, and testing, Econometrica 55, 251–276.
Granger, Clive W.J., and Paul Newbold, 1974, Spurious regressions in econometrics, Journal
of Econometrics 2, 111–120.
Hamilton, James, 1994, Time Series Analysis. (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Hansen, Lars, John Heaton, and Nan Li, 2005, Consumption strikes back?, Working paper,
University of Chicago.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption, risk aversion, and
the temporal behavior of asset returns, Journal of Political Economy 91, 249–265.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of
expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3–54.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1998, An asymptotic theory for testing beta-pricing
models using cross-sectional regression, Journal of Finance 53, 1285–1309.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A cross-sectional
test when risk premia are time-varying, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238–1287.
Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel, and Jay Shanken, 2006, A skeptical appraisal of asset-pricing
tests, NBER Working Paper 12360.
Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429–1446.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2004, Understanding predictability, Journal of
Political Economy 112(1), 1–47.
Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, heteroscedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.
38

Park, Joon Y., 1992, Canonical cointegrating regressions, Econometrica 60, 119–143.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Christian Julliard, 2005, Consumption risk and the cross-section of
expected returns, Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 185–222.
Phillips, Peter C.B., 1986, Understanding spurious regressions in econometrics, Journal of
Econometrics 33, 311–340.

39

Table 1

Summary Statistics
Cash Flow Growth
Portfolio

Returns

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10

0.0657
0.0829
0.0269
0.0238
0.0215
0.0168
0.0195
0.0120
0.0092
0.0034

0.3969
0.4181
0.3518
0.2637
0.2463
0.2019
0.1684
0.1549
0.1303
0.1053

0.1345
0.1235
0.1278
0.1256
0.1199
0.1106
0.1076
0.0994
0.0904
0.0758

0.3388
0.2911
0.3163
0.2957
0.2797
0.2642
0.2517
0.2308
0.2181
0.1906

B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

-0.0026
0.0179
0.0041
0.0009
0.0160
0.0146
0.0165
0.0548
0.1009
0.0467

0.1634
0.1598
0.1562
0.2194
0.1552
0.2461
0.2667
0.2194
0.3486
0.6799

0.0701
0.0834
0.0727
0.0771
0.0963
0.0989
0.1069
0.1265
0.1360
0.1337

0.2157
0.1902
0.1904
0.2224
0.2225
0.2305
0.2484
0.2187
0.2287
0.3315

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the returns and cash ﬂow growth rates on the 20 characteristic-sorted
portfolios used in estimation. The portfolios examined are portfolios formed on market capitalization (S1S10), and book-to-market ratio (B1-B10). Capitalization portfolios are formed by sorting NYSE, AMEX, and
NASDAQ ﬁrms by their market capitalization as of June of each year (using NYSE breakpoints), and holding
the capitalization decile constant for one year. Book-to-market portfolios are formed by sorting NYSE, AMEX,
and NASDAQ ﬁrms based on their market capitalization as of June of each year divided by their book value
as of the most recent ﬁscal year end available. Returns are value-weighted. The cash ﬂow growth rates are
constructed by taking the ﬁrst diﬀerence of the logarithm of dividend series. The data are converted to real
using the PCE deﬂator. The data are sampled at the annual frequency, and cover the period 1929 through 2002,
for a total of 74 observations.

40

Table 2

Cointegration Parameters and ACF
Portfolio

∗

δ̂

ACF(1)

ACF(5)

ACF(10)

Unit Root

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10

9.62
9.71
6.69
6.21
4.41
4.38
2.42
2.38
2.38
0.82

(6.07)
(5.06)
(2.86)
(2.37)
(1.70)
(1.88)
(1.12)
(0.77)
(0.96)
(0.89)

0.90
0.64
0.75
0.81
0.70
0.84
0.72
0.65
0.81
0.79

0.34
0.41
0.41
0.30
0.17
0.28
0.24
-0.03
0.22
0.24

-0.02
-0.01
0.17
0.11
0.05
0.20
0.14
-0.16
0.03
-0.04

-2.09
-5.86∗
-3.32
-2.75
-3.65∗
-2.41
-3.41
-3.47
-3.45
-3.71∗

B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

-0.27
-2.59
-0.11
0.82
2.79
4.83
6.36
9.70
12.54
10.25

(1.28)
(1.41)
(0.79)
(1.91)
(1.59)
(1.75)
(2.20)
(3.07)
(5.95)
(4.55)

0.73
0.72
0.61
0.64
0.91
0.68
0.76
0.79
0.67
0.77

0.16
-0.05
0.07
0.17
0.61
-0.01
0.20
0.21
0.17
0.42

-0.13
0.17
-0.02
0.13
0.17
0.05
0.07
0.16
0.03
0.09

-3.98∗
-3.72∗
-3.87∗
-3.77∗
-1.83
-5.07∗
-3.12
-3.80∗
-4.02∗
-1.88

indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level (MacKinnon critical value = -3.59)

Table 2 presents the estimates of cointegration (CI) parameters for the 20 portfolios sorted by market
capitalization (S1-S10) and book-to-market ratio (B1-B10). CI parameter estimates are obtained by regressing
the deterministically de-trended log level of portfolio’s dividends on the de-trended log level of aggregate
consumption. Aggregate consumption is deﬁned as seasonally adjusted real consumption of nondurables plus
services. Consumption data are taken from the NIPA tables available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
The three columns labeled “ACF” report sample autocorrelation function of the cointegrating residuals for lags
1, 5 and 10. The ﬁnal column presents a unit root test for null that the error correction residuals contain a unit
root. Test statistics that exceed the 10% critical threshold are indicated with an asterisk.

41

Table 3

Predictability Evidence: Dividend Growth

Horizon
—1—
Portfolio

—5—

— 10 —

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10

EC-VAR
0.00
0.11
0.44
0.11
0.11
0.15
0.12
0.12
0.17
0.19

VAR
0.04
0.00
0.52
0.10
0.07
0.16
0.08
0.06
0.15
0.03

EC-VAR
0.14
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.13
0.12
0.21
0.22
0.24
0.43

VAR
0.20
0.01
0.25
0.19
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.22
0.29
0.15

EC-VAR
0.21
0.14
0.05
0.07
0.10
0.10
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.35

VAR
0.22
0.01
0.29
0.21
0.24
0.22
0.25
0.28
0.30
0.19

B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

0.27
0.25
0.24
0.39
0.14
0.23
0.34
0.17
0.13
0.07

0.06
0.08
0.12
0.25
0.19
0.25
0.37
0.14
0.24
0.10

0.55
0.52
0.54
0.48
0.24
0.21
0.15
0.16
0.24
0.17

0.21
0.31
0.40
0.51
0.31
0.37
0.34
0.26
0.40
0.22

0.46
0.37
0.48
0.42
0.21
0.11
0.07
0.09
0.15
0.19

0.29
0.37
0.48
0.39
0.24
0.24
0.22
0.22
0.26
0.27

Table 3 presents the adjusted-R2 for dividend projections implied by the EC-VAR speciﬁcation and the growthrates VAR model that does not assume the long-run relation between assets’ cash ﬂows and consumption. The
entries are reported for the 20 portfolios sorted by market capitalization (S1-S10) and book-to-market ratio
(B1-B10). Data are sampled at the annual frequency, expressed in real terms, and cover the period 1929-2002.

42

Table 4

Predictability Evidence: Returns

Horizon
—1—
Portfolio

—5—

— 10 —

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10

EC-VAR
0.17
0.13
0.10
0.15
0.16
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.04
0.03

VAR
0.06
0.11
0.03
0.10
0.15
0.07
0.08
0.05
0.01
0.02

EC-VAR
0.40
0.53
0.40
0.44
0.36
0.37
0.29
0.32
0.28
0.23

VAR
0.04
0.35
0.08
0.18
0.21
0.17
0.17
0.14
0.12
0.15

EC-VAR
0.36
0.59
0.53
0.50
0.49
0.47
0.46
0.53
0.46
0.43

VAR
0.01
0.44
0.13
0.20
0.26
0.18
0.23
0.21
0.16
0.24

B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

0.04
0.07
0.23
0.06
0.04
0.08
0.15
0.17
0.20
0.20

0.00
0.00
0.14
-0.01
0.02
0.06
0.06
0.11
0.06
0.09

0.19
0.23
0.27
0.26
0.24
0.26
0.44
0.49
0.42
0.48

0.03
0.04
0.06
-0.02
0.07
0.03
0.11
0.21
0.03
0.19

0.32
0.36
0.43
0.44
0.37
0.37
0.42
0.41
0.35
0.51

0.04
0.06
0.07
-0.03
0.06
0.00
0.05
0.18
-0.01
0.17

Table 4 presents the adjusted-R2 for return projections implied by the EC-VAR speciﬁcation and the growthrates VAR model that does not assume the long-run relation between assets’ cash ﬂows and consumption. The
entries are reported for the 20 portfolios sorted by market capitalization (S1-S10) and book-to-market ratio
(B1-B10). Data are sampled at the annual frequency, expressed in real terms, and cover the period 1929-2002.

43

Table 5

Conditional Mean Returns
Horizon
—1—
Portfolio

—5—

— 10 —

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10

EC-VAR
11.74
11.09
11.71
11.40
10.78
10.14
9.86
9.19
8.47
7.19

VAR
11.72
10.98
11.57
11.32
10.75
10.12
9.85
9.20
8.47
7.21

EC-VAR
10.65
10.02
10.39
10.22
9.97
9.19
9.13
8.58
7.83
6.74

VAR
11.69
10.14
10.98
10.50
10.14
9.38
9.24
8.76
7.97
6.77

EC-VAR
10.74
9.97
10.02
10.07
9.58
8.93
8.68
8.14
7.44
6.40

VAR
11.67
9.78
10.58
10.16
9.72
9.10
8.84
8.44
7.66
6.51

B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

6.61
7.92
6.60
7.22
9.09
9.18
9.96
11.76
12.89
11.83

6.64
7.94
6.70
7.30
9.10
9.20
9.84
11.53
12.45
11.63

6.32
7.85
6.68
6.90
8.38
8.73
9.05
11.28
12.80
10.76

6.37
7.72
6.63
7.09
8.57
9.01
9.22
10.97
12.36
10.95

5.99
7.58
6.36
6.40
8.02
8.48
9.20
11.79
13.57
11.05

6.19
7.55
6.45
7.02
8.29
8.82
9.06
10.81
12.40
10.98

Table 5 presents mean returns for investment horizons of 1, 5 and 10 years for each of the 20 portfolios sorted
by market capitalization (S1-S10) and book-to-market ratio (B1-B10). Mean returns for a given horizon s are
computed as ln(ri ) + 0.5

σ̂r2 ,s
i
s .

Data are sampled at the annual frequency and cover the period 1929-2002.

44

Table 6

Consumption Betas by Horizon
Horizon
—1—
Portfolio

—5—

— 10 —

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10

Uncond.
0.71 (1.47)
0.80 (1.38)
0.52 (1.36)
0.77 (1.13)
0.36 (1.21)
0.64 (1.10)
0.33 (1.10)
-0.31 (1.14)
0.13 (1.09)
0.69 (0.83)

EC-VAR
4.12 (2.43)
2.09 (1.12)
4.14 (1.29)
3.52 (1.21)
2.76 (0.99)
3.07 (0.81)
2.37 (0.86)
1.62 (0.68)
1.58 (0.77)
1.54 (0.56)

VAR
1.77 (2.10)
0.89 (1.09)
2.95 (1.98)
2.66 (1.50)
2.36 (1.22)
2.58 (1.07)
2.20 (0.82)
1.43 (0.76)
1.38 (0.80)
1.64 (0.46)

EC-VAR
4.51 (4.66)
1.82 (2.65)
2.14 (2.38)
2.09 (1.97)
0.99 (1.72)
1.42 (1.51)
0.46 (1.37)
-0.12 (1.35)
0.60 (1.41)
0.31 (1.09)

VAR
-1.46 (3.94)
-1.24 (2.42)
0.04 (2.44)
0.79 (1.94)
0.39 (1.52)
0.71 (1.87)
0.14 (1.28)
-0.44 (1.62)
0.27 (1.62)
0.51 (1.09)

EC-VAR
6.54 (4.26)
4.21 (3.02)
3.38 (2.29)
3.56 (2.40)
2.05 (2.12)
2.50 (1.83)
1.00 (1.67)
0.35 (1.68)
1.02 (1.59)
0.34 (1.07)

VAR
-1.55 (4.01)
0.13 (2.37)
0.35 (2.86)
1.59 (1.76)
1.14 (1.37)
1.41 (1.56)
0.61 (1.18)
-0.13 (1.64)
0.62 (1.49)
0.67 (1.04)

B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

0.82
-0.18
-0.33
0.29
0.27
2.24
0.21
0.84
-0.39
0.14

1.81
0.16
-0.09
1.48
1.94
3.18
2.74
4.34
5.47
3.89

2.16
0.65
0.32
1.94
1.67
2.64
1.46
2.18
2.16
2.87

-0.58
-1.69
-1.79
-0.67
1.18
2.75
2.67
4.39
6.11
2.14

0.31
-0.76
-1.34
-0.07
0.81
1.91
1.01
0.37
-1.55
0.54

-0.83
-2.05
-1.70
-0.59
1.60
3.27
4.22
6.36
8.32
4.33

0.14
-0.86
-1.33
-0.28
1.10
2.17
1.70
0.98
-2.03
1.49

(0.97)
(0.84)
(0.84)
(1.10)
(1.11)
(1.01)
(1.24)
(1.23)
(1.54)
(1.63)

(0.54)
(0.56)
(0.37)
(1.29)
(0.86)
(1.49)
(0.98)
(1.83)
(2.31)
(1.06)

(0.33)
(0.39)
(0.37)
(1.50)
(0.96)
(1.97)
(1.68)
(2.14)
(2.91)
(1.03)

(1.40)
(0.91)
(0.77)
(1.99)
(1.58)
(2.42)
(1.53)
(2.72)
(3.75)
(2.60)

(1.48)
(0.98)
(0.85)
(2.10)
(1.79)
(1.96)
(1.59)
(2.22)
(2.72)
(3.15)

(1.32)
(0.86)
(0.84)
(2.06)
(1.69)
(2.37)
(1.63)
(2.69)
(3.43)
(3.38)

Table 6 presents consumption betas for investment horizons of 1, 5 and 10 years for each of the 20 portfolios
sorted by market capitalization (S1-S10) and book-to-market ratio (B1-B10). In columns labeled “EC-VAR,”
betas are measured using the error-correction speciﬁcation for consumption and asset returns. Columns labeled
“VAR” present betas measured using a growth rate VAR omitting the error-correction information. These
consumption betas are estimated as in equation (17) using the covariance matrices implied by the relevant time
series model. The column labeled “Uncond.” represents the standard consumption beta. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

45

(1.63)
(1.06)
(0.98)
(2.22)
(1.57)
(1.77)
(1.69)
(2.34)
(2.79)
(3.54)

Table 7

Cross-Sectional Regressions by Horizon

Horizon
—1—
λ1,s
SE
R̄2

—5—

— 10 —

Uncond.
0.51

EC-VAR
1.19

VAR
1.28

EC-VAR
0.73

VAR
-0.31

EC-VAR
0.65

VAR
-0.07

(2.24)

(0.41)

(1.57)

(0.32)

(0.40)

(0.24)

(0.44)

-0.04

0.75

0.22

0.73

-0.03

0.84

-0.05

Table 7 presents results for cross-sectional regressions for a set of 10 portfolios sorted by market capitalization
and 10 portfolios sorted by book-to-market ratio. The ﬁrst row labeled λ1,s reports the estimated prices of
risk. Consumption risk for diﬀerent investment horizons is measured by the corresponding consumption beta.
In columns labeled “EC-VAR,” betas are measured using the error-correction speciﬁcation for consumption and
asset returns. Columns labeled “VAR” presents betas measured using a growth rate VAR omitting the error
correction information. Consumption betas are estimated as in equation (17) using the covariance matrices
implied by the relevant time series model. The column labeled “Uncond.” represents the standard consumption
beta. All risk prices are expressed in annual percentage terms. Robust standard errors, reported in parentheses,
are computed by estimating time-series and cross-sectional parameters in one step via GMM. The number of
lags used in Newey-West covariance estimator is 8.

46

Table 8

Cross-Sectional Regressions by Horizon with Cointegration Restrictions

Horizon
—1—

λ1,s
SE
R̄2

—5—

— 10 —

δ=1

τ =0

δ=1

τ =0

δ=1

τ =0

1.58

1.55

0.79

1.20

1.12

1.12

(0.39)

(0.28)

(0.54)

(0.31)

(0.41)

(0.19)

0.45

0.62

0.06

0.43

0.26

0.64

Table 8 presents results for cross-sectional regressions for a set of 10 portfolios sorted by market capitalization
and 10 portfolios sorted by book-to-market ratio. The ﬁrst row labeled λ1,s reports the estimated prices of risk.
Consumption risk for diﬀerent investment horizons is measured by the corresponding consumption beta. Betas
are measured under two restrictions on the cointegrating relation between dividends and consumption:
dt = τ0 + τ t + δ ct + d,t .
In the left columns, we restrict the cointegration parameter, δ = 1, for all assets while still allowing for diﬀerent
time trends. In the right columns, we suppress the time trend in the cointegration speciﬁcation, τ = 0, but do
not restrict the cointegration parameter, δ. The beta for a given horizon is calculated from the error-correction
VAR model as in equation (17). All risk prices are expressed in annual percentage terms. Robust standard
errors, reported in parentheses, are computed by estimating time-series and cross-sectional parameters in one
step via GMM. The number of lags used in Newey-West covariance estimator is 8.

47

Table 9

Monte Carlo 1: Alternative δ = 1

2.5%

5%

50%

95%

97.5%

0.10

0.16

0.43

0.68

0.74

0.37

0.67

1.83

2.68

3.74

-0.04

-0.01

0.24

0.54

0.58

1yr Horizon
λ1,1
t-stat
R̄2
10yr Horizon
λ1,1
t-stat
R̄2

-0.07

0.00

0.25

0.54

0.59

-0.61

-0.21

1.05

2.54

3.59

-0.05

-0.05

0.07

0.38

0.45

0.01

0.05

0.22

0.47

0.53

0.05

0.33

1.52

2.47

3.13

-0.05

-0.05

0.12

0.37

0.41

Cross-Section with δ
λ1,1
t-stat
R̄2

Table 9 reports the ﬁrst Monte Carlo experiment (MC-1). It presents distributions of cross-sectional statistics
based on asset betas computed using an unrestricted EC-VAR; the data are simulated from a speciﬁcation
where the cointegration parameter, δ, is restricted to be one for all assets. We simulate samples of 74 annual
time-series observations of consumption growth, dividend growth and price-dividend from the EC-VAR, using
estimates of A and G, and the covariance matrix Σ. Using these simulated data, we re-estimate the EC-VAR
without imposing the restriction. See section Section 5.2 for additional details.

48

Table 10

Monte Carlo 2

2.5%

5%

50%

95%

97.5%

-0.24

-0.13

0.39

0.96

1.11

-0.90

-0.63

1.05

2.87

3.33

-0.10

-0.10

0.06

0.35

0.41

-0.05

0.03

0.51

1.03

1.15

-0.43

-0.09

1.42

3.43

3.95

-0.09

-0.07

0.14

0.43

0.49

1yr Horizon
λ1,1
t-stat
R̄2
10yr Horizon
λ1,10
t-stat
R̄2

Table 10 reports distributions of cross-sectional statistics from the second Monte Carlo experiment (MC-2).
We simulate from our preferred, unrestricted EC-VAR but asset betas are computed from a standard VAR
speciﬁcation. The cross-sectional prices of risks and other statistics are computed using the betas constructed
from the growth-rate based VAR. See section Section 5.2 for additional details.

49

Portfolio S1,

Horizon=1yr

Portfolio S1,

Horizon=10yr

0.2

0.2

0

0.1

−0.2

0

EC−VAR
VAR
1940

1960

Portfolio S10,

1980

EC−VAR
VAR

2000

1940

Horizon=1yr

1960

Portfolio S10,

1980

2000

Horizon=10yr

0.15
0.2
0.1

0.1
0.05

0

0

EC−VAR
VAR

−0.1
1940

1960

Portfolio B1,

1980

EC−VAR
VAR

−0.05

2000

1940

Horizon=1yr

1960

Portfolio B1,

1980

2000

Horizon=10yr

0.3
0.15

0.2
0.1

0.1

0.05

0

0

EC−VAR
VAR

−0.1
1940

1960

Portfolio B10,

1980

EC−VAR
VAR

−0.05

2000

1940

Horizon=1yr

1960

Portfolio B10,

1980

2000

Horizon=10yr

0.4
0.2
0.2
0.1
0
0
−0.2
−0.1

EC−VAR
VAR

−0.4
1940

1960

1980

EC−VAR
VAR

2000

1940

1960

1980

2000

Figure 1. Expected Returns
Figure 1 plots one- and ten-year returns predicted by the EC-VAR model and the alternative, growth-rates VAR
speciﬁcation. The latter ignores the error-correction information in predicting returns. Expected returns are
plotted for small (S1) and large (S10) market capitalization ﬁrms, and low (B1) and high (B10) book-to-market
portfolios.

50

Fitted Mean Returns

14

12

10

8

6

Size
Book−to−Market
6

8

10
Mean Returns

12

14

(a) Short-Run Horizon (s=1)

Fitted Mean Returns

16

12

8

4

Size
Book−to−Market
4

8

12
Mean Returns

16

(b) Long-Run Horizon

Figure 2. Cross-Sectional Fit
Figure 2 displays the ﬁt from the cross-sectional regressions for the investment horizon of one year, as well as
in the long-run limit. The ﬁgures plot ﬁtted expected returns, implied by the model, against mean returns.

51

1.6
Total Risk Compensation
Short−Run Risk Compensation
1.2

0.8

0.4

0
2

4

6

8
10
Horizon (yr)

12

14

Figure 3. Consumption Risks Compensation by Horizon
Figure 3 plots the market price of risk along with the proﬁle of implied compensations for transitory (or shortrun) consumption risk for investment horizons up to 15 years. The diﬀerence between the total and short-run
compensations represents the premium for long-run consumption risks. The prices of risks are expressed in
annual percentage terms.

52

