NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HIT OR MISS? THE EFFECT OF ASSASSINATIONS ON INSTITUTIONS AND
WAR
Benjamin F. Jones
Benjamin A. Olken
Working Paper 13102
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13102

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

We thank Ernesto Dal Bó, Amy Finkelstein, Hein Goemans, Michael Gordin, Katerina Linos, and
Tara Zahra for helpful comments. Meghna Alladi, Nathaniel Kiechel, Ariana Kroshinky, Lauren Raouf,
Pat Regan, and Atanas Stoyanov provided invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Benjamin F. Jones and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutions and War
Benjamin F. Jones and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 13102
May 2007
JEL No. D74,F52,P16
ABSTRACT
Assassinations are a persistent feature of the political landscape. Using a new data set of assassination
attempts on all world leaders from 1875 to 2004, we exploit inherent randomness in the success or
failure of assassination attempts to identify assassination's effects. We find that, on average, successful
assassinations of autocrats produce sustained moves toward democracy. We also find that assassinations
affect the intensity of small-scale conflicts. The results document a contemporary source of institutional
change, inform theories of conflict, and show that small sources of randomness can have a pronounced
effect on history.
Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Benjamin A. Olken
Harvard Society of Fellows
78 Mt. Auburn St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bolken@nber.org

“Assassination has never changed the history of the world.”
- Benjamin Disraeli, 1865, on the death of Abraham Lincoln

1.

Introduction
Assassinations of prominent political leaders have occurred throughout history. From

Julius Caesar to Abraham Lincoln, from John F. Kennedy to Yitzhak Rabin, many leaders have
met violent ends – and many others have escaped assassination narrowly. Had Hitler lingered 13
minutes longer in a Munich beer hall in 1939, he would likely have been killed by a waiting
bomb. Whether or not objectionable, or illegal,1 assassination and assassination attempts are a
persistent feature of the political landscape. In fact, as we will show below, a national leader has
been assassinated in nearly two of every three years since 1950.
To understand assassination – as an influence in history, as a policy, even as a normative
matter – it is important to understand whether assassinations actually change the course of
events. On this topic there is considerable debate, primarily among historians who have focused
on individual assassinations or small collections of case studies.2 In this paper, we assess the
impact of assassination using a data-driven approach.3 Specifically, we focus on the assassination
of national leaders and examine its effects on two important outcomes: institutional change and

1

Moral and legal debates over assassination stretch through history. Dante condemned Brutus for the murder of
Cesar, but Cicero and others have been more kind (Miola 1985). An ethical basis for “tyrannicide” was
promulgated by John of Salisbury in the 12th century and further articulated by Milton in the late Renaissance (e.g.
Nederman 1988). In the United States, government-sponsored assassination was not formally outlawed until 1976,
and here only by Executive Orders that are themselves the subject of renewed debate.
2
For example, Hudson (2000) discusses a set of assassinations and argues that assassination has little effect, echoing
Disraeli’s view. However, the murder of Archduke Ferdinand is often described as the triggering event of World
War I. More recently, the murder of President Habyarimana may have unleashed the Rwandan genocide, and
historians have argued that the Vietnam War was prolonged by the assassination of President Kennedy (Halberstam,
1972, Jones, 2003).
3
To the best of our knowledge, the only related paper along these lines is Zussman and Zussman (2006), who find
evidence that assassinations of senior members of Palestinian organizations affect Israeli stock returns.

1

war. The results show substantial effects of assassinations, informing our understanding of
assassination and more broadly informing theories of institutional change and conflict.
Analyzing the effects of assassination is difficult. While some assassinations may be
associated with historical turning points, the direction of causation is difficult to establish,
especially since assassination attempts often occur (as we will show) in times of crisis, such as
during war. To overcome this problem, we employ a large set of assassination attempts and use
the “failures” as controls for the “successes”. To focus on the cases where the success or failure
of the attempt was most likely determined by chance, we consider only those attempts in which
the weapon was actually used – the gun fired, the bomb exploded, etc. The identification
assumption is that, although attempts on leaders’ lives may be driven by historical
circumstances, conditional on trying to kill a leader the success or failure of the attempt can be
treated as plausibly exogenous. For example, Hitler’s early departure from the beer hall in 1939,
which may have saved his life, came only because bad weather prevented him from flying back
to Berlin, forcing him to leave early for a train.
To implement this approach, we collected data on all publicly-reported assassination
attempts for all national leaders since 1875. This produced 298 assassination attempts, of which
59 resulted in the leader’s death. We show that, conditional on an attempt taking place, whether
the attack succeeds or fails in killing the leader appears uncorrelated with observable economic
and political features of the national environment, suggesting that our basic identification
strategy may be plausible.
We find that assassinations of autocrats produce substantial changes in the country’s
institutions, while assassinations of democrats do not. In particular, transitions to democracy, as
measured using the Polity IV dataset (Marshall and Jaggers 2004), are 13 percentage points more

2

likely following the assassination of an autocrat than following a failed attempt on an autocrat.
Similarly, using data on leadership transitions from the Archigos dataset (Goemans et al., 2006),
we find that the probability that subsequent leadership transitions occur through institutional
means is 19 percentage points higher following the assassination of an autocrat than following
the failed assassination of an autocrat. The effects on institutions extend over significant periods,
with evidence that the impacts are sustained at least 10 years later.
Looking at military conflict, the results show that assassinations affect conflict, but only
in limited contexts. We examine two data sources: the Gleditsch-Correlates of War dataset
(Sarkees, 2000; Gleditsch 2004) and the PRIO/Uppsala Armed Conflict Database (Gleditsch et
al. 2002). We find that successful assassination lead to an intensification of small-scale conflicts
relative to failed assassination attempts. For high-intensity conflicts, we find somewhat weaker
evidence that successful assassinations may have the opposite effect, hastening the end of largescale conflicts already in progress. These results suggest heterogeneous effects of assassinations
that depend on conflict status.
All of these results tell us about the difference in outcomes following success and
following failure. Our approach does not distinguish whether the effects are driven by successful
assassination (e.g., killing an autocrat leads to more democracy), failed assassination (e.g., trying
but failing to kill an autocrat leads to increased suppression), or both. To tease these different
forces apart, we provide further analysis at the end of the paper that uses propensity-score
matching methods to estimate the separate effects of success and failure. While the resulting
estimates are informative, they should be viewed as substantially more speculative than our main
results, because the decomposition relies on comparisons between years with assassination
attempts and years without such attempts, which are not randomly assigned.

3

Using this methodology, we find that most of the effects discussed above are driven by
successful assassinations, rather than failures. However, 75% of all assassination attempts fail,
and there is some evidence that failed attempts have modest effects in the opposite direction of
successful assassinations. In particular, failed attempts slightly reduce the likelihood of
democratic change and may lead to reductions in existing, small-scale conflict. Since failures are
much more likely than successes, the modest effects of failure and the (less likely but larger)
effects of success tend to offset each other. Therefore, from an ex-ante perspective, assassination
attempts produce instability in political institutions and the path of conflict – with the outcome
dependent on success or failure – but at most modest directional shifts in democracy or war on
average.
The results in this paper not only help understand assassination per se, but also help
inform our understanding of institutional change and war more generally. Much of the empirical
literature on institutions has explored the deep historical antecedents for modern institutional
forms (Moore, 1966; North 1990; Engerman and Sokoloff, 2000; Acemoglu et al, 2001; Glaeser
and Shleifer 2002). Meanwhile, “modernization theory”, which attempts to explain
democratization through increased education or income of the nation at large (e.g. Lipset 1959,
Huntington 1991), has not found clear empirical support (Acemoglu et al. 2005, Glaeser et al.
2006). Thus contemporary sources of democracy remain substantially in the error term of
econometric studies. In this paper, we identify a source of contemporary change in institutions
that complements the existing literature and steps beyond the confines of distant history.
The results here also emphasize the interplay between institutions and the role of
individual leaders. In particular, the primary results for institutional change are found only in
autocracies. This finding is natural if autocrats are relatively unconstrained, with significant

4

authority to alter formal institutions and policies, as opposed to leaders in democracies whose
actions may be limited through electoral recall and institutions such as independent legislatures
and judiciaries (Schumpeter 1950; Downs 1957; Tsebelis 2002; Jones and Olken 2005). Our
results point to the individual autocrat as a cornerstone of institutions, which suggests
mechanisms – through leader selection and leader change – that can lead to institutional change.
This paper also speaks to the literature on war. Many formal models and empirical
investigations of war focus on the role of different regime types in explaining different
propensities for war (e.g., Bueno de Mesquita et al. 1999, Mansfield and Snyder 2005). In some
of these models, war arises due to a divergence between the leader’s incentives and those of the
population at large, the likelihood of which depends on the regime type (e.g., Goemans 2000,
Jackson and Morelli 2005, Baliga et al. 2007). From this point of view, assassinations, by
changing leaders, may naturally produce changes in conflict status. Our research thus provides
support for this theoretical approach, which emphasizes the role of leaders in determining the
escalation and cessation of conflict.
Finally, this paper speaks to the role of chance in history. We provide a statistically
driven test of the capacity for small elements of luck to change national political systems and
other outcomes, an idea seen in some broad historical assessments (Merriman 1985, Boorstin
1995, Ferguson 1999) that stand in contrast to Whiggish or Marxist historical interpretation. In
this sense, this paper shares some similarities with literatures that emphasize historical chance in
the initial shaping of institutions, whether it is the disease environment (Acemoglu et al. 2001),
wind patterns (Feyrer and Sacerdote 2006), or other features.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data and
descriptive statistics. Section 3 describes the “hit or miss” methodology, presents the central

5

results regarding institutional change and military conflict, and considers a number of robustness
checks. Section 4 presents the propensity score results to separate out the effect of success from
the effect of failure. Section 5 concludes.

2.

Data and Descriptive Statistics

2.1. Data
The focus of this paper is on assassinations and assassination attempts directed at the
national leader, where the “leader” is defined as the most powerful political figure in each
country at each point in time – the head of state (usually under the title of President), the head of
government (usually under the title of Prime Minister), or perhaps some third figure. To establish
a baseline list of leaders, we use the Archigos dataset, v2.5 (Goemans et al., 2006), which
identifies the primary leader for each country at each point in time from 1875 to 2004. Archigos
provides a data set of 2,440 leaders from 187 different countries.
To collect the assassinations data, we consulted the archives of three major newspapers:
The New York Times, The Washington Post, and The Wall Street Journal. We used a large set of
keyword searches (detailed in the Appendix) and placed several limitations on the returned
results. First, we excluded coup d’etats – cases in which the murder or attempted murder of the
leader was conducted by an individual or group in an attempt to seize power for themselves.
Second, we excluded “uncovered plots” to assassinate leaders, limiting ourselves to cases in
which the would-be assassins actually undertook the attempt. For the main specifications in the
paper, we further restrict our attention to “serious attempts,” which we define as those cases in
which the weapon (the gun, bomb, etc.) was actually discharged, as opposed to cases where the
attempt was thwarted prior to the weapon being used. As shown below, our results are broadly
robust to different restrictions on the nature of failed attempts.
6

For each assassination or attempted assassination found, we recorded the date and
location of the attack, the weapons used, and the result for the leader, as well as information
when available on other casualties and whether the attack was carried about by a group or solo
actor. The data includes 298 assassination attempts, of which 251 are “serious attempts” and 59
result in the leader’s death. A list of the successful assassinations is presented in Table 1.
To ensure that the data collection methodology captured all relevant assassinations, once
the newspaper searches were complete we cross-referenced the assassinations found by the
searches with all assassinations listed in da Graca (2000), Jones and Olken (2005), and the
Archigos data. This exercise showed that our keyword searches produced all relevant
assassinations.4,5
2.2. Summary Statistics
Table 2 provides basic summary statistics. With regard to weapons, guns have been the
most common instrument, used in 55% of attempts, and explosive devices the second most
common, used in 31% of attempts. Guns have kill rates of about 30%, while explosive devices
are much less likely to kill the leader, with success in only 7% of cases where the device was
actually engaged. At the same time, explosive devices produce the greatest number of casualties
among bystanders, with the mean number of dead and wounded six and eight times larger than

4

It is more difficult to conclusively assess our effectiveness in capturing assassination attempts; however, there are
several reasons to believe that our method was effective. First, we ran the keyword searches sequentially, first with
the New York Times, which produced 263 attempts, then the Washington Post, which produced an additional 33
attempts, and then the Wall Street Journal, which produced only 2 additional attempts. The rapidly diminishing
returns to further searches suggest that we are accurately capturing publicly-known assassination attempts. Second,
as we will show below, the number of attempts produced by these searches turns out to closely track the number of
successful assassinations through time. Third, we focus our results on “serious attempts”, where the attack was
actually carried out. These attempts are more likely to be reported and thus harder to miss.
5
Goemans (personal correspondence) notes that two cases, Zia in Pakistan and Boris III in Bulgaria, could be
construed as natural deaths whereas our searching algorithm classified them as assassinations. We have verified that
our results are not meaningfully changed by dropping these two observations.

7

for gun attacks. Explosive devices thus appear to be both a particularly violent and particularly
ineffective tool.6
Table 2 further shows that the vast majority of assassination attempts occur in the
leader’s home country, with only 4% occurring outside the national borders. Attempts are
slightly more likely to be carried out by solo assassins than by groups of assassins (59% to 41%).
Both solo and group attacks show a similar propensity to kill the leader, although group attacks
tend to be far bloodier for bystanders.
Figure 1 shows how the frequency of assassination events has evolved with time, plotting
the frequency of attempts and successful assassinations in each decade. Panel A indicates that
the annual rate of assassinations increased in the late 19th and early 20th century, decreased
substantially during the 1940s (perhaps as a result of heightened security during World War II),
and has been at relatively high levels since 1950. Currently, the world witnesses the
assassination of a national leader in one of every two years. Interestingly, the frequencies of
attempts and successes closely track one another. In fact, the conditional probability of killing a
leader given a serious attempt is not trending, remaining at about 25% through time.
Panel B of Figure 1 presents these frequency patterns again, but normalizes by the
number of countries (and hence the number of national leaders) that exist in a given year. The
rate of attempts and successes now appear to fall after 1930, an effect driven by the increasing
number of independent countries in the world. This means that, although the annual rate of
assassinations is currently at historically high levels, the probability that a given leader is killed
in any given year has fallen over the 20th Century. At the peak in the 1910s, a given leader had a
nearly 1% chance of being assassinated in a given year; today, the probability is below 0.3%.
6

Yet we also find (in results not reported) that explosive devices are used with increasing regularity through time.
This may reflect the fact that bombs can be triggered remotely so that, although less effective as a weapon, bombs
put assassin(s) at lower risk of being caught.

8

3.

Hit or Miss: Identifying the Effect of Assassination

3.1. Empirical approach
In this section we investigate the causative effect of assassination. To identify this effect
we employ the inherent randomness in whether an attack is successful or not. For example, John
F. Kennedy did not escape the bullet that killed him, even though it was fired from 265 feet away
and the president was in a moving car (Warren et al., 1964). But Idi Amin did survive an attack
in 1976, when a thrown grenade bounced of his chest and killed several bystanders.
In our main specifications we examine OLS regressions of the form:
yi = β SUCCESSi + γ X i + ε i

(1)

where i indexes a country-year in which there is an assassination attempt, yi is an outcome of
interest (primarily institutional change or change in war status), SUCCESSi is a dummy equal to
1 if a leader is killed in that country and year and 0 if the leader survives any attempts, and Xi is a
vector of other regressors. The key identifying assumption is that we can treat SUCCESS as
exogenous conditional on observables. Then E [ε | SUCCESS , X ] = 0 , and we can write the
average treatment effect as

β = E [ y | SUCCESS = 1, X ] − E [ y | SUCCESS = 0, X ]

(2)

This expression makes clear that estimates of (1) identify the difference between
successful assassinations and failed assassination attempts. We thus answer the precise question:
what is the effect of killing versus failing to kill the leader? If hypothesis tests reject that β is
zero, then the outcome of the attempt matters, and more broadly, we can reject the idea that
assassinations do not change the course of events. Note, however, that we cannot tell whether
the effect of assassinations we identify comes from the effects of killing the leader, failing to kill

9

the leader, or both. In Section 4 below, we use propensity-score matching methods to tease out
whether β is driven primarily by successful or failed assassinations, but since assassination
attempts are non-random, that analysis is necessarily more speculative than the analysis
presented here.7 We therefore focus first on the better-identified question of whether national
outcomes differ depending on the success or failure of assassination attempts.
3.2. Is Success Exogenous Conditional on Attempts?
The key identification assumption for the main analysis is that, conditional on a serious
attempt taking place, the success of the attempt – i.e., where the bullet hits, where the target is
standing when the bomb explodes, etc. – is uncorrelated with the error term in (1). To investigate
this assumption, we first ask whether observable variables that might be related to the error term
in (1) predict SUCCESS conditional on attempt.
As discussed above, one variable that we know predicts success is the type of weapon
used in the attack. In particular, attempts that use explosive devices are much less likely to lead
to a leader’s death than attempts that use other weapons. For this reason, all specifications in the
analysis below will include weapon fixed effects, although it turns out that the inclusion or
exclusion of weapon fixed effects does not affect the results.
To investigate whether other variables predict successful assassinations, we present in
Panel A of Table 3 the mean values of a number of variables in the year prior to successful and
failed assassination attempts, as well as the result from two-sided t-tests for the equality of these
means. The table shows that the sample of successful and failed assassination attempts is
balanced across a wide variety of variables: a dummy for whether the country was democratic or
not (defined using the POLITY2 variable from Polity IV) and recent changes therein, the status

7

As a preview, we find below that it is primarily the killing of leaders that appears to drive change, rather than
failure.

10

of war and recent changes therein (from the Gleditsch-COW war data), the age of the leader, the
tenure of the leader, and log per-capita energy consumption, which serves as a proxy measure for
per-capita income.8,9 The only result in Table 3 where the difference between successes and
failures is statistically significant is the log of national population (p-value 0.05); however, given
that we have examined 8 variables, it is natural that one be statistically significant at this level.
In Panel B of Table 3, we present the results from Probit specifications that consider all
of these variables simultaneously. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:
P ( SUCCESS a ) = Φ ( γ 1 + X a ' γ

2

)

(3)

where a is a serious assassination attempt and X are the same variables considered in Panel A.
We present specifications with and without weapon fixed effects, and also with and without
fixed effects for the region of the world where the attack takes place. When considering all of the
variables in Table 3 jointly, their joint p-value ranges from 0.40 to 0.49, depending on which
fixed effects are included.10 In the robustness analysis below (see Section 3.4), we show that the
inclusion or exclusion of all of these variables as controls has little effect on the results.
Combined, the relative lack of predictability of SUCCESS, and the invariance of the results to
adding controls for SUCCESS, suggests that the identification assumption is plausible.
3.3. Main results
In this section we present our main results. To test hypotheses, we consider both
parametric and non-parametric specifications. First, we estimate (1) using OLS with robust
8

Recent changes in political institutions and war status compare values in the year prior to the attempt to values
three years prior to the attempt. These are lagged versions of the dependent variables used below, which compare
institutional or conflict status one year after the attempt with status one year before.
9
The energy consumption measure comes from the Correlates of War National Material Capabilities dataset version
3.02 (Singer et al. 1972, 1987). We use such a proxy measure because data on per-capita income is not available for
the world sample prior to 1950.
10
If we use the linear POLITY2 variable instead of the democracy dummy, the joint p-values range from 0.09 to
0.31, with the linear variable significant in some specifications. The results in the paper are also robust to including
this linear POLITY2 variable as a control instead of the dummy version.

11

standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level. Adjusting for clustering at the
country level helps account for potential serial correlation of the error term in the event that there
are multiple attempts in the same country. In the OLS specifications, we include fixed effects for
the weapon used to take into account the differential success probabilities of different weapons,
as discussed above. We also include fixed effects for the number of attempts in a given countryyear. We do this because, even if the success or failure of a given attempt is exogenous, as the
evidence above suggests, the likelihood of success on an annual basis is increasing in the number
of attempts, so that the probability of success in a given year is only exogenous if we condition
on the number of attempts that took place.11
Second, we report the results of non-parametric tests. For cases where the dependent
variable takes a small number of potential outcomes, we report the results of the Fisher exact test
(Fisher 1935; Pagano and Halvorsen, 1981), which has exact small sample properties. This test
takes the marginal distribution of each variable as given and calculates the probability that the
actual association found, or a tighter association, could be produced by chance. This test is exact
because it calculates the exact probability of each permutation of the variables, which is a finite
set.12 For variables that take a large number of values, we calculate non-parametric p-values
from the Wilcoxon (1945) rank-sum test. In this test, the outcomes from successful and failed
assassinations are pooled and jointly ranked. The test-statistic is the sum of the ranks for the
successes. Wilcoxon shows that the sum of the ranks is normally distributed, and gives formulas

11

In any case, the inclusion or exclusion of weapon fixed effects or number-of-attempt fixed effects has no material
effect on the results.
12
For example, if success occurs in 59 of 251 cases and an outcome variable changes in, say, 25 of 251 cases, one
can calculate the probability for each possible permutation of these two variables in a 2x2 matrix (e.g. the
probability that 22 of the successes correspond to 12 of the outcome changes). By considering every possible
permutation of success and the outcome, one can calculate the cumulative probability that the actual association
witnessed, or some even tighter association, was produced purely by chance. This is the reported P-value.

12

for the mean and variance of the sum of the ranks under the null hypothesis that the two samples
are drawn from identical distributions.
3.3.1. Political Institutions
To investigate the effect of assassination on political institutions, we consider two
measures of institutions. The first measure is a dummy variable for political institutions, where 1
indicates democracy and 0 indicates autocracy. This variable is a binary version of the
POLITY2 variable from the Polity IV dataset.13,14 The second measure, which is derived
independently from the Archigos data set, records the percentage of leader transitions over the
following twenty years (excluding the leader in power at the time of the attempt) that are
“regular” – i.e. proceed lawfully -- as opposed to irregular transitions such as coups.15
Table 4 presents the main results, comparing changes in the democracy measures from
the year before the assassination attempt to the year after. In column (1) we examine whether
there are changes in institutions (in one direction or another) following assassinations. The
dependent variable in column (1) takes the value 1 if the regime switched democracy/autocracy
status and 0 otherwise. We see that changes between regimes are 9 percentage points more likely
when the leader is killed than when the leader survives the attack. These results are statistically
13

Specifically, we define autocracy as cases where the POLITY2 variable is less than or equal to zero and
democracy as cases where the POLITY2 variable is greater than zero. The POLITY2 variable itself has 20
categories, 10 for autocracy and 10 for democracy, but the meaning of finer distinctions in this index are less clear,
especially since the POLITY2 index is not coded according to obvious objective criteria. For this reason, we focus
on the clearer binary distinction of this measure for our main results. In results not reported, we find broadly similar
results when using changes in the linear index as the outcome measure.
14
We have also considered other measures in the Polity IV data (in results not reported but available from the
authors). These include the variable XCONST, which measures the degree of executive constraints on the leader,
POLCOMP, which measures political competition – the extent to which alternative political preferences can be both
expressed and pursued, and the linear POLITY2 measure. POLCOMP is intended to refer to aspects of the political
regime other than the power of the executive (which is captured by XCONST). We find that these measures
produce broadly similar results to those presented in the tables.
15
Archigos defines a regular leader transition as one that occurs according to explicit rules or established
conventions. Following Archigos, we exclude cases in which leader transitions occurred following deaths in office
due to natural causes or accidents, though including them as either ‘regular’ or ‘irregular’ does not substantively
change the results. Calculating the percentage of regular transitions over all transitions 1-20 years after the attempt
(as opposed to excluding the target of the attempt) produces stronger results than those reported in the table.

13

significant using both the parametric and non-parametric hypothesis tests. In column (2) we
consider whether assassinations lead systematically in the direction of democracy or autocracy.
Here, the dependent variable takes the value 1 if a regime switched from autocracy to
democracy, -1 if the regime switched from democracy to autocracy, and 0 if no change occurred.
The results show that, on average, successful assassinations lead toward democracy. This result
is not quite statistically significant with the parametric test and significant with a p-value of 0.02
with the non-parametric test. Lastly, column (3) shows that successful assassinations raise the
probability that future leader transitions occur lawfully by 11 percentage points. This last
measure operates on an objective criterion, leadership transition, from a source entirely
independent of the Polity IV data, and thus helps validate the Polity IV results.16
Panel B of Table 4 presents the effect of assassination conditional on the initial nature of
the regime. Importantly, we find that the effects are limited to autocracies. The successful
assassination of an autocrat creates a highly significant 13 percentage point increase in the
probability of democratic transition, compared to the case where the assassination attempt failed.
Meanwhile, the successful assassination of democrats produces no change in institutions using
the Polity IV measure. Democratic institutions thus appear robust to the assassination of leaders,
while autocratic regimes are not. Similar results are obtained using the percentage of regular
future leadership transitions from Archigos as the criterion – successful assassination of autocrats
creates a 19 percentage point increase in the probability that future leadership transitions occur
by regular means, whereas there is no change in the probability that future leadership transitions
occur by regular means following a successful assassination of a democrat.

16

One potential critique of the Polity IV measures is that the Polity analysts may have used changes in leadership to
demarcate underlying changes in institutions. This concern, however, does not apply to the percent of regular
transitions variable from Archigos. The fact that we obtain similar results using the percent of regular transitions
variable suggests that coding decisions are not driving the results.

14

Table 5 breaks down these effects by the tenure of the leader at the time of the attempt
and by the duration of the effect. Each cell reports the coefficient on SUCCESS from a separate
regression, where the sample is shown in the column and the duration of the change used to
calculate the dependent variable is shown in the row. The top panel indicates that the short-run
move to democracy is particularly large following the assassination of long-tenured autocrats, for
whom a successful assassination increases the probability of democratic transition in the next
year by 20 percentage points relative to a failed assassination. The distinction between tenure is
less clear with time however. The most interesting result in this table appears in Panel A column
(4), which shows that democratic transitions following assassinations of autocrats appear to be
sustained 10 years later. The point estimate suggests that initially autocratic regimes are 19
percentage points more likely to be democracies 10 years after the attempt if the assassination
succeeded rather than failed. Twenty years into the future, however, the results are substantially
attenuated using the binary Polity IV measure.
Panel B of Table 5 considers the probability that future leader transitions are regular. Of
particular note is the last row, where we limit ourselves to leadership transitions that occur
between 11 and 20 years after the assassination attempt. These results show that, following a
successful assassination of an autocrat, leadership transitions 11 to 20 years after the attempt are
21 percentage points more likely to be regular. Following a successful assassination of a longtenured autocrat, leadership transitions 11 to 20 years after the attempt are 42 percentage points
more likely to be regular, though this result is only statistically significant in the non-parametric
specification. Combined, these results suggest that assassinations have substantial and at least
somewhat prolonged effects on institutions.

15

3.2.2. War
To investigate the effect of assassinations on war, we use two datasets on conflict: the
Gleditsch (2004) revision of the Correlates of War dataset (Sarkees 2000), and the PRIO/Uppsala
Armed Conflict dataset, version 4 (Gleditsch et al. 2002, PRIO 2006). The Gleditsch-COW
dataset contains data on all armed conflicts with over 1000 battle deaths from 1816-2002, and to
the best of our knowledge is the only dataset with worldwide coverage on conflicts for the entire
time period we consider. The data indicates whether a war exists for a given nation in a given
year and, if a war exists, the type of war (civil, interstate, et cetera). The PRIO dataset contains
more information – it contains data on all armed conflicts with over 25 battle deaths per year and
further describes conflict intensity, indicating whether a conflict had 25-999 battle deaths or
1000 plus battle deaths in a given year.17 The coverage of the PRIO dataset, however, only
begins in 1946, which is why we examine both datasets.18
Table 6 examines the effect of assassination on war status. The dependent variable is the
difference in war status of a country one year after assassination attempts compared to one year
before.19 The first column presents the results for the full sample, using all attempts from 18752002 and the Gleditsch-COW data. The second column presents the results again but restricting
the Gleditsch-COW data to the postwar period (1946-2002), and the final column presents the
results using the PRIO data for the same sample (1946-2002). Panel A presents the average
effect of successful assassination relative to failed attempts, and Panel B splits the sample by war
status in the year prior to the attempt.

17

We define the PRIO variable to be 0.5 if a small conflict is taking place, 1 if a large conflict is taking place, and 0
otherwise.
18
Although in theory Gleditsch-COW and PRIO should agree on conflicts with over 1,000 battle deaths, Gleditsch
(2004) notes that they do not. Although he makes some changes to the COW data to clarify the coding, the two
datasets are still not identical.
19
We group all types of war, which are mainly interstate wars or civil wars. In results not reported, we analyze civil
wars separately and find no substantial difference in the results.

16

Looking at Table 6, we see three primary results. First, there is weak evidence that
successful assassination attempts, compared to failed assassination attempts, tend to hasten the
end of intense wars (i.e. wars with greater than 1000 battle deaths). This effect appears in Panel
B, column (1), and suggests that successful assassination lowers the probability of continued,
intense conflict by 25 percentage points. Although the effect is quite large in magnitude, it is
only marginally significant (P-value of .08 parametrically and .13 non-parametrically) and is not
significant when we restrict to the post World War II period. The post-war results are difficult to
interpret, however, because there are few observations of intense wars after 1946. Overall we
conclude that there is some evidence, but only weak evidence, for an effect on intense wars.
Second, there is evidence that successful assassination attempts, compared to failed
attempts, lead to increased intensity of existing moderate-level conflicts. This is seen in Panel B,
column (3), where we see a 33 percentage point increased probability that a war intensifies when
the leader is killed. This large point estimate shows some significance (P-value of .05
parametrically and .13 non-parametrically) even though the sample size is substantially smaller
due to the fact that the PRIO data exists only for the post-1945 era.
Third, we find that the outcomes of assassination attempts appear irrelevant to the start of
new wars. This is seen in Panel B, across both datasets we examine. For example, taken literally
this suggests that World War I might have begun regardless of whether or not the attempt on the
life of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914 had succeeded or failed.20
In sum, these results suggest heterogeneity in the effect of assassination, depending on
the level of conflict at the time of the attempt. The success or failure of an assassination does not
matter for the start of conflicts, as least as we can measure them in our data. However, successful

20

Note, however, that this event itself is not in our data, as Archduke Ferdinand was the crown prince of AustriaHungary, rather than the leader.

17

assassinations, compared to failed assassinations, appear to intensify moderate-level conflicts but
hasten the end of high-intensity conflicts. These are somewhat subtle results, suggesting an
important role of assassination for conflict, but with effects depending on the circumstances. We
will consider further interpretation of the conflict results in Section 4 below.

3.4.

Robustness Checks and Additional Specifications
Our main results feature both parametric and non-parametric tests, and thus confront

alternative specifications of the error process. In this section we further consider a number of
robustness checks based on alternative specifications of assassination events and the inclusion of
observable variables.
Table 7 reconsiders the main results for institutional change. For comparison, the top
panel summarizes the baseline results from Table 4, where we compared successful
assassinations against failed ‘serious attempts’, defined as those attempts in which the weapon
was actually used in the attempt to kill the leader. The next four panels consider different ways
of defining the comparison group of failed assassination attempts. We see that further limiting
the set of serious attempts to cases where there were casualties – i.e. where the target or a
bystander sustained wounds – produces similar results as the main specification. Further limiting
the control group to cases where the leader specifically was wounded (but not killed) reduces the
set of failed attempts by 70%, leaving only 40 failures. When we focus on this more limited
sample, the results tend to lose some significance, though some results remain statistically
significant and overall the point estimates do not change substantially. The next panel uses the
full set of attempts, as opposed to serious attempts, and produces similar results as the main
specification. Finally, we try limiting the observations to (a) attempts by solo attackers, and (b)

18

the first attempt on a given leader. While these restrictions cut the sample size down, so that the
standard errors increase, most point estimates change only modestly.
The last panel of Table 7 tries a somewhat different specification. We return to the
baseline specification but add as controls all of the variables in Table 3, as well as time (quartercentury) and region fixed effects. Including of the full set of controls reduces the sample size,
but the results are similar to the baseline, with typically somewhat larger coefficients and
somewhat larger standard errors.21
In results not reported in the table (but available from the authors on request), we have
also conducted the same set of robustness checks on the war results. As with the results on
institutional change, we find that the war results are essentially similar to the results in the main
specifications if we consider alternate control groups (bystanders wounded, target wounded, or
all attempts), consider only solo attempts or first attempts, or add the full set of controls.

4.

Distinguishing Between Success and Failure
The results thus far suggest that assassinations have important effects. These effects are

identified using inherent randomness in whether an attack is successful, showing significant
differences in outcomes comparing successes and failures. It may be natural to presume that the
“successes” – where the leader dies – are more important drivers of change than the “failures”,
since success automatically produces changes in leadership while failure does not. However, it
is also possible that failed attempts change outcomes; for example, an autocrat who survives an

21

In a different style of analysis, we have also considered whether natural or accidental leader deaths produce
institutional change. We find that natural and accidental deaths of autocrats increase the probability of a change in
institutions, but these changes are much smaller in magnitude and limited to extreme autocrats.

19

assassination attempt may impose crackdowns on opposition groups, leading a country further
from democracy.
In this section we consider the separate effects of success and failure. Identifying these
effects separately is necessarily more speculative than identifying the difference between them.
The challenge is that, while the path of a bullet may be driven largely by chance, attempts
themselves do not occur at random. As a result, the absolute effects of successes and the absolute
effect of failures may be conflated with changes that would have occurred anyway, and which
are correlated with the probability that an attempt took place. For example, if attempts on
autocrats are more likely in autocracies that are in the process of liberalizing, one might
erroneously attribute a subsequent democratization that would have happened anyway to the
effect of a successful or failed assassination.
That said, one can make some headway on this issue by employing a propensity-score
matching approach. We use observable features of the national context to predict when
assassination attempts will occur and then stratify the sample according to these features. We are
therefore making comparisons between years with assassination events and years without such
events within comparable contexts. While this approach is not perfect, and does not solve the
problem if assassination attempts are correlated with unobservable variables that also predict
subsequent outcomes, it does provide a flexible approach to dealing with selection on
observables.
To implement this approach, for all countries c and years t, we first estimate equations of
the form
P ( ATTEMPTct ) = Φ ( X ct ' ρ )

20

(4)

which allow us to predict attempts conditional on observables. Based on the predicted
probabilities from (4), we form 6 blocks, denoted by b, for different levels of the propensity
score, and check that the covariates are all balanced between treatments and controls within each
block. We then estimate regressions of the form

yib = α b + β s SUCCESSib + β f FAILUREib + X ib ' γ + ε ib

(5)

where αb indicates fixed effects for each propensity score block.
4.1. Predicting Assassination Attempts
We start by considering whether assassination attempts are predictable and find that they
are – and in interesting ways. Table 8 shows the results of estimating (4). The annual rate of
assassination attempts is 0.7 percentage points higher in autocracies than in democracies. The
baseline probability of an attempt in a given country-year is 2.4%, so this implies that autocrats
are approximately 30% more likely to be the target of attacks in a given year. Attacks are also
2.8 percentage points more likely during wartime - more than doubling the background
probability – which makes war a particularly powerful predictor of assassination attempts.
Interestingly, these results are consistent with the results in Section 3, which showed that
assassinations of autocrats had an impact on institutional change, and that assassinations had an
impact on wars that were in progress. The results here suggest that potential assassins may
understand that assassinations against autocrats or wartime leaders are more likely to have an
effect, and hence are more likely to attempt to kill precisely those leaders where it would make a
difference.22

22

These results are broadly consistent with the findings of Feierabend et al. (1971) and Iqbal and Zorn (2003).
Feierabend et al. consider the correlates of assassination attempts from 1948-1967, and, consistent with our findings,
find that assassination attempts are more common in poorer countries, more autocratic (or, in their terminology,
more coercive) countries, and in countries involved in war. Iqbal and Zorn consider predictors of successful
assassinations since World War II and find, as we do, that political institutions and war predict assassination. Both

21

Another interesting result that emerges in Table 8 is that attempts are more common in
countries with larger populations; doubling the population increases the probability of an
assassination attempt each year by 0.35 percentage points. Though this may seem like a small
effect, this implies that the leader of a country the size of the United States (population 300
million) is 1.8 percentage points, or about 75 percent, more likely to be assassinated each year
than the leader of a country the size of Switzerland (population 7.5 million). This population
effect is sustained in a multivariate context, so that it does not appear to proxy for per-capita
income, institutions, or war status. One natural interpretation is that the number of would-be
assassins rises with a country’s population, whereas there is only one leader in each country. The
ratio of would-be assassins to leaders, and hence the probability of an attempt, therefore
increases with population. The results in Table 8 also indicate that assassination attempts are
somewhat less likely in richer countries, as measured by energy intensity. Note that, in results
not reported in the table, both the population and the energy intensity results are unchanged when
we include decade fixed effects, so that these results are not being driven by growth in
population or income over time.
4.2. The Roles of Success and Failure
Given these predictors of assassination attempts, Table 9 presents separate estimates for
the effects of success and failure, relative to comparable years in which there was no
assassination attempt, using equation (5). For each dependent variable, we present three
specifications. In the first column, we present the regression with no controls. In the second
column, we include all of the controls in Table 8, which we have seen have substantial predictive
power for assassination attempts. In the third column, we include these controls again but

studies are limited to the question of predicting assassinations, rather than assessing the consequences of
assassination.

22

further stratify the sample using propensity score matching.23 As is evident in the table, adding
the controls and the propensity score matching has a negligible effect on the estimates.
We find several interesting results. Keeping in mind the caveats about identification in
this section discussed above, we see that most of the effects identified in Section 3 appear to be
driven by successful assassinations, though there are some cases in which failures may have
effects. The first three columns on Table 9 investigate the absolute value of changes in the
POLITY2 dummy. The results here suggest that it is successful assassinations that are driving
the results. Similar insight is provided by the second set of columns, which consider moves
toward democracy. Examining autocrats, successful assassination increases the probability of
democratic transition in the next year by 13 percentage points compared to years without
assassination events, while failed assassinations suggest a modest and statistically insignificant 1
percentage point fall in the probability of democratic transition. The effects of failure are
amplified when we consider the percentage of “regular” leader changes in the ensuing 20 years,
where successful assassinations of autocrats are associated with 16-21 percentage point increases
in the percentage of regular future leader transitions while failure is associated with 6-7
percentage point declines in the percentage of such leader transitions. If these estimates of failure
actually represent the true causal effect of a failed assassination (as opposed, perhaps, to
selection effects not controlled for perfectly with the propensity score methodology), then this
would suggest that autocrats may slightly tighten their grip on power after failed assassination
attempts.
In sum, the institutional changes identified in Section 3 appear to decompose into (a)
substantial roles for success and (b) smaller, and typically statistically insignificant, roles for
23

In results not reported in the table, we find that alternate methods of propensity score estimation, such as kernel
density matching and nearest-neighbor matching, produce qualitatively similar results in almost all cases.

23

failure. The results are quite consistent across specifications, so that controlling for observables
and propensity score matching do not appear critical to the results. This suggests that, to the
extent that the observable variables used in the propensity score form an important part of the
selection of when attempts take place, these selection effects are not driving the results. Of
course, it is impossible to know whether the effects of failures we pick up are driven by selection
on unobservables, but the fact that controlling flexibly for the observable predictors of attempts
makes no substantive difference provides at least suggestive evidence that the estimates are, in
fact, identifying the effect of failures rather than a pure selection effect.
Given that only 25% of assassination attempts are successful, if we take the point
estimates in Table 9 literally, they imply that the average effect of assassination attempts on
democracy is only modestly positive ex-ante, if positive at all. Overall, the results imply that one
would expect a 6-7 percentage point move toward democracy if the assassination succeeds
(approximately 25% of the time), and a 2 percentage point move towards autocracy with failure
(approximately 75% of the time), suggesting an approximately zero net effect on average.
Focusing on autocrats, meanwhile, suggests a modest, positive move to democracy in
expectation, with the point estimates implying a 3% ex-ante increased probability of
democratization from assassination using the POLITY2 measure and essentially no mean shift
ex-ante using the Archigos measure of future leader transitions – far smaller than the 15-20%
average move to democracy comparing success with failure. Thus, a policy of assassination
attempts creates risk – it increases the probability that there will be a change in a country’s
institutions – but if the probability of an attempt succeeding is 25%, there are at most modest
gains in democracy on average.

24

The results on war, presented in Table 10, are similar to the results for institutional
change in that they decompose into (a) substantial roles for success and (b) smaller roles for
failure. Focusing on Panel B, where we split by war status, columns (1)-(3) indicate that if a
country is already involved in a serious conflict, a successful assassination can hasten the end of
that conflict, with failed assassination attempts having little effect. Specifically, the coefficients
on success – suggesting a 25 percentage point fall in the probability that the war continues – are
similar to what we found in Table 6 and are now significant at the 95% level. Meanwhile, failure
to kill the leader during an intense war has no apparent effect on the conflict. As with Table 6
however, these effects are substantially weaker in columns (4)-(9) where we consider post-1946
data. As noted above, there are few relevant observations of intense conflicts in this later period,
so decisive interpretation of the post-war difference is difficult.
Second, focusing on moderate-level conflicts, in Panel B columns (7)-(9), we see that
most of the intensification effect found in Table 6 is driven by successful assassinations,
although failed assassinations do suggest a decline conflict intensity. Taken literally, this latter
result might suggest that failed assassination attempts scare leaders enough to lead to a cessation
of conflict. Given the opposing effects of success and failure, and the greater propensity for
failed attempts in the data, these results share a similarity with the results for institutional
change: assassination attempts increase the variance of outcomes, but produce approximately
neutral effects on moderate-level conflicts on average.
Looking at cases where the country is not at war, the results – using both data sets –
suggest that both successes and failures lead to an increase in conflict. Taken literally, this
suggests that the act of an assassination attempt provokes conflict, regardless of the attempt’s
success. However, it is also possible that this result reflects the inability of the propensity score

25

matching techniques to adequately predict assassination attempts in the context of incipient war,
particularly if we view the assassination attempt as the opening shot of war.24
Overall, the war results make clear that the outcomes of assassinations can affect the
outcomes of wars in progress, and that there may be substantial heterogeneity in the nature of
these effects.

5.

Conclusion
This paper examines the effect of assassination on the evolution of political institutions

and military conflict. Using a novel data set of assassinations and assassination attempts against
national political leaders from 1875 to 2004, we employ inherent randomness in the success and
failure of assassination attempt to identify whether these events affect national outcomes. We
find that the successful assassination of autocrats produces institutional change - substantially
raising the probability that a country transitions to democracy. This democratization effect is
sustained ten years later. The results for war are less systematic, with some evidence that
assassination can exacerbate moderate-level conflict but hasten the end of intense conflict. There
is little evidence that the outcome of assassination attempts matters for the instigation of new
wars.
In sum, these results show that assassinations affect political institutions and conflict.
Whether or not assassinations change “the history of the world” in Disraeli’s words, they do
appear to change the history of individual countries. Our tests provide evidence that small
elements of randomness - the path of a bullet, the timing of an explosion, small shifts in a
leader’s schedule - can result in substantial changes in national outcomes. The findings lend
support to theoretical models of conflict that feature leadership and further suggest that
24

For example, on the eve of the current Iraq war the US government actively sought to kill Saddam Hussein
through targeted bombing.

26

individual autocrats appear to be cornerstones of national institutions, complementing the
literature on institutional origins by showing an important component of institutional change that
lies not in distant history but in contemporary hands.

References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation” American Economic Review, December
2001, 91, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Pierre Yared. “Income and
Democracy” National Bureau of Economic Research WP#11205, December 2001.
Baliga, Sandeep, David O. Lucca, Tomas Sjostrom. “Domestic Political Survival and
International Conflict: Is Democracy Good for Peace?” Northwestern University,
mimeo, 2007.
Boorstin, Daniel L. Cleopatra’s Nose, Random House: New York, 1995.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, James D. Morrow, Randolph M. Siverson, Alastair Smith, “An
Institutional Explanation of the Democratic Peace.” American Political Science Review,
93 (4), 1999.
da Graca, John V. Heads of State and Government, 2nd Edition, St. Martin’s Press: New York,
2000.
Downs, Anthony. An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York: Harper and Row, 1957.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. “History Lessons: Institutions, Factor
Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 14 (3), 2000, 217-232.
Feierabend, Ivo K., Rosalind L. Feierabend, Betty A Nesvold, and Franz M. Jaggar. “Political
Violence and Assassination: A Cross-National Assessment” in William J. Crotty (ed.)
Assassinations and the Political Order, Harper and Row: New York, 1971, 54-140.
Ferguson, Niall (ed.) Virtual History: Alternatives and Counterfactuals. New York: Basic
Books. 1999.
Feyrer, James and Bruce Sacerdote. “Colonialism and Modern Income – Islands as Natural
Experiments,” NBER Working Paper #12546, 2006.

27

Fisher, Ronald A. “The Logic of Inductive Inference”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
98 (1), 1935, 39-82.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Andrei Shleifer. “Legal Origins”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117
(4), 2002, 1193–1230.
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer. “Why Does Democracy Need
Education?”, National Bureau of Economic Research WP#12128, 2006.
Goemans, Hein. War and Punishment: The Causes of War Termination and the First World
War, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000.
Goemans, Hein, Kristian Gleditsch and Giacomo Chiozza. “Archigos: A Database of Leaders
1875-2004”, http://mail.rochester.edu/~hgoemans/data, 2006.
Gleditsch, Kristian S. “A Revised List of Wars Between and Within Independent States, 18162002,” International Interactions, 30, 231-262, 2004. Data available at
http://privatewww.essex.ac.uk/~ksg/expwar.html.
Gleditsch, Nils P.; Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg & Håvard Strand.
“Armed Conflict 1946-2001: A New Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research, 39(5): 615637, 2002.
Halberstam, David. The Best and the Brightest, Random House: New York, 1972.
Hudson, Miles. Assassination. Sutton Publishing: Thrupp, 2000.
Iqbal, Zaryab and Christopher Zorn. “The Political Economy of Assassination: 1946-2002”,
mimeo, Department of Political Science, Emory University, 2003.
Jackson, Matthew O. and Massimo Morelli, “War, Transfers, and Political Bias,” California
Institute of Technology mimeo, 2005.
Jones, Howard. Death of a Generation: How the Assassinations of Diem and JFK Prolonged
the Vietnam War, Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2003.
Jones, Benjamin F. and Benjamin A. Olken. “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and
Growth Since World War II”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3), 2005, 835-864.
Lentz, Harris M. III. Assassinations and executions : an encyclopedia of political violence, 1865
through 1986. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 1988.
Lentz, Harris M. III. Heads of States and Governments: A Worldwide Encyclopedia of Over
2,300 Leaders, 1945 through 1992. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 1994.

28

Lentz, Harris M. III. Encyclopedia of heads of States and Governments, 1900 through 1945.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 1999.
Lentz, Harris M. III. Assassinations and executions : an encyclopedia of political violence, 1900
through 2000. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 2002.
Lipset, Seymour M. “Some Social Requisites for Democracy: Economic Development and
Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review 53, 1959, 69-105.
Mansfield, Edward D. and Jack Snyder. Electing to Fight: Why Emerging Democracies Go to
War, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005.
Marshall, Monty G., and Keith Jaggers. Polity IV Project, Integrated Network for Societal
Conflict Research Program and Center for International Development and Conflict
Management, University of Maryland, 2004.
Merriman, John. For Want of a Horse: Choice and Chance in History. Lexington, MA : Stephen
Greene Press, 1985.
Miola, Robert S. “Julius Cesar and the Tyrannicide Debate”, Renaissance Quarterly, 38 (2),
1985, 271-289.
Moore, B. Jr. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of
the Modern World, Beacon Press: Boston., 1966.
Nederman, Carey J. “A Duty to Kill: John of Salisbury’s Theory of Tyrannicide”, The Review
of Politics, 50 (3), 1988, 365-389.
North, Douglass C. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, 1990.
Pagano, Marcello and Katherine T. Halvorsen. “An Algorithm for Finding the Exact Significant
Levels of r x c Contingency Tables”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 76,
931-934.
PRIO, Armed Conflict Data Version 4-2006b. Available at http://new.prio.no/CSCWDatasets/Data-on-Armed-Conflict/UppsalaPRIO-Armed-Conflicts-Dataset/.
Sarkees, Meredith R. “The Correlates of War Data on War: An Update to 1997,” Conflict
Management and Peace Science 18 (1), pp 123-144, 2000.
Schumpeter, Joseph R. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, New York: Harper and Row,
1950.

29

Singer, J. David, Stuart Bremer, and John Stuckey, “Capability Distribution, Uncertainty, and
Major Power War, 1820-1965,” in Bruce Russett (ed.), Peace, War, and Numbers.
Beverly Hills: Sage, pp. 19-48, 1972.
Singer, J. David. “Reconstructing the Correlates of War Dataset on Material Capabilities of
States, 1816-1985,” International Interactions 14, pp. 115-32, 1987.
Tsebelis, George. Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2002.
Warren, Earl, et al, Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John
F. Kennedy. Washington: United States Government Printing Office, 1964.
Wilcoxon, F. “Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods”, Biometrics 1, pp. 80-83, 1945.
Zussman, Asaf and Noah Zussman. “Assassinations: Evaluating the Effectiveness of an Israeli
Counterterrorism Policy Using Stock Market Data”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
20 (2), 2006, 193-206.

30

Data collection
This appendix describes the method for collecting the assassinations data. For detailed
information about the Archigos, Polity IV, or Correlates of War datasets, and their construction,
please see the resources listed in the references.
To find assassinations and assassination attempts, we used the list of primary national
leaders from 1875 to 2004 provided by Archigos and ran extensive keyword searches on the
archives of major newspapers. The searches examined whether words for assassination type
events appeared in close proximity with particular leader and country identifiers. The keywords
used to capture the events were:
• EVENT: {assassination, assassin, assassinated, wound, wounded, injure, injured, kill,
killed, attack, attacked, attempt, attempted, bomb, bombed, murder, murdered, shot,
shoot, stab, stabbed, assault, assaulted, escape, escaped, die, dies, died, perish,
perishes, perished, slain}
while the country and leader identifiers were country specific. For example, for Afghanistan we
used:
• LEADER: {emir, king, president, prime minister, premier, amir, leader, ruler}
• COUNTRY: {Afghanistan, Afghan}
Specific country and title names were taken from da Graca (2000), with the keywords
“leader” and “ruler” used in all searches. For some countries, where the generic LEADER
keywords returned over 300 articles, we used the names of specific leaders in place of generic
titles.
The search results (returned articles) were then examined to determine whether an
assassination attempt or assassination had occurred. Information was then collected about the (a)
date of the event, (b) outcome for the leader, (c) weapon(s) used, (d) location of the attack, (e)
extent of other casualties, and also about (f) whether a solo assassin or group were responsible
for the attack.
The searches were first run exclusively on archives of the New York Times and then
sequentially on archives of the Washington Post and Wall Street Journal. For each country,
different research assistants conducted the searches on each newspaper. Distinctions between
assassinations and coup d’etats were determined as necessary through the newspaper articles and
through historical resources, primarily Lentz (1988, 1994, 1999, 2002). Summary statistics are
presented in Table 2. The codebook and detailed data are available from the authors.

31

Table 1: Assassinations of Primary National Leaders Since 1875
Country of Leader
Afghanistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Austria
Bulgaria
Burundi
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo (Kinshasa)
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Greece
Guatemala
Guatemala
Haiti
India
Iran
Ireland
Israel
Japan
Japan
Jordan
Korea
Lebanon
Madagascar
Mexico
Nepal
Nicaragua
Pakistan
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Poland
Portugal
Portugal
Russia
Rwanda
Salvador
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Spain
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Togo
United States
United States
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
North Yemen
North Yemen
Yugoslavia

Year of
Assassination
1919
1933
1992
1934
1943
1994
1977
2001
1899
1911
1961
1875
1981
1913
1898
1957
1912
1984
1896
1922
1995
1921
1932
1951
1979
1989
1975
1920
2001
1956
1951
1988
1955
1877
1933
1922
1908
1918
1881
1994
1913
1975
1969
1966
1897
1912
1921
1959
1993
1986
1963
1881
1901
1963
1897
1950
1977
1978
1934

Name of Leader
Habibullah
Nadir Shah
Boudiaf
Dollfuss
Boris III
Ntaryamira
Ngouabi
Kabila
Heureaux
Caceres
Trujillo
Moreno
Sadat
George I
Reina Barrios
Castillo Armas
Leconte
Indira Gandhi
Nasir Ad-Din
Collins
Rabin
Hara
Inukai
Abdullah
Park
Moawad
Ratsimandrava
Carranza
Birendra
Somoza
Khan
Zia
Remon
Gill
Sanchez Cerro
Narutowicz
Carlos I
Paes
Alexander II
Habyarimana
Araujo
Faisal
Shermarke
Verwoerd
Canovas
Canalejas
Dato
Bandaranaike
Premadasa
Palme
Olympio
Garfield
McKinley
Kennedy
Idiarte Borda
Delgado
Al-Hamdi
Al-Ghashmi
Alexander

32

Weapon Used
gun
gun
gun
gun
gun
other
gun
gun
gun
gun
gun
other
gun
gun
unknown
gun
explosive device
gun
gun
gun
gun
knife
gun
gun
gun
explosive device
unknown
unknown
gun
gun
gun
other
gun
unknown
gun
gun
gun
gun
explosive device
other
gun
gun
gun
knife
gun
gun
gun
gun
explosive device
gun
gun
gun
gun
gun
gun
gun
gun
explosive device
gun

Table 2: Assassination Attempts: Summary Statistics

Obs

Percentage

Probability Leader Killed
All
Serious
Attempts
Attempts

Bystander Casualties
Mean
Mean
Killed
Wounded

Type of Weapon
Gun
Explosive device
Knife
Other
Unknown

161
91
23
19
10

55%
31%
8%
6%
3%

28%
5%
13%
16%
40%

31%
7%
21%
18%
44%

1.0
5.8
0.3
1.1
2.0

2.2
18.2
0.4
0.3
1.3

Location
Abroad
At home

12
286

4%
96%

25%
20%

30%
23%

3.6
2.4

6.5
6.7

Number of Attackers
Solo
Group

132
92

59%
41%

24%
22%

29%
26%

0.4
5.6

2.5
11.0

Total Attempts

298

n/a

20%

24%

2.4

6.7

Notes: There are 298 total assassination attempts observed and 251 serious attempts. Serious attempts are defined as cases where the
weapon was actually used. Note that the location of the attack is observed in every case, but the type of weapon is observed in 288
cases and the number of attackers observed in 224 cases. For some attempts, multiple types of weapons were used, so that the weapon
observation counts sum to 304. Attacks with weapons classified as “other” include arson, rocket attacks, stoning, and automobile
crashes, among others. Also note that casualties among bystanders are skewed distributions so that the means are much larger than
medians.

33

Table 3: Are successful and failed attempts similar?
Panel A: Pairwise t-tests of sample balance.
Variable
Democracy dummy

Success
0.362
(0.064)
-0.036
(0.025)
0.263
(0.059)
0.036
(0.058)
-1.589
(0.338)
9.034
(0.219)
55.172
(1.351)
9.328
(1.440)
59

Change in democracy
dummy
War dummy
Change in war
Log energy use per capita
Log population
Age of leader
Tenure of leader
Num obs

Failure
0.344
(0.035)
-0.022
(0.019)
0.318
(0.034)
0.011
(0.034)
-1.740
(0.180)
9.526
(0.117)
52.777
(0.866)
7.619
(0.544)
194

Difference
0.018
(0.072)
-0.013
(0.032)
-0.055
(0.068)
0.025
(0.067)
0.152
(0.383)
-0.492
(0.248)
2.395
(1.604)
1.709
(1.539)

Pval on Difference
0.80
0.67
0.42
0.71
0.69
0.05*
0.14
0.27

Notes: This table reports the means of each listed variable for successes and failures, where each observation is a serious attempt.
Standard errors in parentheses. P-values on differences in the mean are from two-sided unpaired t-tests. All variables are examined in
the year before the attempt took place. Change variables represent the change from 3 years before the attempt occurred to one year
before the attempt occurred. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Panel B: Multivariate regressions
Democracy dummy
Change in democracy
dummy
War dummy
Change in war
Log energy use per capita
Log population
Age of leader
Tenure of leader

(1)
0.068
(0.068)
-0.039
(0.100)
0.057
(0.069)
-0.024
(0.077)
0.002
(0.014)
-0.027
(0.021)
0.003
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
NO
NO
208
0.46

(2)
0.063
(0.066)
-0.050
(0.103)
0.063
(0.065)
-0.017
(0.083)
0.001
(0.014)
-0.025
(0.021)
0.003
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
YES
NO
208
0.49

(3)
0.071
(0.070)
-0.033
(0.104)
0.061
(0.070)
-0.025
(0.076)
0.008
(0.015)
-0.028
(0.021)
0.002
(0.003)
0.005
(0.003)
NO
YES
208
0.46

(4)
0.070
(0.067)
-0.036
(0.109)
0.067
(0.065)
-0.013
(0.083)
0.009
(0.015)
-0.032
(0.020)
0.002
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
YES
YES
208
0.40

Weapon FE
Region FE
Observations
P-val of F-test on all listed
variables
P-val of F-test on all listed
0.46
0.06*
0.59
0.01***
variables and fixed effects
Notes: This table reports marginal effects from a probit regression, where each observation is a serious attempt and the dependent
variable equals 1 for successful assassinations. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering on country. Weapon FE
refers to dummies for each weapon type (gun, knife, explosive, poison, other, unknown), and region FE refers to dummies for each
region of the world (Africa, Asia, Middle East / North Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, Western Europe / OECD).
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

34

Table 4: Assassinations and Institutional Change
(1)
Absolute
change in
POLITY2
dummy
Panel A: Average effects
Success
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs
Data source

0.091
(0.047)
0.06*
0.03**
221
Polity IV

(2)
Directional
change in
POLITY2
dummy
0.079
(0.051)
0.12
0.02**
221
Polity IV

(3)
Percentage of
‘regular’ leader
transitions in
next 20 years
0.111
(0.057)
0.06*
0.18
138
Archigos

Panel B: Split by regime type in year before attempt
0.131
0.191
Success × Autocracy
(0.055)
(0.085)
-0.012
0.034
Success × Democracy
(0.083)
(0.043)
Autoc-Parm p
0.02**
0.03**
0.05**
Autoc-Nonparm p
0.01***
Democ-Parm p
0.89
0.43
Democ-Nonparm p
0.13
0.96
Obs
221
133
Data source
Polity IV
Polity IV
Archigos
Notes: Results from estimating equation (1). Success is a dummy for whether the assassination attempt succeeded. The dependent
variable in column (1) is a dummy for whether there was a change from autocracy to democracy or vice versa (change = 1, no change
= 0). The dependent variable in column (2) indicates the direction of any change (change to democracy = 1, no change = 0, change to
autocracy = -1). The dependent variable in column (3) is the percentage of future leader transitions that are “regular” as opposed to
“irregular” (i.e. coups). This measure excludes the transition of the leader in power during the attempt. The sample in all columns is
limited to serious attempts. Standard errors and parametric p-values are computed using robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering
at the country level; these specifications all include dummies for weapon type and the number of attempts in that year. Non-parametric
p-values are computed using Fisher’s exact (1935) p-values in columns (1) and (2) and using a Wilcoxon (1945) rank-sum test in
column (3). In Panel B, autocracy / democracy is defined by the POLITY2 dummy in the year before the attempt. The main effect for
the lagged autocracy variable is also included in the Panel B regressions. Absolute change in POLITY2 dummy is not shown in Panel
B as it is mechanically identical to the directional change in POLITY2 dummy once we split by lagged POLITY2 dummy status. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

35

Table 5: Tenure of leader and duration of effects
(1)
All

(2)
All leaders
Tenure <= 10

Panel A: Directional change in POLITY2 dummy
1 year out
0.079
0.058
(0.051)
(0.051)
Parm p-val
0.12
0.26
Nonparm p-val
0.02**
0.31
10 years out
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
20 years out
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val

Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
11-20 years out
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val

Tenure > 10

(4)
All

(5)
Autocrats only
Tenure <= 10

(6)
Tenure > 10

0.129
(0.125)
0.31
0.01***

0.130
(0.057)
0.03**
0.01***

0.088
(0.069)
0.21
0.10*

0.214
(0.110)
0.06*
0.01***

0.046
(0.062)
0.46
0.01**

0.013
(0.075)
0.86
0.12

0.092
(0.146)
0.53
0.03**

0.190
(0.079)
0.02**
0.05**

0.226
(0.108)
0.04**
0.14

0.169
(0.132)
0.21
0.05**

-0.003
(0.091)
0.98
0.86

-0.006
(0.116)
0.96
0.78

0.001
(0.154)
0.99
0.72

0.023
(0.090)
0.80
0.59

0.091
(0.117)
0.44
0.79

0.013
(0.157)
0.94
0.48

0.087
(0.243)
0.73
0.53

0.186
(0.113)
0.11
0.16

0.197
(0.145)
0.18
0.25

0.102
(0.255)
0.70
0.28

Panel B: Percentage of transitions by ‘regular’ means
1-10 years out
0.099
0.126
(0.077)
(0.089)
Parm p-val
0.21
0.16
Nonparm p-val
0.35
0.18
1-20 years out

(3)

0.111
(0.057)
0.06*
0.18

0.116
(0.063)
0.07*
0.23

0.274
(0.181)
0.15
0.03

0.165
(0.095)
0.09*
0.05**

0.147
(0.113)
0.20
0.15

0.306
(0.227)
0.20
0.03**

0.119
(0.068)
0.09*
0.25

0.1
(0.072)
0.17
0.59

0.368
(0.246)
0.16
0.04

0.208
(0.107)
0.06*
0.03**

0.181
(0.110)
0.11
0.16

0.422
(0.275)
0.15
0.05**

Notes: Each cell reports the coefficient and p-values on “success” from a separate regression of equation (1). Columns (1) and (4)
reports results for all leaders, columns (2) and (5) for those with tenure <= 10 years in year before assassination, and columns (3) and
(6) for those with tenure > 10 years in year before year of attempt. For the POLITY2 dummy, 1 year out compares the change in polity
score 1 year after attempt to 1 year before attempt; 5 years out compares the change in polity score 5 years after attempt to 1 year
before attempt, etc. For regular transitions, 1-10 years out calculates the average percentage of leadership transitions that are regular in
years 1-10 after the attempt; etc. Standard errors and p-values are as in Table 4. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%

36

Table 6: Assassinations and Conflict: Change 1 Year After Attempt

Panel A: Average effects
Success
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs
Data source

(1)
GleditschCOW Dataset
1875-2002

(2)
GleditschCOW Dataset
1946-2002

(3)
PRIO/Uppsala
Dataset
1946-2002

-0.072
(0.068)
0.29
0.57
223
Gleditsch

0.041
(0.093)
0.66
0.83
116
Gleditsch

0.162
(0.071)
0.02**
0.03**
116
PRIO

Panel B: Split by war status in year before attempt
-0.255
-0.103
Success × Intense War
(0.144)
(0.257)
Success × Moderate War
Success × Not At War
Intense War-Parm p
Intense War-Nonparm p
Moderate War-Parm p
Moderate War-Nonparm p
Not At War-Parm p
Not At War –Nonparm p
Obs
Data source

-0.024
(0.068)
0.08*
0.13
N/A
N/A
0.73
0.62
222
Gleditsch

0.020
(0.086)
0.69
1.00
N/A
N/A
0.82
0.71
116
Gleditsch

-0.110
(0.294)
0.334
(0.163)
0.070
(0.057)
0.71
0.69
0.05**
0.13
0.22
0.21
116
PRIO

Notes: See notes to Table 4. Non-parametric p-values are computed using Fisher’s exact tests. In Panel B, at war / not at war is
defined by whether the relevant war concept (i.e., the concept used in the dependent variable) is positive in the year before the attempt.
The main effect for the lagged war variable is also included in the regression in Panel B. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%

37

Table 7: Alternative specifications

Baseline specification
(Serious attempts)
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs

(1)
Absolute change in
POLITY2 dummy
1 year out
All
0.091
(0.047)
0.06*
0.03**
221

All
0.079
(0.051)
0.12
0.02**
221

Autocrats only
0.131
(0.055)
0.02**
0.01***
142

Control group: Bystanders
Or target wounded
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs

0.078
(0.049)
0.11
0.07*
157

0.076
(0.052)
0.15
0.06*
157

0.130
(0.055)
0.02**
0.02**
103

0.151
(0.074)
0.05**
0.13
97

0.255
(0.097)
0.01***
0.01***
54

Control group: Target
Wounded
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs

0.081
(0.050)
0.11
0.11
104

0.057
(0.053)
0.28
0.25
104

0.120
(0.055)
0.03**
0.12
66

0.182
(0.095)
0.06*
0.35
68

0.264
(0.126)
0.04**
0.04**
38

Control group: Any attempt

0.090
(0.047)
0.06*
0.02**
260

0.068
(0.051)
0.18
0.01***
260

0.132
(0.056)
0.02**
0.01***
166

0.116
(0.054)
0.04**
0.37
173

0.172
(0.081)
0.04**
0.10*
94

Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs

0.073
(0.063)
0.25
0.26
100

0.027
(0.066)
0.68
0.41
100

0.095
(0.066)
0.15
0.21
53

0.144
(0.060)
0.02**
0.41
65

0.258
(0.115)
0.03**
0.11
30

First attempt on leader
Serious attempts only
Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs

0.080
(0.060)
0.18
0.12
172

0.048
(0.066)
0.47
0.11
172

0.099
(0.067)
0.14
0.07*
102

0.111
(0.061)
0.07*
0.41
108

0.206
(0.093)
0.03**
0.11
52

Parm p-val
Nonparm p-val
Obs
Solo attempts only

Adding all Table 3 controls
quarter-century FE , and
region FE (Serious attempts)
Parm p-val
Obs

0.081
(0.056)
0.15
189

(2)
(3)
Directional change in POLITY2
dummy 1 year out

0.088
(0.057)
0.13
189

All
0.111
(0.057)
0.06*
0.18
138

Autocrats only
0.191
(0.085)
0.03**
0.05**
74

0.176

0.192

0.237

(0.084)
0.04**
115

(0.063)
0.00***
112

(0.110)
0.04**
57

Notes: See text. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

38

(4)
(5)
Percentage regular leader
transitions 1-20 years out

Table 8: What predicts attempts?
Democracy dummy

(1)
-0.007*
(0.004)

War dummy

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.028***
(0.006)

Log energy use per
Capita
Log population

-0.003***
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)

Age of leader

-0.00022*
(0.00012)

Tenure of leader
Observations
P-value of regression

(6)

11171
0.08*

11671
0.00***

9664
0.00***

10607
0.00***

12019
0.08*

-0.00011
(0.00020)
12133
0.60

(7)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.018***
(0.006)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.00030**
(0.00015)
-0.00010
(0.00024)
9185
0.00***

Notes: Results are marginal effects from a probit specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the
country level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

39

Table 9: Separating Impacts of Successes and Failures on Institutional Change
(1)

Panel A: Average effects
Success
Failure
Success p-val
Failure p-val
Obs
Data source

(2)
(3)
Absolute change in POLITY2 dummy
No controls
Adding
Adding
controls
controls and
propensity
score
stratification

(4)
(5)
(6)
Directional change in POLITY2 dummy
No controls
Adding
Adding
controls
controls and
propensity
score
stratification

(7)
(8)
(9)
Percent regular leader transitions 1-20 years out
No controls
Adding
Adding
controls
controls and
propensity
score
stratification

0.098
(0.042)
0.006
(0.018)
0.02**
0.72
10932
Polity IV

0.099
(0.042)
0.004
(0.017)
0.02**
0.79
10932
Polity IV

0.066
(0.047)
-0.017
(0.019)
0.17
0.39
10932
Polity IV

0.062
(0.044)
-0.019
(0.019)
0.16
0.31
10932
Polity IV

0.064
(0.044)
-0.020
(0.019)
0.15
0.31
10932
Polity IV

0.071
(0.040)
-0.071
(0.041)
0.08*
0.08*
5979
Archigos

0.110
(0.044)
-0.043
(0.025)
0.01***
0.09*
5979
Archigos

0.105
(0.043)
-0.045
(0.025)
0.02**
0.08*
5979
Archigos

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

0.125
(0.057)
-0.013
(0.016)
-0.051
(0.066)
-0.042
(0.042)
0.03**
0.42
0.44
0.32
10932
Polity IV

0.127
(0.056)
-0.008
(0.016)
-0.048
(0.063)
-0.040
(0.041)
0.02**
0.62
0.45
0.33
10932
Polity IV

0.127
(0.056)
-0.009
(0.016)
-0.045
(0.063)
-0.039
(0.041)
0.02**
0.57
0.48
0.35
10932
Polity IV

0.155
(0.059)
-0.074
(0.052)
0.023
(0.034)
-0.025
(0.038)
0.01***
0.16
0.50
0.51
5573
Archigos

0.210
(0.056)
-0.062
(0.041)
0.003
(0.044)
-0.023
(0.033)
0.00***
0.14
0.94
0.48
5573
Archigos

0.208
(0.055)
-0.060
(0.042)
-0.004
(0.043)
-0.028
(0.032)
0.00***
0.15
0.93
0.39
5573
Archigos

0.101
(0.042)
0.005
(0.017)
0.02**
0.77
10932
Polity IV

Panel B: Split by regime type in year before attempt
.
.
Success × Autocracy
.
.
.
.
Failure × Autocracy
.
.
.
.
Success × Democracy
.
.
.
.
Failure × Democracy
.
.
Autoc P-val– Success
.
.
Autoc P-val– Failure
.
.
Democ P-val– Success
.
.
Democ P-val– Failure
.
.
Obs
Data source

Notes: Controls includes lagged values of polity, leader’s tenure, war status, population, and energy; quarter-century fixed effects; and region fixed effects.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

40

Table 10: Separating Impacts of Successes and Failures on Conflict
(1)

Panel A: Average effects
Success
Failure
Success p-val
Failure p-val
Obs
Data source

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Gleditsch-COW Dataset
Gleditsch-COW Dataset
PRIO/Uppsala Dataset
1875-2002
1946-2002
1946-2002
No controls
Adding
Adding
No controls
Adding
Adding
No controls
Adding
Adding
controls
controls and
controls
controls and
controls
controls and
propensity
propensity
propensity
score
score
score
stratification
stratification
stratification
-0.069
(0.060)
0.001
(0.038)
0.25
0.98
11286
Gleditsch

-0.020
(0.049)
0.058
(0.036)
0.69
0.11
11286
Gleditsch

-0.024
(0.049)
0.057
(0.036)
0.62
0.11
11286
Gleditsch

0.035
(0.075)
-0.022
(0.047)
0.64
0.65
7183
Gleditsch

0.027
(0.066)
0.006
(0.043)
0.68
0.88
7183
Gleditsch

0.027
(0.065)
0.007
(0.043)
0.68
0.87
7183
Gleditsch

0.080
(0.062)
-0.056
(0.037)
0.20
0.13
7183
PRIO

0.078
(0.061)
-0.044
(0.038)
0.20
0.25
7183
PRIO

0.077
(0.060)
-0.044
(0.038)
0.20
0.24
7183
PRIO

-0.251
(0.123)
0.000
(0.060)

-0.263
(0.122)
0.000
(0.060)

-0.095
(0.219)
-0.042
(0.081)

-0.096
(0.222)
-0.048
(0.080)

-0.103
(0.214)
-0.048
(0.081)

0.066
(0.051)
0.104
(0.043)
0.05**
0.93

0.062
(0.050)
0.084
(0.042)
0.04**
1.00

0.060
(0.049)
0.081
(0.042)
0.03**
0.99

0.074
(0.066)
0.049
(0.041)
0.67
0.60

0.052
(0.065)
0.026
(0.042)
0.67
0.55

0.052
(0.064)
0.027
(0.042)
0.63
0.55

0.20
0.02**
11286
Gleditsch

0.21
0.05**
11286
Gleditsch

0.23
0.05**
11286
Gleditsch

0.27
0.23
7183
Gleditsch

0.43
0.54
7183
Gleditsch

0.42
0.52
7183
Gleditsch

-0.044
(0.272)
0.059
(0.072)
0.208
(0.137)
-0.091
(0.074)
0.070
(0.055)
0.036
(0.035)
0.87
0.42
0.13
0.22
0.21
0.32
7183
PRIO

-0.059
(0.290)
0.061
(0.073)
0.199
(0.142)
-0.104
(0.068)
0.054
(0.054)
0.015
(0.035)
0.84
0.41
0.16
0.13
0.32
0.68
7183
PRIO

-0.063
(0.287)
0.060
(0.072)
0.199
(0.142)
-0.103
(0.069)
0.055
(0.054)
0.016
(0.035)
0.83
0.41
0.16
0.14
0.31
0.64
7183
PRIO

Panel B: Split by war status in year before attempt
-0.248
Success × Intense war
(0.125)
0.006
Failure × Intense war
(0.063)
Success × Moderate war
Failure × Moderate war
Success × Not at war
Failure × Not at war
Intense war P-val – Success
Intense war P-val– Failure
Moderate war P-val–Success
Moderate war P-val– Failure
No war P-val– Success
No war P-val– Failure
Obs
Data source

Notes: Controls includes lagged values of polity, leader’s tenure, war status, population, and energy; quarter-century fixed effects; and region fixed effects.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

41

0

0

1

Attempts per Year
2
3

.2
.4
.6
Assassinations per Year

4

.8

Figure 1: Trends in the Frequency of Assassinations and Assassination Attempts
Panel A: Annual Attempts and Assassinations Worldwide

1880

1900

1920

1940
Decade

Attempts per Year

1960

1980

Assassinations per Year

.01
0

0

Attempts per Country-Year
.01
.02
.03
.04

.002
.004
.006
.008
Assassinations per Country-Year

.05

Panel B: Annual Attempts and Assassinations per Country

1880

1900

1920

1940
Decade

Attempts per Country-Year

1960

1980

Assassinations per Country-Year

42

