                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       RATIONAL PESSIMISM, RATIONAL EXUBERANCE, AND ASSET PRICING
                                 MODELS

                                            Ravi Bansal
                                         A. Ronald Gallant
                                         George Tauchen

                                       Working Paper 13107
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13107


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ravi Bansal, A. Ronald Gallant, and George Tauchen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rational Pessimism, Rational Exuberance, and Asset Pricing Models
Ravi Bansal, A. Ronald Gallant, and George Tauchen
NBER Working Paper No. 13107
May 2007
JEL No. G0,G00,G1,G10,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

The paper estimates and examines the empirical plausibiltiy of asset pricing models that attempt to
explain features of financial markets such as the size of the equity premium and the volatility of the
stock market. In one model, the long run risks model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), low frequency movements
and time varying uncertainty in aggregate consumption growth are the key channels for understanding
asset prices. In another, as typified by Campbell and Cochrane (1999), habit formation, which generates
time-varying risk-aversion and consequently time-variation in risk-premia, is the key channel. These
models are fitted to data using simulation estimators. Both models are found to fit the data equally
well at conventional significance levels, and they can track quite closely a new measure of realized
annual volatility. Further scrutiny using a rich array of diagnostics suggests that the long run risk model
is preferred.

Ravi Bansal                                          George Tauchen
Fuqua School of Business                             Department of Economics
Duke University                                      Duke University
1 Towerview Drive                                    Durham, NC 27708
Durham, NC 27708                                     george.tauchen@duke.edu
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu

A. Ronald Gallant
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
ron.gallant@duke.edu
1     Introduction
Asset market models provide alternative explanations for a wide range of asset markets
anomalies. Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bansal and Yaron (2004) use calibration
to verify that their models can account for the equity premium, risk free rate, and asset
price volatility puzzles. The empirical plausibility of the key risk channels, which are the
slow moving habits in the Campbell-Cochrane model and the long run risks in the Bansal
and Yaron model, are not tested against data. Hence, it is not clear if aggregate economic
data support the risk channels highlighted in these papers. Our simulation based estima-
tion approach provides data driven estimates of structural parameters and a rich array of
diagnostics that help discriminate between these models.
    The primary contribution of this paper is to estimate, using simulation techniques, the
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bansal and Yaron (2004) models and evaluate if there
is any empirical support for the risk channels developed in these papers. We provide esti-
mates of the structural parameters and highlight the differences between these models. We
also impose in estimation the cointegration restriction between consumption and dividends,
unlike Campbell-Cochrane (1999) and Bansal and Yaron (2004). Imposing this restriction
is economically well motivated because aggregated dividends and consumption cannot per-
manently deviate from each other and financial wealth cannot permanently deviate from
aggregate wealth.
    Below, we set forth the Long Run Risks (LRR) model, which is patterned after Bansal
and Lundblad (2002) and Bansal and Yaron (2004). In the LRR model, growth rates of cash
flows contain a statistically small but economically important slow moving component. As
is well known from the familiar Gordon growth formula, small, near permanent movements
in the forecasted growth rates of cash flows can be expected to generate large movements
in asset valuations relative to current cash flows. The LRR model couples these cash flow
dynamics with preferences of the Epstein-Zin-Weil type. One departure from the Bansal
and Yaron (2004) specification is the inclusion of cointegration restriction between between
aggregate stock market dividends and consumption.
    We also present a model with habit persistence (HAB) that follows Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) rather closely. Their dynamics must be modified slightly to be compatible
with the cointegration relationships in the data. The HAB model presumes quite simple
cash flow dynamics, in contrast to the LRR model, but it assumes an involved preference
structure with a time-varying habit stock that evolves with conditionally heteroskedastic in-

                                             1
novations. Like the LRR model, the HAB model also generates long-term swings in stock
market valuations.
   In addition to these models we also provide evidence on a short-run risks model SRR,
which is similar to the type considered in Mehra and Prescott (1985), Hall (1978), and
Hansen and Singleton (1982). This model is the traditional baseline which emphasizes short
run risks in consumption as the key risk channel in the economy.
   We undertake econometric estimation of both the LRR and HAB models using a
simulation-based procedure similar to that of Smith (1993). Intuitively, the estimation tech-
nique minimizes a statistical measure of distance between a vector autoregression model
fitted to observed data and to simulated data at the annual frequency. The simulations
are generated by operating the models in monthly time, numerically solving for the equi-
librium, and then aggregating appropriately to the annual frequency. The estimation is a
type of GMM estimation, and it therefore delivers a chi squared measure of fit to the data.
We also undertake extensive additional diagnostic assessments using reprojection (Gallant
and Tauchen, 1998, 2006). As part of this effort, we develop a new measure of realized
annual volatility, which is patterned after the measure developed by Andersen, Bollerslev,
and Diebold (2002), and we assess the models’ capabilities to track this new variable.
   The empirical work, which simultaneously imposes restrictions on consumption and asset
market data, shows that the SRR model is sharply rejected in the data. Further, very large
persistence is required in the habit process of the HAB model to account for the volatility
of the dividend yield and the equity premium. Our estimation finds support for the key
channels highlighted in the LRR model—low frequency movements in consumption growth
and in movements in consumption volatility. The preference parameters for both models are
estimated at plausible values. Model specification tests do not reject the HAB and LRR
models.
   While the omnibus chi-square statistic provides support for both models our diagnostics
permit discrimination across them. One channel for discrimination is the role that high
frequency movements in consumption play in accounting for the risk-return relation across
the two models. The consumption beta of the market return in the HAB model is 4.19, for
the LRR model it is 0.52. In the observed data the consumption beta is 0.79. Unlike the
HAB model, high frequency consumption movements are not significantly compensated in
the LRR model. Kiku (2006) uses this intuition and the LRR model to account for the value
premium puzzle and the general failure of the standard consumption beta (i.e., C-CAPM)


                                             2
model. The role for high frequency consumption movements in accounting for risk in the
HAB model, and the role of low frequency movements in consumption to account for the
risk-return relation in the LRR provides a clear distinction between the two models. The
data, as we document, does not support a significant role for the high frequency consumption
movements in accounting for risk premia. In this sense, we find greater support for the LRR
model.
    To further underscore the different channels across the HAB and LRR models we also
consider the valuation of hypothetical contingent claims on the market index (price of div-
idend claim) and aggregate wealth claims (price of aggregate consumption claim). The
contingent claim prices on the market index are very similar across both models, suggesting
that the underlying market return distribution is very similar across these models. How-
ever, there are big differences in the contingent claim prices for aggregate wealth index. The
aggregate wealth contingent claim prices are very large in the HAB model relative to the
LRR model. Further, the contingent claim prices for the market index and the aggregate
wealth index are very similar to each other in the the HAB model, implying that return
distribution for both claims is very similar in the HAB model. This suggests that consump-
tion insurance, from the perspective of HAB model, is very expensive relative to the LRR
model.
    Section 2 below sets out the LRR model and Section 3 sets forth HAB model. Section 4
develops the observation equations along with the new measure of realized annual volatility.
Section 5 describes the data and the cointegration analysis. Section 6 contains the estima-
tion results and is followed by Section 7 which evaluates the fitted models’ performance.
Section 8 contains concluding remarks. Details of the simulation based methods described
in a technical appendix.


2     Long Run Risks (LRR)
We develop an asset pricing model that is extension of Bansal and Yaron (2004). Some key
features of the model are that consumption and dividends are separate stochastic processes
but are tied together by a long run cointegrating relationship. Other features include pref-
erences of the Epstein-Zin (1989) and Weil (1989) type along with time varying stochastic
volatility.




                                              3
2.1      Dynamics of Driving Variables
Let dt = log(Dt ), and ct = log(Ct ) denote log real per capita values of the stock dividend
and the consumption endowment. The log endowment ct is assumed to be generated as

                                     ct = ct−1 + µc + xt−1 + ct                                          (1)

where µc is the average growth rate of ct , xt−1 is the stochastic part of the conditional
mean of consumption growth, i.e. the long-run risk process, and ct is the error. Let ∆ct =
ct − ct−1 . We impose (and later test) the restriction that log consumption and log dividends
are cointegrated,
                                           dt − ct = µdc + st ,

where µdc is a constant and st is an I(0) process. Note that the cointegration coefficient is
set at one and the deviation dt − ct is strictly stationary; that is dividends and consump-
tion share the same deterministic and stochastic trends. Finally we introduce a stochastic
volatility factor νt and below adopt a standard exponential stochastic volatility process for
the dynamics of the variables of interest. For compactness, collect the four variables into the
vector                                                            
                                                   ∆ct 
                                                       
                                                   xt 
                                            qt =      
                                                                   ,                                     (2)
                                                   s              
                                                     t            
                                                                  
                                                          νt
which we assume is a VAR(1) process with stochastic volatility that takes the form

                                    qt = a + Aqt−1 + exp(Λt )Ψzt                                          (3)

where zt is a 4 × 1 standard normal random variable, the parameters of the VAR are
                                                                                   
                               µc                 0  1                   0    0 
                                                                                
                               0                  0 ρx                   0    0 
                            a=
                              
                               −µ
                                            , A = 
                                                  
                                                    0 λ
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   
                                                                                                          (4)
                                  dc
                                            
                                                       sx                 ρs   0 
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                     µσ                        0       0    0    ρν
with volatility structure
                                                                                               
                      bcc νt   0          0     0                      Ψcc Ψcx Ψcx 0 
                                                                                     
                      0      bxx νt       0     0                      0   Ψxx 0 0 
               Λt =                              
                                                             Ψ=                      
                                                                                                     .   (5)
                     
                           0   0         bss νt 0 
                                                   
                                                                        
                                                                           0     0       Ψss 0 
                                                                                                
                                                                                               
                            0   0          0     0                          0     0       0   1

                                                      4
From the matrix A it is seen that the long run risk factor xt is Granger causally prior and
the volatility factor νt evolves autonomously. The zero restrictions within A, along with the
diagonality of Λt , and the zero restrictions within Ψ shut down many paths of cross-variable
feedback in the interests of parsimony. On these assumptions, the minimal state vector is
                                                         
                                                     xt
                                                         
                                         ut = 
                                               st  ,
                                                   
                                                                                          (6)
                                                  
                                                νt
knowledge of which suffices to simulate the system one step forward.
   Note that cointegration between ct and dt implies that ∆dt+1 = ∆ct+1 + ∆st+1 . Hence,
given equation (3) and the dynamics of st+1 , the implied dividend growth rate specification
is identical to Bansal and Yaron (2004) save for the fact that st is needed in addition to xt
to forecast dividend growth rates. Cointegration between dt and ct ensures that the long run
variances of dividend and consumption growth rates are equal to each other and the levels
of these processes cannot deviate from each other permanently. This is turn ensures that
the present value of the consumption stream (aggregate wealth) and the present value of the
dividend stream (financial wealth) are cointegrated and cannot permanently deviate from
each other.
   In the LRR model innovations in the xt correspond to low frequency or long run risks,
and the ct correspond to high frequency risks in consumption. Both these risks carry a
distinct and different risk compensation, with the risk compensation associated with shocks
to xt being critical for accounting for asset prices. The common volatility process across
consumption and dividends, νt , as in Bansal and Yaron, is for parsimony. This variation in
volatility is important for capturing time variation in risk premia.

2.2    Asset Pricing
Let Pct denote the price of an asset that pays the consumption endowment and let
                                                     Pct
                                           vct =                                          (7)
                                                     Ct
denote the corresponding price dividend ratio. The Epstein-Zin-Weil utility function is
                                                                           θ
                                               1−γ                          1−γ
                                                               1−γ θ1
                             Ut = (1 − δ)Ct     θ
                                                     +   δ(Et Ut+1 )                      (8)

where γ is the coefficient of risk aversion,
                                                1−γ
                                         θ=            ,                                  (9)
                                               1 − 1/ψ

                                                 5
and ψ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. As noted in Campbell (2002), Bansal
and Yaron (2004), and elsewhere, the first order conditions derived in Epstein and Zin (1989,
1991) imply that the price dividend ratio, vct , is the solution to the nonlinear expectational
equation
                    n                                                                o
            vct = Et δ θ exp[−(θ/ψ)∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ] (1 + vc,t+1 ) exp(∆ct+1 ) .      (10)

where
                                          1 + vc,t+1
                                                                            
                               rc,t+1 = log          exp(∆ct+1 )                         (11)
                                             vct
is the geometric return on the asset. Evidently, the one-period marginal rate of substitution
is
                          Mt,t+1 = δ θ exp[−(θ/ψ)∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ].                   (12)

The price dividend ratio vdt = Pdt /Dt on the asset that pays Dt is the solution to
                   n                                                                 o
           vdt = Et δ θ exp [−(θ/ψ)∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ] (1 + vd,1+1 ) exp(∆dt+1 )] .

The one-step-ahead risk-free rate rf t is the solution to
                                  n                                              o
                        e−rf t = Et δ θ exp [−(θ/ψ)∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 ] .

The outcome variables of interest are the price-dividend ratios, the risk free rate, and returns.
These are obtained by evaluating the pricing functions

                                           vct = vc (ut )
                                           vdt = vd (ut )                                   (13)
                                           rf t = rf (ut ),

which are determined as functions of the state vector (6) using the solution method described
in the Appendix, and then generating returns via
                                                  h                   i
                                                    (1+vct ) exp(∆ct )
                                   rct = log             vc,t−1
                                                  h
                                                    (1+vdt ) exp(∆dt )
                                                                       i                    (14)
                                   rdt =      log        vd,t−1
                                                                         .

     Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (1993) consider asset price implications of consumption and
or dividends models that incorporate regime shifts in the context of time separable utility.
Similarly, Evans (1998) uses regime shift in dividends to interpret the behavior of dividend
yields across time. Models of regime shifts in growth rates may provide an alternative way
to capture predictable variation in fundamentals, such as consumption growth.

                                                      6
3      Habit Persistence (HAB)
We now set forth a model of habit persistence that follows the specification of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) with the exception that we impose cointegration on their driving variables.
     The agent is assumed to maximize the utility function
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                                   i (Ct+i   − Xt+i )1−γ − 1
                                    Et         δ
                                         i=0                  1−γ

where Ct denotes real consumption, Xt denotes the habit stock, δ is a discount rate, and γ
is a risk aversion parameter, although relative risk aversion itself depends on Xt as well and
will be much higher than γ for plausible values of Xt . Define the surplus ratio
                                                             Ct − Xt
                                                   Ht =
                                                                Ct
and assume that
                                                    ht = log(Ht )

evolves as
                            ht+1 = (1 − ρh )h + ρh ht + λ(ht )c,t+1 ,

where ρh and h are parameters, c,t+1 is the consumption innovation defined in (1) above,
and the sensitivity function λ(ht ) is
                                        q
                                     1
                               
                                     H
                                             1 − 2(ht − h) − 1                  ht ≤ h max
                       λ(ht ) = 
                                                        0                       ht > h max

where                                                        s
                                                                   γ
                                               H = σc
                                                                 1 − ρh
and σc is the standard deviation of ct . The value h max is the value at which λ(ht ) first
touches zero; by inspection,
                                             1h          i
                                hmax = h + 1 − (H)2 ,
                                             2
and, in the continuous time limit, h max is an upper bound on ht . These dynamics for ht
imply, among other things, that the risk free rate is constant to a first approximation.
     Under the assumption of external habit, the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution
is                                                                        −γ
                                                      Ht+1 Ct+1
                                                        
                                     Mt+1          =δ                           ,
                                                       Ht Ct


                                                             7
or, equivalently,
                                 Mt+1 = δ exp [−γ(∆ht+1 + ∆ct+1 )]                     (15)

where ∆ht+1 = ht+1 − ht and ∆ct+1 is as defined in Section 2 above. Thus, in notation
consistent with the preceding sections, the expectational equation for the price dividend
ratio vct = Pct /Ct for the asset that pays the consumption endowment Ct is

                    vct = Et {δ exp[−γ(∆ht+1 + ∆ct+1 )](1 + vc,t+1 ) exp(∆ct+1 )} ,    (16)

and the expectational equation for the price dividend ratio vdt = Pdt /Dt for the asset that
pays the dividend Dt is

                    vdt = Et {δ exp[−γ(∆ht+1 + ∆ct+1 )](1 + vd,t+1 ) exp(∆dt+1 )}      (17)

The risk free rate rf t is the solution to

                           exp(−rf t ) = Et {δ exp[−γ(∆ht+1 + ∆ct+1 )]} .              (18)

The above three equations correspond directly to their counterparts above for Epstein-Zin-
Weil preferences. The geometric return is
                                                    1 + vc,t+1
                                                                        
                                 rc,t+1 = log                  exp(∆ct+1 )             (19)
                                                       vct
on the consumption asset and
                                                    1 + vd,t+1
                                                                            
                                rd,t+1 = log                   exp(∆dt+1 )             (20)
                                                       vdt
on the equity asset.
   Campbell and Cochrane (1999) assume that log consumption ct and the log dividend dt
processes are each I(1) with the same growth rates and correlated innovations. We can easily
modify the dynamics (3) of Section 2 to retain the essential features of their model while
incorporating cointegration between consumption and dividends. We retain the equation

                                          dt = µdc + ct + st .

We set xt = 0 for all t; so that

                                ∆ct = µc + ct
                                                                                       (21)
                                ∆dt = µc + (ρs − 1)st−1 + ct + st


                                                        8
and turn off stochastic volatility, i.e., νt = 0 for all t, so that ct and st immediately above
are iid Gaussian. This setup, with correlation between ct and st , is a direct extension
of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). If ρs = 1 the setup reduces to that of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) specification of iid dividend growth; in this case dividends and consumption
are not cointegrated and have separate stochastic trends. However, the imposition of unit
cointegration implies that dividend growth rates are not iid, as they are predictable via the
error-correction variable st .
    The outcome variables of interest are the same as for the LRR model above. Using the
same solution technique we solve for the pricing functions

                                                vct = vc (ut )
                                               vdt = vd (ut )                               (22)
                                               rf t = rf (ut )

and then generate returns. The minimal state vector for HAB is st and ht . Here we augment
it to                                                          
                                                           st
                                                               
                                              ut = 
                                                          ht   .
                                                                
                                                                                            (23)
                                                               
                                                       λ(ht )
for numerical reasons.


4       Time Aggregation and the Observation Equations
The LRR and HAB models defined in Sections 2 and 3 operate in monthly time while we
observe annual consumption data and annual summary measures from the financial markets.
To simulated the model, we run the VAR with stochastic volatility (3) at the monthly
frequency, burn off the transients, and form the monthly levels of consumption Ct and
dividends Dt . The annual aggregate consumption and dividends, Cta and Dta , are twelve
month moving sums sampled annually, which are then converted to logs:

                                     cat = log(Cta ) t = 12, 24, 36, . . .

                                     dat = log(Dta ) t = 12, 24, 36, . . .

The annual price dividend ratio is computed as
                                                           !
                                                    Dt
                          padt   −   dat   = log vdt a          t = 12, 24, 36, . . .
                                                    Dt

                                                       9
We also compute the annual geometric returns
                                                     11
                                           a
                                                     X
                                          rdt    =         rd,t−k
                                                     k=0
,
                                                     11
                                          rfat
                                                     X
                                                 =         rf,t−k
                                                     k=0
.
    As an additional diagnostic on the asset pricing models, which to our knowledge is new,
we employ ideas from realized variance literature (Andersen, Bollerslev, and Diebold, 2006).
Specifically we compute log of the within-year realized variance
                                                      11
                                                                       !
                                    qta                       2
                                                      X
                                          = log              rd,t−k        ,             (24)
                                                     k=0

as a measure of within year variation (Andersen, Bollerslev, and Diebold, 2002). A closely
related volatility measure is                v
                                             u 11
                                         a
                                             uX
                                                  2
                                      stdt = t rd,t−k ,                                  (25)
                                                      k=0
which we shall often use when reporting results.
    In results reported in Section 6, we estimate models using an observation equation com-
prised of the four variables                                          
                                                 −  dat         cat   
                                           a
                                           c − ca
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                             t      t−12
                                     yt = 
                                          
                                           pa − da
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                                         (26)
                                              dt     t                
                                                                      
                                                            a
                                                           rdt
annually. If the observations were monthly, inclusion of rdt in the observation equation (26)
would induce a nonlinear intertemporal redundancy; however, at an annual frequency, the
                                                            a
aggregation protocol just described implies that including rdt adds additional information.
We evaluate the LRR and HAB models by studying their implications for the the dynamics
of these four variables along with their implications for the dynamics of realized volatility,
which is nowhere used in estimation.


5     Data
5.1    Raw Data
Our data set consists of annual observations 1929–2001. All variables, except population
and consumption, are computed using monthly data from CRSP and then converted to the

                                                     10
annual frequency. Annual real ($1996) per capita consumption, nondurables and services,
along with the mid-year population data are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) web site.
    To construct the annual per capita stock market valuation series, we start with the
month-end combined nominal capitalizations of the NYSE and the AMEX, convert to $1996
using the monthly CPI, take the year-end value, and divide by the BEA population figure.
To compute the annual dividend series, we use the difference between the nominal value
weighted return and the capital return (i.e. the return excluding dividend) to compute an
implied monthly nominal dividend yield on the NYSE+AMEX. Applying this dividend yield
to the preceding month’s market capitalization gives an implied monthly nominal dividend
series. This series is converted to a real ($1996) monthly dividend series using the monthly
CPI, aggregated over the year, and then divided by the BEA population figure. To compute
the annual real return series, we use the monthly nominal value weighted return on the
NYSE+AMEX and the CPI to compute a monthly real geometric return, which is then
cumulated over the year to form a real annual geometric return. The annual quadratic
variation is the sum of the monthly squared real geometric returns.
    For consistency with the presentation of the model, we let t denote the time index in
months, so that Pdta , t = 12, 24, . . . denotes the end-of-year per capita stock market value
observations; Dta , t = 12, 24, . . . denotes the annual aggregate per capita dividend obser-
vations; Cta , t = 12, 24, . . . denotes the annual per capita observations; rdt
                                                                              a
                                                                                 , t = 12, 24, . . .
denotes the annual real geometric return observations; qta , t = 12, 24, . . . denotes the log
annual realized variation observations. While in principle it would be possible to use mixed
monthly and annual data, this would entail a more complicated likelihood and additional
assumptions. Our preference here is to use a more standard estimation approach.
    Figure 1 shows time series plots of the annual observations on the logged series padt =
log(Pdta ), dat = log(Dta ), cat = log(Cta ), rta , and qta = log(Qat ). The three series padt , dat , and cat ,
are upward trending series, while rta and qta appear stationary.

5.2     Cointegrating Relationships
One would expect there to be cointegrating relationships among the three trending variables.
A simple regression of (padt dat cat ) on (pad,t−12 dat−12 cat−12 ), annual data 1930–2001, yields an
autoregressive matrix with one eigenvalue nearly exactly equal to unity and two others
about 0.90 in magnitude. Two eigenvalues separated from unity suggests that there are


                                                      11
two cointegrating relationships among the three variables. One relationship, which has been
explored extensively in the literature and which we imposed a priori in the development of
                                                                    a
the LRR and HAB models above, is that the log price dividend ratio vdt = padt − dat is
stationary.
    It is natural to presume that there is also a cointegrating relationship between the log
dividend and the log consumption variable. Thus we conjecture the relationship

                                            dat − λdc cat = I(0)

where λdc is a parameter that should be unity. We first constrain λdc = 1 and do a
heteroskedasticity-robust augmented Dickey-Fuller test for a unit root in dat − cat . The BIC
criterion suggests that one lag in the ADF equation is better than none or two, and for that
model the unit-root t-statistic is 3.56 (p-value = 0.009), which is rather strong evidence for
a cointegrating relationship between the log dividend and log consumption variables with a
coefficient of unity.
    Another strategy is to estimate λdc by running a reduced rank regression model (Ander-
son, 2001). We did this and the estimate was λdc = 0.9497, which is consistent with the unit
root test above.
    In what follows we shall take the series padt − dat , dat − cat , and cat − cat−12 as the three
jointly I(0) variables embodied in the three trending series. Of course the above analysis
only identifies the two dimensional subspace of <3 that determines the two cointegrating
relationships among (padt dat cat ). Put another way, given any nonsingular 2 × 2 matrix times
the vector                                                             
                                                               padt
                                        1 −1         0                 
                                                       dat
                                                     
                                                                       
                                                                        
                                        0      1   −1                  
                                                                 cat
could, on statistical grounds, also be taken as the I(0) linear combinations of the three
trending series. However, the normalization above leads to very simple and easy to interpret
variables: the log price dividend ratio, the log dividend consumption ratio, and consumption
growth, all jointly I(0).


6     Model Parameter Estimates
In order to estimate the models described in Section 2 and 3 one must handle the fact that
the ex ante real risk free rate of interest is not directly observable. Campbell (2002) notes

                                                    12
that any reasonable asset pricing model must incorporate the indirect evidence that the
mean risk-free rate rf t is very low with low volatility. Campbell’s evidence suggests that the
mean risk-free rate for the U.S. is 0.896 percent per annum. We want to impose Campbell’s
empirical evidence on the parameter estimates; to do so, we impose a Campbell’s restriction
on E(rf t ) within the monthly simulations. In practical terms, we constrain E(rf t ) to lie within
a small band of approximately 50 annual basis points around 0.896 percent per annum. The
reason for treating the constraint on the risk-free rate as a small inequality constraint is
numerical: doing so gives the optimization software a small amount of slack and it makes
feasible the task of finding start values for the numerical optimization. Treating it as an
exact constraint is numerically infeasible. It bears noting that Campbell’s auxiliary evidence
sharply restricts the parameter space and thereby challenges any model so constrained.
Indeed, at the start of a run, we found it difficult and tedious to find start values for the
parameters that generate simulated data consistent with Campbell’s evidence.
   In results reported below, we use as the auxiliary model a four-variable VAR(1) at the
annual frequency:
                                      yt = b0 + Byt−12 + et                                   (27)

where                                                     
                                                a    a
                                             dt − ct 
                                             a
                                             c − ca
                                                        
                                                        
                                             t    t−12 
                                      yt =          
                                            pa − da 
                                                                                              (28)
                                             dt   t 
                                                          
                                                     rta
The definition of yt above corresponds exactly with that of the observation equation (26) for
the theoretical model. The period of the dependent variable in (27) is 1931–2001. We do
not include the log realized variance qta , but we do check how well the asset pricing model
can match the dynamics of that variable.
   In some initial work, we used an unrestricted 4 × 4 VAR(1). However, many of the
estimates of the off-diagonal elements of B are statistically insignificant and the diagonal
elements clearly dominate; rather than adopt some arbitrary scheme for dropping variables,
we use a VAR that is diagonal in both location and scale for estimation. The intercept
and AR(1) coefficients are shown in the columns labeled “Observed” in Table 4, which is
discussed more fully below. The simulation estimator described in the Appendix remains
consistent and asymptotically normal with this choice of the auxiliary model. The estimation
begins with a simplified version where the long run risk factor of LRR is turned off and all


                                                13
risks are presumed short run; this version corresponds closely to the model of Hall (1978).
In this version, labeled the Short-Run Risk (SRR) model, the xt process is set to zero,
so consumption growth is a random walk with drift, and the driving processes in (3) are
homoskedastic, so that the risk premia are constant. The restrictions are implemented by
setting ρx = 0, by setting the elements of Ψ corresponding to xt to zero, and by setting to zero
the parameters governing the stochastic volatility in (5). The assumption that consumption
growth is iid is quite common, e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999), as is the assumption
of homoskedastic driving variables. We use the term Short Run Risk (SRR) because the
only exposure of the dividend to consumption risk arises through innovation correlations.
We use linear functional forms for the solution functions of the SRR model in the numerical
solution of the model as described in the Appendix; we could find little indication of a need
for quadratic terms. The use of a linear form is typical in the literature. A major difference
is that we maintain cointegration between the consumption and dividend process.
   The second model, labeled the Long Run Risk (LRR) model, is more general with
underlying dynamics given by (3) above. This model incorporates a stochastic mean, µc +
xt , for consumption growth and it includes stochastic volatility as embodied in (5). A
normalization for identification is that bc = bs = bx = 0. Initial estimation was done with
both linear and quadratic terms in the solution functions. Inspection of the results indicated
that the only important quadratic term was the interaction term of xt with the log-volatility
variable, νt , and that other quadratic terms could be set to zero without altering the results.
   The initial work suggested that freely estimating the LRR model using an unconstrained
4 × 4 VAR(1) as the auxiliary model gives results almost exactly the same as those reported
below, except that consumption volatility tends to be underestimated somewhat and there-
fore returns volatility is underestimated. We elected to fix the scale parameters of the
consumption process in (4) and (5) to values that, after some experimentation, would give
rise to consumption volatility matching that of the observed data. These values are

                                        bcc = 0.14320
                                       bxx = 0.11000
                                                                                           (29)
                                       Ψcc = 0.00340
                                       Ψxx = 0.00012

and they remain fixed throughout the estimation, so they are calibrated parameters; Ψss is a
free parameter while the the off-diagonal elements of Ψ in (5) are set to zero. Also, estimates
of the elasticity of substitution parameter, ψ, typically land in the region 1.50–2.50, but the

                                              14
objective function is very flat in ψ, so we constrain ψ = 2.00. The remaining parameters,
including the dynamic parameters, ρx and ρσ , and the parameter, λsx , are freely estimated.
Note that ρσ affects the dynamics of the price to dividend ratio and stock returns which
identifies ρσ as can be see for the expressions for the price to dividend and stock returns
given in Bansal and Yaron (2004).
   Table 1 displays parameter estimates for the SRR and LRR models along with the chi-
squared measure of fit. The chi-squared statistics suggest that the SRR model is rejected,
as might be expected, though the LRR model appears to give an adequate fit given the
well known tendency of this type of chi-squared test to over reject. Both point estimates
of ρs are close to unity, indicating that shocks to the log dividend consumption ratio are
highly persistent in both models. The estimate of ρx is close to unity in the LRR model,
which is evidence for a very persistent component xt to consumption growth, though the
small conditional standard deviation suggests that this component is small. Likewise, the
estimate of ρσ is very close to unity, a finding consistent with all other empirical evidence on
volatility persistence. Interestingly, the estimate of ρσ close to unity is obtained only using
mean dynamics without regard to the log realized variance process, qta , as that process was
not included in the VAR on which LRR was estimated.
   Perhaps the sharpest difference between SRR and LRR is the estimates of the risk
aversion parameter γ, which is huge in the SRR model but much more reasonable in the
LRR model. The difference can be traced directly to very different dynamics of the driving
variables across the models. In the SRR model, consumption shocks are completely tran-
sient, while in the LRR model the transient consumption shocks are superimposed with the
very persistent process xt . Thus, in the latter model, the asset that pays the consumption
endowment Ct is much riskier and thereby commands a higher risk premium, Et (rc,t+1 − rf t ),
other things equal. In addition, the near permanent shocks to xt affect the mean growth rate
of the dividend in (4) the amount λsx , estimated to be about 2.5. Thus, the asset paying
the dividend stream Dt is likewise much riskier in the LRR model and commands a higher
risk premium, Et (rd,t+1 − rf t ). Taken together, these characteristics of the dynamics of the
driving processes imply that the LRR model can generate higher equity risk premia without
appeal to an (implausible) high coefficient of risk aversion γ.
   Another model we considered was one with long run dynamics but with the utility func-
tion constrained to be the constant relative risk aversion (CRR) instead of the more general
Epstein-Zin-Weil form considered in the LRR model. This estimation is achieved by setting


                                              15
θ = 1 in (8) and estimating risk aversion, γ, which corresponds to 1/ψ, along with the other
free parameters. The empirical failures of CRR utility have been extensively documented in
the literature, so we not report the results in detail. The model is sharply rejected (p-value =
4.98e-13). Interesting, the fitted model estimates a modest value for the risk aversion param-
eter, γ̂ = 7.285 (2.223), but it also estimates a very small value for µc , and thereby predicts
an absurdly low value for mean annual average consumption growth. The low estimate of µc
is the only way this model can satisfy the real interest constraint; of course it cannot then
generate a sufficient equity premium, as has been long understood. Table 2 shows parameter
estimates and the chi-squared statistic for the model of habit persistence (HAB) described
in Section 3 above. Initial work suggested that Ψcs is difficult to estimate as a free param-
eter, so we constrain Ψcs = 0. Keep in mind that the consumption and dividend growth
innovations are still correlated in (21); the parameter estimates imply correlations very close
to 0.20, which is the value imposed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). As seen in the table,
the HAB model does well on the χ2 criterion and the point estimates appear reasonable. As
expected, the estimates of ρh and ρs are close to unity as is δ. The risk aversion parameter γ
is estimated to be close to unity and is reasonably precisely estimated. A conventional Wald
confidence interval would include a range of values above unity but would exclude the value
2.00 imposed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999).


7     Contrasts between Models
7.1    Unconditional Moments
Table 3 shows unconditional means and standard deviations computed from the data and
the predicted values under the models SRR, LRR, and HAB. In this, and in subsequent
tables, the predicted values should be regarded as population values implied by the model at
the estimated parameter values corrupted by very small Monte Carlo noise. All three models
agree rather closely with the data on the means and standard deviations of the log dividend
consumption ratio and also for consumption growth, except that the HAB model under
predicts consumption growth volatility somewhat. Also, the three models agree quite closely
with the data on the mean of the price dividend ratio, though the SRR model seriously
underestimates its volatility, while the LRR and HAB models are much closer, though still
below that of the data.
    All three models predict an annual return on the stock market, i.e., the dividend asset, at


                                              16
just over 6 percent per year, which is consistent with the data. Likewise, since the mean of
the risk-free is tightly constrained, the three models also predict about the same equity pre-
mium. The mechanisms, however, are quite different. The unrealistically high degree of risk
aversion of the SRR model generates an expected return on the consumption asset, E(rct ),
of about 5.60 percent per year, which, via the correlation between consumption innovations
and dividend innovations, is stepped up to a predicted value of 6.15 percent per year for
the dividend asset. On the other hand, for the LRR model, the risk aversion parameter is
much smaller, but the inherent higher riskiness of the consumption asset implies an expected
return E(rct ) on the consumption asset of about 2.33 percent per year. Cointegration, inno-
vation correlation, and the effects of xt innovations implied by a positive estimate of λsx (see
(3)) increase the expected return on the equity E(rdt ) to the predicted value of 6.29 percent
per year. Finally, as explained at length in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the dynamics
of the surplus consumption ratio make stocks rather unappealing to investors who therefore
require a relatively large premium over cash. As seen from the table, the unconditional first
two moments of the dividend asset and the consumption asset are about the same under
the HAB model, and for the dividend asset, are in close agreement with the data, which is
largely consistent with Campbell and Cochrane (1999, Table 2, p. 225).
   One quite remarkable finding in Table 3 is how well both the LRR and HAB models
do in terms of matching the unconditional moments of the volatility measure defined by the
square root of the quadratic variance variable (25). Both models are nearly right on the
observed values despite the fact that this variable is not used in the estimation.

7.2    Conditional First and Second Moments
Table 4 shows observed and predicted univariate AR(1) models. It includes an AR(1) model
for the log quadratic variance variable, qta defined in (24), which was not used in estimation
but is still available for model assessment of return volatility dynamics. The shortcomings of
the SRR model are readily apparent. This model under predicts the persistence in annual
consumption growth, cat − cat−12 , and it misses very badly on volatility dynamics.
   The LRR model, on the other hand, matches quite well nearly all of the univariate
features of the data. Interestingly, this model captures the serial correlation properties of
return volatility quite while only slightly underestimating the level of volatility. Overall, the
HAB does just about as well, though there are two exceptions worth noting: First, the HAB
model, just like the SRR model, predicts a value of 0.25 for the first order autocorrelation


                                               17
in consumption growth, while the observed value is about 0.45. This under prediction can
be traced directly to the presumption that consumption growth process lacks the long-term
component xt of the LRR model. Second, the persistence parameter of the realized volatility,
qta is too large for the HAB model relative to the data whereas it is comparable to the data
in the LRR model,

7.3       Data Tracking
Figures 3–5 show time series plots of the observed data along with the predicted values from
an unrestricted VAR estimate and the restricted VAR implied by the SRR, LRR, HAB
models. The unrestricted VAR is a four-variable VAR estimated on yt in (28) augmented
by the log quadratic variance variable qta , but set up to be block diagonal in (yt qta ). The
restricted VAR is the same thing except it is estimated on a long simulation (based on 50,000
months) from the model evaluated at the fitted parameters and is therefore the reprojected
VAR; the one-step ahead predictions are the reprojected data series. To ease interpretation,
the values for qta are converted from logs to levels and annualized.
   The figures are quite conclusive on the abilities of the models to track the data. The
reprojected series from the SRR model are a disaster, as see in Figure 3. The reprojected
series from the LRR and HAB model, however, are seen in Figures 4 and 5 to track
very closely the predictable components of the log dividend consumption ratio, consumption
growth, the log price dividend ratio, and the equity return. Indeed, the LRR and HAB
predict well ahead of time the drop in equity returns that occurs between 1999 and 2001.
Also, the LRR and HAB models track rather well the conditional volatility of the return
as is evident from the bottom panels of these figures.
   It seems quite striking that two models with such quite different internal structures as
the LRR and HAB can come to such a close agreement on the data, at least on a one-step-
ahead basis; we thus investigate further the multi-step characteristics of these two models
using selected pairwise projections of financial and macro variables analogously to Wachter
(2002).

7.4       Predictability Regressions
Table 5 shows projections of the end-of-year log price dividend ratio on contemporaneous
and five (annual) lags of the consumption growth variable. The table suggests a rather
weak link between the log price dividend ratio and the history of consumption in both the

                                              18
observed data and under the LRR model: the R2 ’s are nearly negligible. On the other, the
HAB model suggests a much tighter link than is consistent with the data. The link between
consumption (its lags) and the price-dividend ratio helps discriminate across the two models.
   Table 6 shows linear projections of cumulative n-year-ahead geometric stock returns on
the log price dividend ratio, for n = 1, 2, ..., 5 years out. The R2 ’s increase with the horizon
for all three sets of projections. For those done on the observed data the increase is rather
mild, while for those done for the LRR model there is steeper increase with horizon, while
for the HAB model, there is an even steeper increase with horizon. Table 5, and to some
extent 6, appear to contain evidence supportive of the LRR model over the HAB model.
Recent papers in the literature also entertain other returns forecasting variables. Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001) consider an empirical proxy for the consumption wealth ratio and show
that it has some ability to forecast returns. We evaluate this in the context of our models.
For the LRR and HAB models, regressions of cumulative stock returns on the log wealth
consumption ratio, which is available in a theoretically consistent form directly within each
model, reveal no appreciable differences in the R2 ’s across LRR and HAB models and are
similar in pattern and magnitude to those reported for the price dividend ratio in Table 6.
This suggests that regressions of cumulative stock returns on the log wealth consumption
ratio do not distinguish between the two models.
   Predictability of consumption and dividend growth rates is also an issue of considerable
interest. Papers by Ang and Beakert(2001), Bansal, Khatcharian, and Yaron (2005), and
Lettau and Ludvigson (2005) show that dividend growth rates are predictable, particularly at
long horizons. We consider cumulative n-year-ahead geometric growth rates of consumption
and dividends on the log consumption wealth ratio and the price dividend ratio and that there
are no substantive differences across models. For the consumption regressions, the R2 are
low (about one percent at the five year horizon) in the case of the LRR model, as discussed
in Bansal and Yaron (2004), because the right-hand side variable is affected by several other
state variables that diminish its ability to forecast future growth rates. In the HAB model
the lack of predictability is due to iid consumption growth. For the dividend regressions,
one must keep in mind that we have imposed cointegration on all models, including the
HAB model, see (21), unlike Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Consequently, we find that
dividend growth rates are forecastable, even in the HAB model. Specifically, the error
correction variable st in (21) is a state variable that drives price dividend ratios, and hence
this valuation ratio can forecast dividend growth rates to some extent; e.g. at the five year


                                               19
horizon the R2 is about 20 percent for both models. Note that the error correction state
variable st captures similar intuition to the the business cycle variable considered in Lettau
and Ludvigson (2005) for the predictability regressions.
   One potential source of discrimination across models is the variance decomposition of
the price dividend ratio into portions attributable to variations in expected dividends and
expected returns (see Cochrane (1992), for example). We find that even on this score there
is no great discrimination across models either. In our simulation, we find that 65 percent
of the price-dividend variability is due to expected returns and about 35 percent due to
dividend growth rates for the HAB model. The numbers for the LRR model are about
60 percent and 40 percent for expected returns and dividends, respectively — quite similar
to those reported in Bansal and Yaron (2004). For the HAB model, as discussed above,
cointegration implies that dividend growth rates are predictable in contrast to the HAB
model considered in Campbell and Cochrane (1999). In the data, the point estimate for the
expected return contribution to the long price-dividend variation is is around 100 percent;
however, these estimates in the data have fairly large standard errors (of the order of 40
percent) and the variance decompositions avove can be regarded as consistent with the data.

7.5       Consumption-Return Relationships
Table 7 summarizes consumption beta regressions, i.e., regressions of the stock market return
on consumption growth estimated on the observed data and simulated data from the models.
The contrasts between the LRR and HAB models are quite sharp in this respect. In the
data the stock market’s consumption beta is 0.79 and the projection adjusted R2 is zero.
The HAB predicts a much higher beta of 4.19 and an adjusted R2 of 19 percent. In contrast
the LRR predicts values quite comparable to those observed in the data. (The estimated
standard errors using observed and simulated data are not comparable because the simulated
sample sizes are far larger.) The evidence suggests that the HAB predicts an overly tight
relationship between stock returns and consumption growth. Kiku (2006) uses the risk and
return links in the LRR model to explain the empirical failure of standard consumption
CAPM and the market CAPM in accounting for the differences in mean returns across
assets.
   A related exercise is to evaluate the ability of the two models to account for the findings
of Hansen and Singleton (1982) regarding the empirical implausibility of the power utility
specification for the stochastic discount factor. Table 8 summarizes the results of using GMM


                                             20
to estimate the subjective discount factor and risk aversion parameters using simulated data
from each model at both the monthly and annual frequencies. This is a form of encompass-
ing, i.e., a check on whether a maintained model can explain previous empirical findings.
There are three Euler-equation errors corresponding to the risk free rate, the dividend asset,
and the consumption asset. GMM was used to minimize the length of the vector of average
pricing errors using the appropriate covariance matrix to form the over identification test,
which is chi-squared on one degree of freedom. Not surprisingly, both models produce rather
large estimates of risk aversion. Note, however, that LRR generates far larger chi-squared
test statistics than HAB, suggesting it accounts better for previous empirical findings us-
ing power utility. While this exercise is similar is spirit to that conducted in Lettau and
Ludvigson (2005), there are important differences: our test assets differ from theirs, and the
model implementations are different. For example, we impose conintegration which affects
predictability of dividend growth rates and returns as discussed above.
   The consumption beta and the power utility-based diagnostic highlights that the HAB
model, through the habit function, emphasizes the risks associated with high frequency move-
ments in consumption to account for the risk and return relation. The data do not support
this channel. The LRR model on the other hand emphasizes the low frequency movements
in consumption as the key channel for risks in asset markets; these risks are handsomely
compensated while high frequency risks do not receive significant risk compensation. This
feature of the LRR explains its smaller consumption beta and the large chi-square statis-
tic discussed above. Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) and Kiku (2006), for example,
utilize this feature of the LRR model to examine cross-sectional differences in risk premia
between assets.

7.6    Derivatives Prices
We now examine the implications of the two models for derivatives pricing, and for simplicity
we restrict the analysis to standard European call and put options written on the stock
and consumption assets. The computations are numerically intensive but conceptually very
straightforward, because the functional form of each models’ asset pricing kernel is generated
as a byproduct of the estimation. These call and put derivatives do not directly correspond
to actual real-world traded securities, and so the computed prices cannot be compared to
actual data. Nonetheless, the contrasts between the two models’ derivative prices can provide
additional insight into their internal structures.


                                               21
   As is well understood, the price Pgt at time t of a financial instrument with payoff Gt+k
at t + k is given by                                                          
                                                     k
                                                     X
                             Pgt = Et exp                mt+j−1,t+j  Gt+k              (30)
                                                     j=1

where mt,t+1 is the log of the one-period marginal rate of substitution. Define the pricing
operator                                                                      
                                                         k
                                                         X
                             Vtk (·) = Et exp                mt+j−1,t+j  (·)           (31)
                                                         j=1

so the valuation can be expressed simply as Pgt = Vtk (Gt+k ).
   Consider a European call option written on the stock price process Pdt with strike price X
and expiration k steps ahead. The payoff Gd,t+k = max (Pd,t+k − X, 0) expressed in relative
terms is
                              Gd,t+k          Pd,t+k
                                                                            
                                      = max          − x∗t , 0 ,
                                Pdt             Pdt
where x∗t = X/Pdt denote the strike-to-underlying ratio of the call. Using the pricing operator
(31) the relative price of the call is
                                                               Gd,t+k
                                                                    
                                         vd,kt = Vtk                  ,
                                                                Pdt
which is computed using the solution technique described in the Appendix.
   Evidently, the computations proceed in analogous manner for a European put option
starting from
                                 Gp,t+k = max (X − Pd,t+k , 0) .

A put-call parity relationship holds for these options, but the formula is awkward because
of the stochastic dividend stream.
   Table 9 shows for both the LRR and HAB models the unconditional means of the
implied relative call and put prices written on the dividend asset Pdt . The expiration dates
range from one through twelve months ahead and the strike-to-underlying ratios are 0.99,
1.00, and 1.01. The derivative prices are in percent relative to the level of the stock price at
the time the option is written. For example, under the LRR model, a one month call option
with strike-to-underlying ratio of 1.00 costs 1.65 percent of the price of a share of the stock,
with a similar interpretation for the other reported average prices. The average put prices
might seem high relative to the average call prices but one must keep in mind the dividend,
which tends to increase the value of puts relative to calls. Overall, the average prices shown
in Table 9 exhibit the usual properties of call and put options. There does not seem to be

                                                       22
much difference between the prices computed under the LRR and HAB models, indicating
that the models are generally in agreement on the prices of call and put derivatives written
on the dividend asset.
    For derivatives written on the consumption asset, Pct , it is helpful to keep in mind that
Pct is just wealth in the economies considered above, so derivatives written on Pct represent
derivatives on wealth. Consider a European call option written on Pc,t+k . It has payoff
Gc,t+k = max (Pc,t+k − X, 0) that can be normalized as

                                           Gc,t+k       Pc,t+k
                                                                      
                                                  = max        − x∗t , 0 ,
                                            Pct          Pct
where now x∗t represents the wealth strike-to-underlying of the call. The relative price of
this call is
                                               Gt+k
                                                                 
                                                 vw,kt = Vt
                                               Pdt
and would interpreted as the fraction of wealth that must be paid for a call with payoff
          Pc,t+k
                         
max        Pct
                   − x∗t , 0 . The analysis is completely analogous for wealth puts starting from the
                                Pc,t+k
                                           
scaled payoff max x∗t −          Pct
                                       ,   0 .
    Table 10 shows the computed average relative prices for puts and calls written on the
consumption asset Pct expressed as a percentage of total wealth Pct . Thus, the LRR model
implies that, on average, the cost of a twelve month at-the-money put option on wealth is
1.26 percent of current wealth. By way of contrast, the HAB models implies the same put
option would cost 7.93 percent of current wealth.
    There are sharp differences between the wealth derivative implications of the two models.
The HAB model implies a substantially higher costs across the board for both the call and
put derivatives. A factor accounting for the differences appears to be the different volatilities
of the return on the consumption asset under the two models. From Table 3 above, the
HAB model implies that the annual volatility on the return on the consumption asset is
18.12 percent per year, which is about the same as that on the dividend asset. In contrast,
the LRR model implies the much lower value of 3.95 percent per year for the volatility of the
consumption asset. Thus the HAB model generates about the same values for derivatives
written on either the dividend or consumption asset, while the LRR model generates much
smaller values for derivatives written on the consumption asset. Put another way, using
derivatives to protect or hedge the value of the stock index would cost about the same in
either model, but using derivatives to protect wealth would be much cheaper in an LRR
economy than in a HAB economy.

                                                         23
8     Conclusion
A simulated method of moments method proposed by Smith (1993) was used to estimate
consumption based rational expectations asset pricing models using aggregate data on con-
sumption, dividends, and stock prices from 1929 to 2001, taking cognizance of the cointe-
grating relationships among these variables both with respect to the data and with respect
to the dynamics of the models themselves.
    The first model, patterned after Bansal and Yaron (2004) and termed long run risks
(LRR), has Epstein-Zin-Weil preferences and slowly time-varying growth dynamics for the
consumption and dividend driving processes. A special case of this model, termed short run
risks (SRR), is patterned after Hall (1978), has the same preferences but constant growth
dynamics for the consumption and dividend driving processes. The second, patterned after
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and termed habit (HAB), has power utility preferences with
external habit formation and constant growth dynamics for the consumption and dividend
driving processes. For these models, a practicable simulation-based numerical method for
pricing dividend flows, consumption flows, and derivatives on the stock market and on wealth
developed and implemented in the paper.
    The SRR was overwhelmingly rejected by the test of overidentifying restrictions and
it did a poor job of matching conditional and unconditional moments of the data. It was
dismissed from further consideration.
    On the other hand, both LRR and HAB did well on the tests of overidentification and
did an excellent job of matching conditional moments, unconditional moments, and first
order dynamics in general. The models account for the equity premium, the long swings
in stock market valuations relative to underlying cash flows, the high level of stock market
volatility, and the persistence of long term swings in stock market volatility. The models
were further validated by considering the match of predicted to realized conditional and
unconditional moments used in estimation and also to a realized variance measure, newly
developed in this paper, that had been held out from the data used for estimation. Also
of interest is the fact that both models predicted the stock market downturn around 2000
whereas VAR forecasts did not. According to conventional determinants of the adequacy of
asset pricing models, both LRR and HAB appear successful; one can conclude that there
is no need to abandon rationality and behavioral models might be unnecessary.
    A choice between LRR and HAB must be made on the basis of a more extensive scrutiny
of their structural characteristics. Regressions designed to reveal differences in multi-step-

                                             24
ahead dynamics were undertaken. These are regressions of the log price-dividend ratio on
current and lagged consumption growth and regressions of future stock returns on the price-
dividend ratio. Regressions for LRR simulations agreed more closely with regressions for
the data than did regressions for HAB simulations. Also, consumption beta regressions
and encompassing GMM estimations suggested that LRR better reflects the co-movements
between consumption and returns. Finally, analysis of prices of put and call option written on
the stock market and wealth suggest that HAB makes little distinction between stock market
wealth and overall wealth, while LRR finds a sharp distinction. A bottom-line decision is
very difficult to make, but on the basis of the more extensive scrutiny one concludes that
probably the long run risks model is preferred to the habit model.


Appendix: Model Solution Technique and Estimation
Methodology
We use a simulation-based methodology based on Smith (1993) and implemented using a
score-based estimation strategy proposed by Gallant and Tauchen (1996). Central to the
methodology is the use of long simulations to compute unconditional expectations of the
functions of the state vector involving one or more leads and lags. In particular, an expecta-
tion of a random variable of the form g(ut+1 , ut ), which depends on a contemporaneous and
a one-step-ahead value of the state vector, can be computed from a simulation {ût }N +1
                                                                                    t=1 as
                                              N
                                         . 1 X
                                    E(g) =       g(ût+1 , ût )
                                           N t=1
to any desired degree of accuracy by taking N sufficiently large.
   Because one must bear the cost of generating the simulation {ût }N +1
                                                                     t=1 for the purpose

of estimation anyway, it becomes convenient to use this same simulation to determine the
pricing functions vc (u), vd (u), and rf (u) using a Bubnov-Galerkin method (Miranda and
Fackler, 2002, p. 152–3). Consider, for example, the determination of vc (u) for the LRR
model, which, like all other policy functions in this paper, can be adequately approximated
                         .
by the quadratic vc (u) = a0 + a01 u + u0 A2 u. Using (10) and (11), vc (u) must satisfy the
conditional expression

                E{vc (ut ) − M (ut+1 , ut )[1 + vc (ut+1 )] exp(∆ct+1 ) | ut = u} = 0    (32)

for all u ∈ <3 , where

                 M (ut+1 , ut ) = δ θ exp[−(θ/ψ)∆ct+1 + (θ − 1)rc (ut+1 , ut )]

                                                 25
                                              "                                #
                                           1 + vc (ut+1 )
                     rc (ut+1 , ut ) = log                exp(∆ct+1 ) .
                                              vc (ut )
Let
                  g(ut+1 , ut ) = {vc (ut ) − M (ut+1 , ut )[1 + vc (ut+1 )] exp(∆ct+1 )} Zt
where Zt = [1, u0t , vech0 (ut , ut )]0 and vech(A) denotes the vector comprised of the elements of
the upper triangle of a symmetric matrix A. Then, by the law of iterated expectations, the
conditional expression (32) implies that the unconditional expression Eg = 0 must also be
satisfied by vc (u). Let g(ut+1 , ut , αc ) denote g(ut+1 , ut ) with vc (u) replaced by its quadratic
approximation and let αc = [a0 , a01 , vech0 (A2 )]0 denote the ten distinct coefficients of the
quadratic approximation. Because both αc and Zt are vectors of length ten, the unconditional
expression Eg(·, αc ) = 0 becomes a system of ten nonlinear equations that can be solved for
αc . As integrals are computed by averaging over a long simulation {ût }N +1
                                                                         t=1 , it is actually

the system
                                             N
                                          1 X
                                                g(ût+1 , ût , αc ) = 0                           (33)
                                          N t=1
that is to be solved for αc . One solves for vd (u) and rf (u) similarly. As the marginal rate of
substitution M (ut+1 , ut ) depends on vc (ut+1 ) and vc (ut ), one must solve for vc (u) first. The
solution strategy for HAB is exactly the same using (15) as the marginal rate of substitution
and (23) as the state vector. Because vc (u) is needed to price macro risks as described later,
we compute it for the habit model. At this stage of the computations, both the simulation
{ût }N +1
      t=1 and the values vc (ût ), vd (ût ), and rf (ût ) at the monthly frequency become available.
                                          N/12
The corresponding values for {ŷt }t=12,24,... at the annual frequency can now be computed by
applying the expressions for aggregation set forth in Section 4.
      Let the transition density of the VAR be written as f (yt |yt−12 , θ), t = 12, 24, . . .; let θ̃
                                                                                            n/12
denote the maximum likelihood estimate of θ computed from the data{ỹt }t=12,24,... Collect the
parameters of one of the structural models, e.g. LLR, into a vector denoted ρ. Simulations
from the structural model will follow a stationary density that we denote by p(yt , yt−12 |ρ).
Consider the unconditional moment functions
                                  Z Z
                                        ∂
                     m(ρ, θ̃) =            log f (yt |yt−12 , θ̃) p(yt , yt−12 |ρ) dyt dyt−12 .    (34)
                                        ∂θ
The integral in (34) is computed by specifying ρ, simulating the structural model, and
averaging over the simulation as discussed above. Using these moment conditions, ρ can be
estimated by minimizing the GMM criterion

                                        s(ρ) = m0 (ρ, θ̃)(Ĩ)−1 m(ρ, θ̃),                          (35)

                                                        26
where
                        n/12   (                             )(               )0
                        X          ∂               ∂
             Ĩ =                     log f (ỹt |ỹt−12 , θ̃)
                                                      log f (ỹt |ỹt−12 , θ̃) .  (36)
                  t=12,24,...      ∂θ             ∂θ
                                                       √
    The EMM estimator is ρ̂ that maximizes s(ρ). It is n-consistent and asymptotically
normally distributed as proved in Gallant and Tauchen (1996) under regularity conditions
set forth there. The most important of these conditions is an identification condition, that,
excepting pathological examples, will be satisfied when dim(θ) ≥ dim(ρ), which is essentially
the requirement that the number of moments used to define a method of moments estimator
must equal or exceed the number of parameters estimated. Gouriéroux, Monfort, and Re-
nault (1993) show that, for the particular choice of auxiliary model f (yt |yt−12 , θ) used here,
equation (27), the EMM estimator is asymptotically equivalent to Smith’s (1993) estimator.
The Gallant and Tauchen regularity conditions do not require that the data follow the dis-
tribution f (yt |yt−12 , θ) because the proof strategy relies only on quasi-maximum likelihood
estimation theory (Gallant, 1987). However, when using (36) as the weighting matrix, it
is good practice to subject f (yt |yt−12 , θ) to specification tests; we used BIC. With respect
to setting off diagonal terms of f (yt |yt−12 , θ) to zero in Section 6, a good analogy is to the
problem of bias caused by weak instruments. Removing the moments corresponding to the
poorly estimated off diagonal moments is like removing weak instruments and therefore rela-
tively conservative. One would expect it to reduce bias rather than increase it. We possibly
pay a price in efficiency.
    The EMM estimator is a GMM estimator whence ns(ρ̂) is asymptotically distributed
as a (non-central) chi-square random variable on dim(θ) − dim(ρ) degress freedom. When
m(ρo , θo ) = 0, where θo and ρo are the almost sure limits of θ̃ and ρ̂, expressions for which are
given in Gallant and Tauchen (1996), then ns(ρ̂) follows the central chi square distribution.
If the data do, in fact, follow the structural model p(yt , yt−12 |ρ), then m(ρo , θo ) = 0. Thus,
comparing ns(ρ̂) to the chi square critical value, as we do in Section 6, is a test of model
specification. This logic is exactly the same as the logic of the GMM test of overidentifying
restrictions.


9     References
 Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T. and Diebold, F. X. (2006), “Parametric and Nonparamet-
      ric Volatility Measurement,” in L. P. Hansen and Y. Aı̈t-Sahalia, eds., Handbook of
      Financial Econometrics, North Holland, Amsterdam, forthcoming.

                                                       27
Anderson, T. W. (2001), “Reduced Rank Regression in Cointegrated Models,” Journal of
    Econometrics 106, 203–216.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert (2001), “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,”
    NBER working paper 8207.

Bansal, Ravi, R. Dittmar, and C. Lundblad (2005), “Consumption, Dividends, and the
    Cross Section of Equity Returns,” Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1972.

Bansal, Ravi, Varoujan Khatchatrian, and Amir Yaron (2005), “Interpretable asset mar-
    kets?,” European Economic Review 49, 531–560.

Bansal, Ravi, and Christian Lundblad (2002), “Market Efficiency, Asset Returns, and the
    Size of the Risk Premium in Global Equity Markets,” Journal of Econometrics 109,
    195–237.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron (2004), “Risks For the Long Run: A Potential Resolution
    of Asset Pricing Puzzles”, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Barberis, N., M Huang, and T. Santos (2001), “Prospect Theory and Asset Prices” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 116, 1–54.

Campbell, John Y., (2002), “Consumption Based Asset Pricing,” Manuscript, Department
    of Economics, Harvard, Cambridge MA.

Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane (1999), “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based
    Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 107,
    205–251.

Cochrane, John, (1991), “Explaning the Variance of Orice-Dividend Ratios,” Review of
    Financial Studies 5, 243–280.

Cecchetti Stephen G, Pok-sang Lam, and Nelson C. Mark (1993), “The Equity Premium
    and the Risk-Free Rate: Matching the Moments,” Journal of Monetary Economics 31,
    21–45.

Epstein, L. G., and Stanley Zin (1989), “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Be-
    havior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica
    57, 937–969.

                                            28
Epstein, L. G., and Stanley Zin (1991), “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal
    Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns II: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of
    Political Economy 99, 1263–1286.

Evans, Martin, (1998), “Dividend Variability and Stock Market Swings,” Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 65, 711–740.

Gallant, A. R. (1987), Nonlinear Statistical Models, Wiley, New York.

Gallant, A. R. and G. Tauchen (1996) “Which Moments to Match?” Econometric Theory
    12, 657–681.

Gallant, A. R., and G. Tauchen (1998), “Reprojecting Partially Observed Systems with Ap-
    plication to Interest Rate Diffusions,” Journal of the American Statistical Association
    93, 10–24.

Gallant, A. R., and G. Tauchen (2006), “Simulated Score Methods and Indirect Inference
    for Continuous Time Models,” in L. P. Hansen and Y. Aı̈t-Sahalia, eds., Handbook of
    Financial Econometrics, North Holland, Amsterdam, forthcoming.

Gouriéroux, C., A. Monfort and E. Renault (1993) “Indirect Inference,” Journal of Applied
    Econometrics 8, S85–S118.

Hall, Robert E. (1978), “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle Permanent Income Hy-
    pothesis: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy 86, 971–988.

Hall, Robert E. (2001), “Struggling to Understand the Stock Market,” American Economic
    Review 91, 1–11.

Hansen, L. P., and K. J. Singleton (1982), “Generalized Instrumental Variable Estimation
    Estimators of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica 50, 1269–1286.

Kiku, Dana (2006), “Is the Value Premium a Puzzle?” Manuscript, Wharton Business
    School, University of Pennslyvania, Philadelphia.

Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson (2001) “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and
    Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.

Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson (2005) “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend
    Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics 76, 583–626.

                                           29
Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson (2005) “Euler Equation Errors,” Manuscript,
    Stern School of Business, New York University, New York.

Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott (1085), “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics 15, 145–161.

Smith, A. A. (1993), “Estimating Nonlinear Time Series Models Using Simulated Vector
    Autoregressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 8, S63–S84.

Wachter, Jessica A. (2002), “Habit Formation and Returns on Bonds and Stocks,” Manuscript,
    Stern School of Business, New York University, New York NY.

Weil, Philippe (1989), “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk Free Rate Puzzle”,
    Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 401–421.




                                          30
      Table 1. Parameter Estimates: Four Variable Score


                  SRR Model                 LRR Model

 Parameter Estimate         Std Err    Estimate        Std Err

     µc      0.002178      0.000290    0.001921       0.000332
      ρs       0.9892        0.0080      0.9583         0.1032
     λsx                                 2.5004        16.9346
     ρx                                  0.9871         0.0088
     bcc                                 0.1432              c
     bss                                 0.8188         0.2788
     bxx                                 0.1100              c
     ψcc      0.00646       0.00458      0.0034              c
     ψcs      0.00146       0.01746
     ψss      0.02487       0.00809    .4109e-06     .2203e-05
     ψxx                                0.000120             c
     ρσ                                   0.9866        0.0011


      δ      0.997488      0.004369    0.999566       0.000343
      θ        -195.79       233.59    -12.2843         7.6243
      ψ           2.00            c        2.00              c
      γ       98.8969      116.7968      7.1421         3.8122

     µdc       -3.3965       0.0428      -3.3857        0.0540

             χ2 (5) = 41.051 (.9e-7)   χ2 (3) = 10.501 (0.0148)


* Notes: (1) γ is a derived parameter computed from θ and ψ.
(2) ”c” indicates a calibrated parameter.




                              31
Table 2. Parameter Estimates for the
  Habit Persistence (HAB) Model


Parameter Estimate        Std Err

    µc      0.002116     0.000250


    ρs        0.9719       0.0154

    ψcc     0.006151     0.000896
    ψss     0.036503     0.007716

    ρh        0.9853     0.002597


     δ        0.9939     0.000526
     γ        0.8386       0.2463

    µdc       -3.3587      0.0380

            χ2 (5) = 7.109 (0.213)




                32
                              Table 3. Comparision of Model Predicitons with Observed Unconditional Moments



                                                                       Observed      Predicted-SRR    Predicted-LRR    Predicted-HAB

                                                                    Mean Std Dev     Mean Std Dev     Mean Std Dev     Mean     Std Dev

     log Dividend consumption ratio                dat − cat        -3.399   0.162   -3.414   0.163   -3.384   0.154    -3.37     0.148

     Consumption growth (% Per Year)          100(×cat − cat−12 )    1.95     2.24    2.58     1.91    2.34     2.36    2.52          1.76
                                                       a
     Price dividend ratio                         exp(vdt )         28.24    12.08   28.86     4.18   27.47     8.01   27.75      7.037
                                                         a
     Return (% Per Year), dividend asset          100 × rdt          6.02    19.29    6.15     2.82    6.29    16.00    6.54      16.89
33




          √
     100 × Quadratic variation                   100 × stdat        16.69    09.32    3.22     0.64   14.95     8.21   14.41          9.69

     Risk free rate (% Per Year)                  100 × rfat                          0.39     0.00    0.78     0.41    1.07          0.99
                                                         a
     Return (% Per Year), consumption asset       100 × rct                           5.60     2.33    2.34     3.95    6.60      16.99

                                                      a
     Equity premium (% Per Year)               100 × rdt − rfat                       5.76     2.82    5.51    16.09    5.46      17.14



       Notes. Observed values are sample statistics computed from annual data, 1930–2001; predicted values are computed from a long
       simulation from the indicated model.
                         Table 4: AR(1) Models for Each Series



                 Observed       Predicted(SRR)      Predicted(LRR)      Predicted(HAB)

    zt           α0     α1        α0        α1        α0         α1       α0       α1

 dat − cat     -0.6879 0.7992   -0.30281 0.91128     -1.0358   0.6939   -0.6784   0.7985
                0.3542 0.1034

cat − cat−12   0.0116 0.4495    0.01894    0.2666    0.0119    0.4916    0.0185   0.2645
               0.0031 0.0909

 padt − dat    0.4926 0.8542     0.3467    0.8966    0.7880    0.7598   0.54924   0.8326
               0.3678 0.1077
     a
    rdt        0.0675 0.0088     0.0582    0.0546    0.0673 -0.0694      0.0689 -0.0536
               0.0639 0.1454


    qta        -0.8972 0.5352    -6.7936   0.0177   -1.73212   0.5621   -1.2400   0.7114
                0.2545 0.1275


Notes. Each line of the table shows the coefficients for a regression of the form zt =
α0 + α1 zt−1 + zt for the variable named in the first column. The regressions in the
columns labeled observed are for the annual data where the span of the dependent
variable is 1931–2001. The regressions in the columns labeled predicted are for a
simulation of the model.




                                           34
   Table 5. Predictability Projections: Price Dividend Ratios


                           Observed             Predicted
                          Coef Std Err         LRR HAB

         Intercept        3.4168   0.0055      3.2520   2.7183
         ∆ct             -0.3021   0.1744      1.0716   6.7533
         ∆ct−24          -1.0560   0.1926      0.0383   3.7708
         ∆ct−48          -0.6209   0.1925      0.2521   3.4854
         ∆ct−60          -0.3480   0.1926     -0.0176   3.1036
         ∆ct−72          -0.1263   0.1926     -0.0442   2.4550
         ∆ct−84          -0.2006   0.1744     -0.0857   2.7694

         R2                   0.036            0.011     0.422


Notes: Shown above are the linear projections of the log price
dividend ratio, vd on contemporaneous and five annual lags of log
consumption growth ∆c. The period for the observed projection
is 1935–2001. The predicted values are from long simulations
from the Long Run Risks LRR Model and the Habit Persistence
HAB Model.




      Table 6. Long Horizon Predictability Projections:
    Cumulative Future Return on the Price Dividend Ratio


                                              R2

              Horizon(Years)       Observed LRR HAB

                     1                0.038   0.088   0.084
                     2                0.060   0.129   0.154
                     3                0.071   0.172   0.213
                     4                0.071   0.202   0.262
                     5                0.070   0.229   0.299

Notes: The table shows R2 ’s from projections of cumulative an-
nual geometric returns for 1,2,...,5 years ahead onto the log price
dividend ratio for the observed data, 1935–2001, and for long
simulations from the Long Run Risks LRR Model and the Habit
Persistence HAB Model.




                                   35
        Table 7. Consumption Betas: Annual Frequency



                                 Data LRR HAB
                      β̂         0.790 0.521 4.19
                     σ̂β̂        1.124 0.176 0.17

                     R̄2 -0.006 0.006        0.19

Notes: For the observed data the period of the dependent variable
for the beta regression is annual data, 1929–2001, while the other
two regressions are estimated on long annual simulated data sets
from the estimated models.




     Table 8. GMM Estimation of the Power Utility Model


                              Annual
                                LRR HAB
                       χ2 (1) 242.65 2.61
                      p-value    0.00 0.11

                            β̂        1.38 2.39
                            γ̂       16.62 50.40


                              Monthly
                                LRR HAB
                       χ2 (1)   26.28 1.49
                      p-value    0.00 0.22

                            β̂        1.01 1.04
                            γ̂        9.60 23.22

Notes: β and γ represent the subjective time preference and
curvature parameter for power utility, respectively. Parameter
estimates and test statistics are based on simulations from the
estimated models.




                                    36
            Table 9. Average Put and Call Prices on the Stock


                                 Long Run Risks (LRR)
                                        Call                 Put

          Strike-to-Underlying: 0.99 1.00 1.01        0.99 1.00     1.01

          Expiration (months)
                    1            2.19   1.65   1.22   1.38   1.85   2.41
                    2            2.79   2.28   1.84   2.18   2.67   3.23
                    3            3.25   2.75   2.31   2.83   3.33   3.89
                    4            3.61   3.13   2.69   3.38   3.89   4.45
                    5            3.93   3.45   3.01   3.88   4.40   4.96
                    6            4.21   3.73   3.30   4.34   4.86   5.42
                    7            4.46   3.99   3.56   4.76   5.29   5.85
                    8            4.69   4.23   3.80   5.15   5.68   6.25
                    9            4.90   4.44   4.01   5.54   6.07   6.64
                   10            5.08   4.63   4.21   5.92   6.45   7.02
                   11            5.25   4.80   4.38   6.28   6.82   7.39
                   12            5.40   4.96   4.54   6.64   7.19   7.76



                                          Habit (HAB)
                                        Call                 Put

          Strike-to-Underlying: 0.99 1.00 1.01        0.99 1.00     1.01

          Expiration (months)
                    1            2.06   1.51   1.12   1.31   1.76   2.37
                    2            2.63   2.09   1.67   2.13   2.60   3.17
                    3            3.05   2.52   2.08   2.82   3.29   3.85
                    4            3.39   2.87   2.42   3.41   3.88   4.43
                    5            3.68   3.16   2.70   3.97   4.44   4.98
                    6            3.94   3.42   2.96   4.50   4.97   5.51
                    7            4.18   3.66   3.20   5.02   5.50   6.03
                    8            4.40   3.88   3.42   5.54   6.02   6.54
                    9            4.59   4.08   3.61   6.02   6.50   7.03
                   10            4.78   4.27   3.80   6.50   6.98   7.50
                   11            4.95   4.44   3.97   6.96   7.44   7.97
                   12            5.10   4.60   4.13   7.44   7.92   8.45




Note. Prices are percent of the stock price at the time the option is written.




                                     37
            Table 10. Average Put and Call Prices on Wealth


                                 Long Run Risks (LRR)
                                        Call                 Put

          Strike-to-Underlying: 0.99 1.00 1.01        0.99 1.00     1.01

          Expiration (months)
                    1            1.18   0.43   0.10   0.11   0.36   1.03
                    2            1.35   0.63   0.22   0.22   0.50   1.09
                    3            1.51   0.80   0.35   0.32   0.61   1.15
                    4            1.65   0.95   0.47   0.40   0.70   1.21
                    5            1.79   1.09   0.59   0.48   0.78   1.27
                    6            1.92   1.23   0.71   0.55   0.85   1.32
                    7            2.05   1.36   0.82   0.62   0.92   1.38
                    8            2.18   1.48   0.93   0.68   0.98   1.43
                    9            2.30   1.61   1.04   0.75   1.05   1.48
                   10            2.42   1.72   1.15   0.81   1.12   1.54
                   11            2.53   1.84   1.26   0.88   1.18   1.60
                   12            2.65   1.95   1.37   0.96   1.26   1.66


                                         Habit (HAB)
                                        Call                 Put

          Strike-to-Underlying: 0.99 1.00 1.01        0.99 1.00     1.01

          Expiration (months)
                    1            2.07   1.52   1.13   1.33   1.77   2.38
                    2            2.64   2.10   1.68   2.15   2.61   3.19
                    3            3.06   2.53   2.09   2.84   3.31   3.86
                    4            3.40   2.88   2.43   3.43   3.91   4.45
                    5            3.69   3.17   2.72   3.99   4.47   5.01
                    6            3.95   3.44   2.97   4.53   5.00   5.54
                    7            4.19   3.68   3.21   5.05   5.53   6.06
                    8            4.41   3.90   3.43   5.57   6.05   6.58
                    9            4.61   4.10   3.62   6.07   6.55   7.07
                   10            4.79   4.28   3.81   6.54   7.03   7.55
                   11            4.96   4.45   3.98   7.01   7.49   8.01
                   12            5.12   4.61   4.14   7.48   7.97   8.49




Note. Prices are percent of wealth at the time the option is written.




                                    38
                                         Log Real Per Capita Stock Market Value

11
10
9
8
7




                    1930    1940         1950        1960        1970       1980          1990   2000


                                        Log Real Per Capita Stock Market Dividend
8
7
6
5
4




                    1930    1940         1950        1960        1970       1980          1990   2000


                           Log Real Per Capita Consumption, Measured at Annual Frequency
12
11
10
9
8




                    1930    1940         1950        1960        1970       1980          1990   2000


                                       Real Annual Geometric Stock Market Returns
0.4
0.0
−0.4




                    1930    1940         1950        1960        1970       1980          1990   2000


                                   Log Quadratic Variation of Real Stock Market Returns
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1




                    1930    1940         1950        1960        1970       1980          1990   2000


Figure 1. Raw Data. In the notation of the text, the variables shown are padt =
     a
log(Pdt ), dat = log(Dta ), cat = log(Cta ) rdt
                                             a
                                                , and qta = log(Qat ), in order.




                                                            39
                Nominal Annual Arithmetic Stock Market Returns
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
  0.0
  −0.4




         1930     1940     1950      1960      1970     1980      1990      2000


                 Real Annual Geometric Stock Market Returns
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
  0.0
  −0.4




         1930     1940     1950      1960      1970     1980      1990      2000

Figure 2. Nominal Arithmetic and Real Geometric Returns. The figure
compares the more familiar nominal arithmetic returns series with the real per-capita
geometric returns series used to fit the model.




                                         40
                                       Log of Dividend Consumption Ratio



 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2




                  1930   1940   1950          1960         1970         1980   1990   2000


                                             Consumption Growth
 0.4
 0.0
 −0.4




                  1930   1940   1950          1960         1970         1980   1990   2000


                                          Log of Price Dividend Ratio
 5
 4
 3
 2




                  1930   1940   1950          1960         1970         1980   1990   2000


                                             Annual Equity Returns
 0.4
 0.0
 −0.4




                  1930   1940   1950          1960         1970         1980   1990   2000


                                            Equity Returns Volatility
 0.5
 0.3
 0.1




                  1930   1940   1950          1960         1970         1980   1990   2000


Figure 3. One Step Ahead Forecasts of the Data Confronted by the SRR
Model The variables shown are dat − cat , cat − cat−12 padt − dat , rdt
                                                                     a
                                                                        , and qta of the text,
in order. The dotted line is the data. The dashed line is a one-step-ahead forecast
of a VAR fitted to the data. The solid line is the one-step-ahead forecast of a VAR
computed from a simulation from the SRR Model.



                                                     41
                                   Log of Dividend Consumption Ratio



 −3.1
 −3.4
 −3.7




         1930   1940        1950          1960         1970         1980   1990      2000


                                         Consumption Growth
 0.05
 −0.05




         1930   1940        1950          1960         1970         1980   1990      2000


                                      Log of Price Dividend Ratio
 4.0
 3.5
 3.0
 2.5




         1930   1940        1950          1960         1970         1980   1990      2000


                                         Annual Equity Returns
 0.4
 0.0
 −0.4




         1930   1940        1950          1960         1970         1980   1990      2000


                                        Equity Returns Volatility
 0.5
 0.3
 0.1




         1930   1940        1950          1960         1970         1980   1990      2000


Figure 4. One Step Ahead Forecasts of the Data Confronted by the LRR
Model The variables shown are dat − cat , cat − cat−12 padt − dat , rdt
                                                                     a
                                                                        , and qta of the text,
in order. The dotted line is the data. The dashed line is a one-step-ahead forecast
of a VAR fitted to the data. The solid line is the one-step-ahead forecast of a VAR
computed from a simulation from the LRR Model.



                                                 42
                                  Log of Dividend Consumption Ratio



 −3.1
 −3.4
 −3.7




         1930   1940       1950          1960         1970         1980   1990     2000


                                        Consumption Growth
 0.05
 −0.05




         1930   1940       1950          1960         1970         1980   1990     2000


                                     Log of Price Dividend Ratio
 4.0
 3.5
 3.0
 2.5




         1930   1940       1950          1960         1970         1980   1990     2000


                                        Annual Equity Returns
 0.4
 0.0
 −0.4




         1930   1940       1950          1960         1970         1980   1990     2000


                                       Equity Returns Volatility
 0.5
 0.3
 0.1




         1930   1940       1950          1960         1970         1980   1990     2000


Figure 5. One Step Ahead Forecasts of the Data Confronted by the Habit
Persistence (HAB) Model The variables shown are dat − cat , cat − cat−12 padt − dat , rdt
                                                                                       a
                                                                                          ,
and qta of the text, in order. The dotted line is the data. The dashed line is a one-
step-ahead forecast of a VAR fitted to the data. The solid line is the one-step-ahead
forecast of a VAR computed from a simulation from the HAB model.



                                                43
