                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EXPLAINING WOMEN'S SUCCESS:
     TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND THE SKILL CONTENT OF WOMEN'S WORK

                                           Sandra E. Black
                                        Alexandra Spitz-Oener

                                         Working Paper 13116
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13116


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




The authors thank David Autor, Leah Boustan, Michael Burda, and seminar participants at the NBER
Labor Studies Program Meeting, Case Western Reserve, Duke University, University of Kentucky,
University of Texas, Austin, and Notre Dame University for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Sandra E. Black and Alexandra Spitz-Oener. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Explaining Women's Success: Technological Change and the Skill Content of Women's Work
Sandra E. Black and Alexandra Spitz-Oener
NBER Working Paper No. 13116
May 2007
JEL No. J01,J16,J2,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

The closing of the gender wage gap is an ongoing phenomenon in industrialized countries. However,
research has been limited in its ability to understand the causes of these changes, due in part to an
inability to directly compare the work of women to that of men. In this study, we use a new approach
for analyzing changes in the gender pay gap that uses direct measures of job tasks and gives a comprehensive
characterization of how work for men and women has changed in recent decades. Using data from
West Germany, we find that women have witnessed relative increases in non-routine analytic tasks
and non-routine interactive tasks, which are associated with higher skill levels. The most notable difference
between the genders is, however, the pronounced relative decline in routine task inputs among women
with little change for men. These relative task changes explain a substantial fraction of the closing
of the gender wage gap. Our evidence suggests that these task changes are driven, at least in part, by
technological change. We also show that these task changes are related to the recent polarization of
employment between low and high skilled occupations that we observed in the 1990s.

Sandra E. Black
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
NHH, IZA and NBER
sblack@econ.ucla.edu

Alexandra Spitz-Oener
Department of Economics and Business Studies
Humboldt University Berlin
Spandauer Str. 1
10178 Berlin, Germany
and ZEW Mannheim and IZA
alexandra.spitz-oener@wiwi.hu-berlin.de
I. Introduction

           The closing of the gender wage gap is an ongoing phenomenon in industrialized

countries. When investigating potential explanations, most research has focused on fac-

tors such as education and experience, for which changes have been more favorable for

women than for men in recent decades. However, a substantial portion of the improve-

ment in women’s labor market opportunities still remains unexplained.1 One reason for

this is that empirical research has been limited in its ability to directly compare women’s

work to that of men.

           In this study, we apply a new approach for analyzing changes in the gender pay

gap that uses direct measures of job tasks and gives a comprehensive characterization of

how work for men and women has changed in recent decades. The strategy is based on

the task-based framework introduced by Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003). The advan-

tage of this framework is that, in addition to the analysis of task changes, it also allows us

to investigate one of the potential underlying causes of changes in occupational skill re-

quirements: workplace computerization. In this framework, the work performed in an oc-

cupation is broken down into a series of tasks, each of which can be characterized based

on its substitutability or complementarity with computers. Hence, it becomes predictable

how each occupation is likely to be affected by the introduction of computers.

           Using a rich, survey-based data set from West Germany covering 1979 to 1999,

we are able to measure skill requirements directly by using the task composition of occu-

pations; that is, survey participants indicated the activities they perform on the job. Occu-

pational skill requirements are characterized by five categories of tasks: non-routine ana-

lytic (such as researching and analyzing), non-routine interactive (such as managing and
1
    For a comprehensive review, see work by Blau and Kahn (1997, 2003, 2006).


                                                                                            2
organizing), routine cognitive (such as calculating and bookkeeping), routine manual

(such as operating machinery) and non-routine manual (such as serving and repairing).

           We find that women witnessed relative increases in non-routine analytical and

non-routine interactive task inputs, which are associated with higher skill levels. The

most notable difference between the genders in task changes is, however, the strong de-

cline in routine tasks experienced by women and almost not at all by men. When decom-

posing the closing of the gender wage gap into relative task and relative price changes,

we find that relative task changes would have resulted in wage convergence that is as

large as 85 percent of the one we actually observe. Interestingly, relative changes in ana-

lytical task inputs appear to be the largest single contributor to this development. The re-

sults also show, however, that relative prices did not stay constant and that their relative

movement had a mitigating effect on the convergence of wages of men and women. Rela-

tive task and relative price changes together can explain more than 40 percent of the

wage convergence between the genders.

           We then turn to possible explanations for these task changes. Our analysis reveals

that – consistent with the technological change hypothesis – task changes were most pro-

nounced within industry/occupation cells. Only minor parts of the aggregate trends are

attributable to women moving towards more skill intensive occupations or industries, a

phenomenon that has attracted much attention in the literature.2 In addition, the task

changes occurred most rapidly in occupations in which computers have made major

headway.

           Overall – and in contrast to recent literature that puts a strong emphasis on only

one dimension of activities on the job, namely interactive tasks – we show that changes in
2
    See, for example, Katz and Murphy (1992).


                                                                                           3
job content has evolved differently for men and women along several dimensions.3 While

the relative changes in interactive task input and changes in relative prices for this task

category play an important role in explaining part of the closing of the gender pay gap,

the results suggest that the relative evolution of analytical and routine manual task inputs

is also important.

           A by-product of the task-based framework is that it has reinvigorated the discus-

sion on the “polarization” of the labor market that began at the beginning of the 1990s.4

In the task-based framework, computers are a complement to the analytical and interac-

tive tasks that are most often used by high skilled workers, computers are substitutes for

routine tasks that are most often performed by medium educated workers, and they have

no predictable effect for non-routine manual skills most often used by the lowest skilled

workers. As a result, we expect the largest effect of workplace computerization on mid-

dle-educated workers who are most likely to be engaged in routine manual and routine

cognitive skills. Given the distribution of tasks in 1979, we would also expect to find

stronger polarization of employment among women relative to men. We do find evi-

dence of this polarization for both women and men. Interestingly, and in line with the

task changes that we observe for the two genders, the polarization tendency in the labor

market has been larger for women than for men in recent decades.

           The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature, Section 3

presents the data set, and Section 4 presents the patterns of task changes between 1979

and 1999. Section 5 relates these changes to the closing of the gender wage gap. Section

6 examines possible explanations: in particular, changes in technology. Section 7 exam-


3
    See, for example, Borghans, ter Weel and Weinberg, 2006, and Weinberg, 2000.
4
    See, for example, Levy and Murnane, 1992, Goos and Manning, 2007, and Autor, Katz, Kearney, 2006.


                                                                                                        4
ines the relationship between task changes and the polarization of the labor market. Sec-

tion 8 then concludes.



                                      II. Related Literature

        In an effort to better understand the link between technological changes and labor

demand, the recent literature has adopted a task-based view of technological change (see

Autor, Levy and Murnane, hereafter ALM, 2003).5 The major feature of this framework

is that it conceptualizes work as a series of tasks and classifies tasks into routine and non-

routine activities, with the terms routine and non-routine characterizing the relationship

between the respective task measure and computer technology. Both manual and cogni-

tive routine tasks are well-defined in the sense that they are easily programmable and can

be performed by computers at economically feasible costs – a feature that makes routine

tasks amenable to substitution by computer capital (Levy and Murnane, 1996). Non-

routine tasks, in contrast, are not well defined and programmable and, as things currently

stand, cannot be easily accomplished by computers. However, computer capital is com-

plementary to both analytical and interactive non-routine cognitive tasks in the sense that

computer technology increases the productivity of employees performing these tasks.

        This task-framework is applied in ALM and in recent work by Spitz-Oener

(2006), who document the relationship between computer adoption and changing tasks at

the aggregate level, within industry (ALM, using U.S. data) and within occupations

(Spitz-Oener, using data for West Germany). As predicted, the evidence suggests that

tasks have shifted from routine manual and routine cognitive tasks towards analytic and

5
  See Chennells and Van Reenen (1999), Katz and Autor (1999), and Acemoglu (2002) for a review of ear-
lier studies in this body of the literature.



                                                                                                     5
interactive non-routine tasks at all levels of aggregation in recent decades. The frame-

work thereby identifies the mechanism that underlies the relative increase in the demand

for high-educated employees. However, there is little work using the task-based frame-

work to analyze how the content of work has changed for women relative to men.

        So far, most of the literature on the gender wage gap has focused on supply side

explanations such as changing education and experience.6 However, there are a number

of studies that also looked at demand side factors, though with a conceptually different

approach than the one we are using. Katz and Murphy (1992), for example, showed that

there have been changes in product demand that are associated with shifts in employment

towards sectors that are female intensive.7 Unlike this earlier work, we are able to focus

on within-occupation task changes for women relative to men while previous work

mainly emphasized between-occupation (industry) employment shifts.

        There are also a number of recent studies that examine the relationship between

computer adoption and gender. Weinberg (2000), for example, shows how computeriza-

tion, by de-emphasizing physical skills, has benefited women’s employment relative to

that of men. He does so by relating the change in women’s share of hours worked to the

change in computer use at the occupation and industry level. However, he is not able to

describe how work has actually changed due to the absence of direct task measures.

        Bacolod and Blum (2006) use data from the United States to examine the role of

changing task prices in explaining rising wage inequality and a declining gender wage


6
 Again, see work by Blau and Kahn (1997, 2003, 2004). Another study is O’Neill and Polachek (1993).
7
  Other studies are Black and Juhn (2000) and Goldin (2004). Welch (2000) attributes the closing of the
gender wage gap to the expansion in the value of brains relative to brawn. In addition, recent work by Oli-
vetti and Petrongolo (2006) introduces evidence of differential labor market participation as an explanation
for across-country differences in the gender wage gap. Mulligan and Rubinstein (2005) also stress the im-
portance of changes in the selection process over time into employment in explaining changes in the U.S.
gender gap.


                                                                                                          6
gap and conclude that price changes can explain a large fraction of the decline in the gen-

der wage gap. However, owing to the choice of task categories, a key limitation of this

work is its inability to relate the changes in task prices to computerization.8 In addition,

data limitations prevent them from looking at changes in tasks within occupations, which

we find to be the primary factor in explaining changes in the tasks performed by women

relative to men.9

        Finally, the paper most closely related to our own is recent work by Borghans, ter

Weel, and Weinberg (2006), that focuses on interactive, or people skills. Using data from

Britain, West Germany and the United States, they find that people skills have become

more important in recent decades; in addition, the relative employment of women is high

in occupations in which people tasks are more important.10 However, they neither provide

evidence on how interpersonal task inputs have evolved across genders, nor on how the

evolution of interpersonal task inputs is related to the closing of the gender wage gap in

recent decades. In addition, our evidence suggests that for women relative to men, the

increase in the use of interpersonal skills is not nearly as large as the decline in cognitive

and manual routine skills. Thus, by focusing on a broader spectrum of tasks, including

analytic, interpersonal, routine cognitive, routine manual, and non-routine manual, we

provide a comprehensive analysis of how work has changed for women relative to men

and how these changes are related to the closing of the gender wage gap.

8
   In particular, their choice of cognitive skills comprises both routine and non-routine cognitive tasks.
Given that, based on the task framework, computers are predicted to have a negative impact on prices of
routine cognitive tasks and a positive impact on non-routine cognitive tasks, it is not clear what kind of
price changes one should expect for the composite classification.
9
  Bacolod and Blum use the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) dataset for their analysis. See Spen-
ner (1983) and references cited there for a detailed criticism of the DOT. In the context of this study, the
most important points are that the process in which experts evaluate occupations encourages them to under-
estimate the true changes in job content, and that occupational titles in the DOT are not consistent over
time.
10
   For the analyses concerning West Germany, they use the same data as this study.


                                                                                                          7
                                                III. Data

        We use two data sets for our analysis, the “Qualification and Career Survey” and

the IAB employment sample. The main advantage of the “Qualification and Career Sur-

vey” is that it includes information on both the activities that employees perform at work

as well as computer use. This data is then matched to the IAB employment sample, an

administrative data set with the major advantage of providing precise information on

wages. The matching is done at the occupation level as both data sets follow the same

occupational classification.

        The “Qualification and Career Survey” is an employee survey carried out by the

German Federal Institute for Vocational Training (“Bundesinstitut fur Berufsbildung,

BIBB”) and the Research Institute of the Federal Employment Service (“Institut fur Ar-

beitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung, IAB”). It includes four cross-sections launched in

1979, 1986, 1992 and 1999, each covering about 30,000 individuals, both men and

women.11 For ease of exposition, we use the 1979 and 1999 waves for our analysis, in-

cluding only those occupations with both men and women in both years.12

        This data set is particularly well-suited to analyze changes in skill requirements

within occupations for a number of reasons. Unlike the Dictionary of Occupational Titles

(DOT) data set for the United States — the data set often used by researchers for ques-

tions related to tasks — these data use a consistent set of occupational classifications; the

constant occupational titles thus provide the reference point for the analysis.13 Another


11
   For details on the data set see Spitz-Oener (2006).
12
   We lose approximately 10% of our sample by restricting the data in this way. However, results are in-
sensitive to this restriction.
13
   Appendix Table 1 provides a list of the occupational classifications at the two digit level.


                                                                                                           8
major improvement over previous data is that survey respondents indicated themselves

what kind of activities they perform on the job. It is very unlikely that this causes an un-

derestimation of true changes in job content. In the DOT, experts assign scores to differ-

ent indicators characterizing the occupations, and it is well known that this process en-

courages analysts to underestimate the true changes in job content. Moreover, occupa-

tional titles in the DOT are not consistent over time.14

         Occupational skill requirements are based on the activities that employees have to

perform at the workplace. We pool these activities into five task categories. They are:

non-routine analytical tasks, non-routine interactive tasks, routine cognitive tasks, routine

manual tasks, and non-routine manual tasks. Table 1 illustrates the assignment of activi-

ties to the five categories.15

         For individual i, the task measures (Tijt) are defined as:

         number of activities in category j performed by individual i in time t
Tijt =                                                                          x 100,
                       total number of activities in category j

where t=1979, 1986, 1992 and 1999; and j represents the task group, including non-

routine analytic tasks, non-routine interactive tasks, routine cognitive tasks, routine man-

ual tasks, and non-routine manual tasks. For example, if individual i indicates that she




14
   The credibility of the analysis in the present study would be impaired if the answers provided by male
and female survey participants were systematically biased toward certain categories of tasks. This is
unlikely as survey participants only indicate whether they perform certain activities or not and do not as-
sign scores to the different measures. In addition, most of the analysis is performed in first-differences; the
reporting bias therefore would only pose a problem if it changed over time.
15
   The data set does not include information about the time spent on different activities. In addition, while
most questions remained the same over time, there were some changes in questions concerning the activi-
ties employees perform at the workplace. For consistency, we reduced the activities in each category to
those that are comparable over time.


                                                                                                             9
performs two interactive tasks and the category includes four tasks in total, then her in-

teractive task measure is 50.16

         The data set also includes detailed information on the tools and machines used by

the employees at the workplace. Our measure of computer use is a variable indicating

whether the employees use any of the following on the job: computers, terminals, and

electronic data processing machines.

         Employees are classified based on their vocational education:17 (1) People with

low levels of education, that is, people with no occupational training; (2) people with a

medium level of education, that is, people with a vocational qualification who might have

either completed an apprenticeship or graduated from a vocational college and (3) people

with a high level of education, that is, people holding a degree from a university or tech-

nical college.

         The Administrative Social Security Records, also known as the IAB employment

sample, is a two percent representative sample of administrative social security records in

Germany covering 1975-2001. The sample, which includes more than 200,000 employ-

ment spells per year, provides precise information on daily wages for all individuals who

contribute to the social security system; this represents about 80 percent of the German

workforce (among the excluded groups are the self-employed and civil servants). The

major shortcoming of the data is that it is right-censored at the contribution assessment

ceiling for the pension insurance (a similar problem encountered by researchers using the

Current Population Survey). The deficit mainly concerns employees with high levels of


16
   We tested the sensitivity of our results to our choice of task measure by also trying the share of total tasks
an individual performs in each category. The results are robust to this choice.
17
   School qualifications are not considered, that is, it is not important which of the three different school
streams (Hauptschule, Realschule or Gymnasium) an individual attended.


                                                                                                             10
education, for which censoring affects more than 50 per cent of the wage observations.

Because of this, we restrict the wage analysis to employees with low and medium levels

of education only.18

         Our wage sample consists of prime-age workers (aged 25-55) in West Germany

who are working full-time (38+ hours per week), though they need not work all year

round. Our wage measure is the daily wage, averaged over the number of days the worker

worked in the respective year. In order to adjust for the differences in working days, we

additionally weight the observations by the number of days worked per year in the analy-

sis.19 We present summary statistics of the wage sample in Appendix Table 3.



                                    IV. Patterns of Task Changes

         Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of task inputs of women relative to men between

1979 and 1999 by showing the proportional difference in task changes relative to 1979;

that is, growth in female task inputs minus growth in male task inputs. Table 2 shows the

absolute values of task categories for men and women in this period and demonstrates

again how differently they have evolved.20 It is striking that all the changes in task inputs

have been larger for women than for men. In the earliest period, men’s analytical task

inputs were more than twice as high as those for women, while women had higher routine


18
   The impact of this restriction is less severe than it might first appear. The reason is that relative changes
in task inputs across the genders were most pronounced for low and medium educated employees; hence,
they appear to be the most interesting groups to look at. In addition, the gender wage gap convergence has
been the most pronounced for low and medium educated employees (Fitzenberger and Wunderlich, 2002).
19
   Our results are robust to alternative weighting schemes.
20
   Appendix Table 2 presents the summary statistics using an alternative measure of task inputs: the frac-
tion of total tasks performed by an employee in each category. The conclusions are consistent across task
measures. From now on we focus on the overall period, although Figures 1 and 2 suggest that there are
differences across sub-periods that might be interesting to analyze in more detail. However, for the sake of
exposition of this study, we leave this for future research. Results are presented for full-time workers only.
Results for all worksers are similar.


                                                                                                            11
cognitive and routine manual task inputs.21 However, by 1999, women appear to be

catching up to men in terms of analytic skills and, even more, in terms of interactive

skills. For routine cognitive and routine manual skills, where women had dominated 20

years earlier, men have taken over; and non-routine manual skills, which were used pri-

marily by men in 1979, have a larger importance in women’s work relative to that of men

in 1999.22

         These patterns are very similar across education groups. Table 3 shows the results

for each education group separately. Within each group, women have experienced large

relative increases in analytical task inputs. For low- and medium-educated employees the

differences in analytical skill requirements between the genders is small by 1999, while

for high educated the difference is still notable in 1999. The difference in interactive task

inputs between the genders is small for all education groups by 1999. Women have wit-

nessed large relative decreases in routine tasks — both cognitive and manual — at all

education levels, and large relative increases in non-routine manual task inputs.23, 24



                    V. Role of Changing Tasks on the Gender Wage Gap

21
   Results are presented for full-time workers only. We performed a similar breakdown for all workers for
which the descriptive statistics turned out to be very similar.
22
   To get a sense of what types of occupations are most affected, sales representatives, bank and insurance
clerks, and engineers experienced large declines in routine cognitive tasks, electricians, precision mechan-
ics workers, assemblers, gardeners, librarians, and judicial officers all experienced large declines in routine
manual tasks, and technical service workers, teachers, clergymen, and social workers experienced large
increases in non-routine manual tasks.
23
   One concern about looking at these figures is unobserved heterogeneity; we know, for example, that in
more recent cohorts girls performed better than boys in school, and it could be that the patterns we are ob-
serving are due to cohort effects. To examine this, we look at the evolution of tasks within cohorts (see
Appendix Tables 4 and 5). Interestingly, cohort effects do not appear to play a role in explaining task
changes within each gender nor in explaining task changes for women relative to men.
24
   We restricted the analysis to those occupations that include both men and women, therefore segregated
occupations are excluded from our analysis. We did analyze occupational segregation, however. The main
finding is that – similar to the developments in the U.S. – occupational segregation has declined in West
Germany in recent decades. Most importantly for our analysis is that the pattern of task changes in segre-
gated occupations is very similar to those in non-segregated occupations.


                                                                                                            12
           Given these patterns, we next examine how these changes in tasks relate to the

change in the gender wage gap over this period. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the gen-

der wage gap for low and medium educated employees in West Germany. Between 1979

and 1999, the gender wage gap declined by 9.3 percentage points in West Germany. To

investigate the role of task changes, we do a simple decomposition of the rate of wage

convergence into its components, namely, relative task changes and relative price

changes. The decomposition is as follows:


            (W M − W F ) 99 − (W M − W F ) 79 = ∑ p M (YM 99 − YM 79 ) − ∑ p F (YF 99 − YF 79 )
            1444442444443                       j                        j
                            (1)                 1 44424443 1               4442444         3
                                                                ( 2)                      ( 3)

                                                   + ∑ YM ( p M 99 − p M 79 ) − ∑ YF ( p F 99 − p F 79 )
                                                     j                          j
                                                     1 44424443 1                 4442444           3
                                                                 ( 4)                       ( 5)



where W gt is the average log wage for gender g (M=men; F=female) at time t, Ygt is the

average value of the skill for gender g at time t, and p gt is the price of the skill for gender

g at time t. Terms (2) and (3) represent the changes in male (2) and female (2) wages that

can be attributed to changes in the “quantity” of tasks – holding prices constant at the av-

erage level over the two time periods. The fourth and fifth terms represent the changes in

male (4) and female (5) wages that can be attributed to changes in the gender-specific

returns – holding gender-specific task inputs constant at the gender average level for the

two periods.

           Appendix Table 6 presents the results from the simple wage equation used to gen-

erate the price measures used in the decomposition.25 The log(wage) equations include

controls for education, age, education-gender interactions and age-gender interactions, as


25
     Standard errors were adjusted to allow for clustering at the occupation level.


                                                                                                           13
well as industry dummies. From Appendix Table 6, Column (1), it is interesting to note

that, on average, women’s rewards for analytical task inputs were much larger than those

for men. This is also the case for the interactive and routine cognitive task category, al-

though the difference in the coefficients is much smaller than in the case of analytic tasks.

Both genders, on average, turn out to be negatively rewarded for routine and non-routine

manual task inputs, with the penalty being larger (smaller) for women than for men for

routine manual tasks (non-routine manual tasks). Both genders have experienced a de-

cline in the price for analytical task inputs and non-routine manual task inputs (column

2); the size of the effect being larger (smaller) for women than for men for the first (lat-

ter) task category. Average prices for interactive tasks have decreased for men but in-

creased for women. Returns to routine cognitive task inputs have decreased for women

but increased for men, whereas average prices for routine manual task inputs have not

changed much for men or women.

       Table 4 summarizes the contribution of task changes and price changes to the

gender wage convergence. Of the .093 decline in the gender wage gap over this period,

Column 1 minus Column 2 gives how much of the change in the gender wage gap can be

explained by changes in quantities of these tasks performed, while Column 3 minus Col-

umn 4 gives the amount that can be explained by changes in the prices of these tasks.

Column 5 is the total amount that can be explained by changes in both prices and quanti-

ties (Column 1-Column 2+Column 3-Column 4) and Column 6 gives the total percentage

that can be explained (([Column 5]/.093)*100). Overall, the results suggest that relative

task changes (holding prices fixed at average levels) could explain about 86 percent of

wage convergence ((.08/.093)*100).        However, this positive effect of relative task




                                                                                          14
changes was offset by the changes in prices, which would have increased the gender

wage gap by about 45 percent if quantities had been held constant ((-.042/.093)*100).

       There are large differences across task categories in how changes in task inputs

have contributed to the gender wage convergence; the relative change in the analytical

task inputs is the largest single contributor to wage convergence (96 percent), followed

by the routine manual task category (66 percent) and the interactive task category (56

percent). The relative changes in the routine cognitive task inputs, by contrast, would

have resulted in a large increase in the gender wage gap (124 percent; that is more than

we actually observed). For this task category, relative price changes add to this pattern, as

they also work in the direction of increasing the gender wage gap (159 percent). For the

interactive task category, in contrast, relative price changes also contributed to the closing

of the gender wage gap (80 percent), so – taking task and price changes together – this

task category was the largest single contributor to wage convergence (135 percent). How-

ever, by solely focusing on this category, one would largely overestimate the gender

wage convergence. The results suggest that in order to being able to identify the factors

contributing to wage convergence, it is important to consider a broader spectrum of tasks.



                 VI. Sources of Task Changes: Technological Change

Decomposition

       What can explain the changes in tasks that we observe? The gender-specific

changes in tasks over time can be broken into two components: (1), changes in the distri-

bution of men and women across occupations and/or industries and, (2), changes in the

task composition within occupations and/or industries. The technological change hy-




                                                                                           15
pothesis predicts that changes in tasks should be observed within industry/occupation to

representing a change in the production process. Changes across industries would be

more consistent with changing product demand, perhaps through increased globalization.

        In a first effort to understand the causes of the patterns we observe, we apply a

decomposition similar to that which we did for the change in the gender wage gap. We

decompose the changes in the difference between men and women into those that are due

to changes in the employment of men and women between cells (how much of the differ-

ence can be explained by differential shifts in employment across occupation and/or in-

dustry cells) and those that are due to differential changes in task inputs within cells (how

much of the difference can be explained by the fact that woman and men experience dif-

ferent task changes within occupations and/or industry cells).

        Formally, the change in the gender gap in tasks can be decomposed as follows:


(YM − YF ) 99 − (YM − YF ) 79 = ∑ α Mj (YM 99 j − YM 79 j ) − ∑ α Fj (YF 99 j − YF 79 j )
14444244443                     j                             j
              (1)               1 44424443 1                    44424443
                                               ( 2)                           ( 3)

                                 + ∑ YMj (α M 99 j − α M 79 j ) − ∑ YFj (α F 99 j − α F 79 j )
                                   j                              j
                                   1 444   424444         3 1       44424443
                                                ( 4)                           ( 5)



where Ygtj is the average value of the skills for gender g (M=men; F=female) at time t in

occupation j and α gtj is the proportion of gender g employed in cell j at time t. Terms (2)

and (3) represent the fraction of the total change in the gender gap in a particular task that

can be attributed to changes within cells, with the first and second terms representing

within cell task changes for men and women respectively – holding gender-specific em-

ployment shares constant at the average level. The fourth and fifth term represent the

fraction of the total change in the differences that can be attributed to changes in the gen-



                                                                                                 16
der-specific employment composition of cells – holding gender-specific task inputs con-

stant at the average level. The fourth term captures the portion that can be attributed to

the changing employment share of men and the final term refers to the portion that can be

attributed to the changing employment share of women.

       Table 5 presents the results of this decomposition. The first panel presents results

when we look at occupation cells (and decompose changes in the gender gap in tasks to

within occupation changes and across-occupation changes). The second panel present

results when we look at industry cells, and the final panel presents results when we de-

compose industry*occupation cells.

       Column 1 shows the total change in the difference in task inputs of men and

women. Columns (2) and (3) show the within cell task changes by gender, and columns

(4) and (5) show the changes in task inputs for men and women that are due to changes in

the distribution of employment across cells.

       From looking down the columns, it is clear that the largest portions of the changes

are coming from within cell task changes, which is consistent with the idea of techno-

logical change altering the task composition of jobs. Interestingly, for all task categories

and all cells, within cell task changes have been larger for women than for men .

       The total change in the difference in analytical tasks inputs is not particularly

large, partly because the differences weren’t large to begin with. There have been large

increases in the use of analytic skills for both men and women between 1979 and 1999,

with very little change due to changes across cells. The small decline in the gender gap in

analytical tasks is due to the fact that within cell changes in analytical tasks have been

larger for women than for men. The same is true for interactive skills, although the mag-




                                                                                         17
nitude of the decline in the gender gap in interactive tasks is larger than for the analytical

task category. Again, the primary source of the overall increase in the task measure is the

large increases in the use of interpersonal tasks within cells for both men and women.

       Once we turn to the routine tasks, a different pattern emerges. For both cognitive

and manual routine tasks, the gender task gap has increased considerably, although the

use of these tasks has in fact declined for both genders (only exception: routine cognitive

task category within industries). Similar to the non-routine cognitive task categories, the

changes have been most pronounced within cells and the changes have been much larger

for women than for men. The large increase in the task difference results from the fact

that women had larger values of routine tasks in 1979, whereas by 1999 this pattern had

reversed and it was the men who had the highest values in the routine tasks.

       The gender gap in the non-routine manual task category experienced the largest

decline between 1979 and 1999. Again, task changes within cells account for the largest

part of the change. The decline in the gap is a result of a considerable relative increase in

non-routine manual activities within cells for women.

       Overall, this decomposition suggests that task changes have occurred primarily

within occupations and industries, which is consistent with the idea that technological

developments are a major cause for the changing skill patterns we observe.

Computer Adoption

       In this paper, we focus on workplace computerization as our measure of techno-

logical change. The last column in Table 2 shows that not only the evolution of tasks has

been different between the genders; the proliferation of computers has also evolved dif-




                                                                                           18
ferently. In 1979, men were about 20 percent more likely to use computers than women,

while the difference in computer use had declined to 6 percent by 1999.

       The task framework makes two specific predictions about which occupations will

adopt computers most rapidly as computer prices declined: (1) occupations intensive in

cognitive and manual routine tasks, for which computers are direct substitutes, and (2)

occupation intensive in non-routine cognitive tasks, for which computers are relative

complements to labor. As men and women had very different occupational skill require-

ments in 1979, these predictions are important in the context of this study. We test them

by fitting the following model:

        ∆C j ,1979−1999 = α + β T j ,1979 + ε j ,

where ∆C j ,1979−1999 is the percentage point change in the share of employees using a com-

puter in occupation j between 1979 and 1999, T j ,1979 is the measure of task intensity in

occupation j in 1979 and ε j is an error term.

       Table 6 shows the results. The more intensive an occupation was in terms of cog-

nitive and manual routine task in 1979, the faster was the growth in computerization be-

tween 1979 and 1999. This was also the case for non-routine cognitive tasks. In contrast,

occupations intensive in non-routine manual tasks computerized significantly less than

others. Thus, given the different task content of jobs of men and women in the late-1970s,

we would expect computers to alter women’s work relatively more than that of men – an

idea that we can test directly.

       We next turn to examine the effect of computer adoption on task inputs, allowing

the effect to vary by gender. In this case, we estimate the following specification:




                                                                                        19
            Tijt = β 0 + β 1C ijt + β 2 Fi + β 3Y1999 + β 4 (C ijt * Fi ) + β 5 (C ijt * Y1999 )
                 + β 6 ( Fi * Y1999 ) + β 7 (C ijt * Fi * Y1999 ) + β 8 X ijt + ε j

where, again, Tijt is the task measure for individual i in occupation j at time t, Cijt is an

indicator of computer use by individual i in occupation j at time t, Fi indicates whether

the individual is female, Y1999 is an indicator if the year is 1999, and Xijt is a vector of

other controls, including gender-specific-education and occupation controls. β 5 describes

how the relationship between computers and the task measure has changed between 1979

and 1999, and β 7 describes whether this relationship has changed differently for women

relative to men. The task framework suggests that we should see a positive relationship

between computerization and non-routine cognitive skills (analytic and interactive) but a

negative relationship between computerization and routine skills (manual and cognitive).

As the specification includes occupation dummies, we test the relationship between

changes in computer use and changes in task inputs within occupations.

           Table 7 shows the results for each task category separately. As before, we restrict

the analysis to the overall period, 1979-1999, so the regressions are based on the pooled

1979- and 1999-waves. The dependent variables are the respective task measures in 1979

and 1999.26

           We first look at analytic skills (Column 1). We can see from the interaction of PC

and 1999 that increasing computer use is associated with an increase in analytical tasks.

In addition, we can see from the coefficient on PC*1999*Female that the computeriza-

tion effect is stronger for women than men (the coefficient represents the difference in the

effect for women relative to men). Given that women started out with lower levels of ana-


26
     Results are robust to the exclusion of some/all of the controls.


                                                                                                   20
lytical task inputs, this catching up effect for female computer users is not very surpris-

ing.

         The results for the interactive task category are shown in Column 2. As with the

analytical task category, computer adoption is associated with an increase in interactive

skills. The effect is much stronger for men relative to women. The overall results sug-

gest that computers are relative complements to non-routine interactive task inputs, par-

ticularly among men.

         In the case of routine skills, we predict a negative change between computeriza-

tion and task inputs. Column 3 shows the results for the routine cognitive task category.

Female computer users and male computer users have experienced declines in routine

cognitive task inputs, though the effect is larger for women. Column 4 then shows that

the results are similar for the routine manual task category. Again, a possible explanation

for this larger effect of computer use on women’s tasks even within occupations is that

women started out with higher levels ex ante and so, even within occupations, there is

more room for computers to affect skills.27 However, for these two task categories, it is

actually also interesting to note that the coefficient for the interaction term “Fe-

male*1999” is significantly negative and large in size (much larger than the time effects

for men; Year_1999); so the results suggest that part of the larger declines in routine

tasks inputs for women is not explained by computerization.

         Based on the task framework, we do not have testable hypotheses about the rela-

tionship between computers and non-routine manual activities. However, as the relation-


27
   In order to examine this further, for each task category we break our occupations into 10 deciles based on
the 1979 distribution of individual tasks. We then allow the effects to vary by decile of this distribution
and find that the effects of computerization are the same for men and women, suggesting that it is the rela-
tive starting point that allows for differential effects for men and women.


                                                                                                          21
ship might still be interesting, Column 5 presents the results for this task category. We

see that computer adoption is associated with significantly more non-routine manual

tasks among men; however, this effect is much smaller among women. In addition, for

men and (even more so for) women, changes in non-routine tasks not explained by work-

place computerization is large.28



                                         VII. Polarization

        There is one dimension along which the task-based framework diverges from the

traditional skill-biased technological change hypothesis: in its prediction about who is

most affected by technological change. The traditional skill-biased technological change

hypothesis predicts an increased demand for skilled jobs relative to unskilled jobs. The

task-based framework presents a more nuanced view of this (see Autor, Katz and Kear-

ney, 2006, Goos and Manning, 2007, and Spitz-Oener, 2006). The argument is that it is

jobs that employ middle education workers that are going to be most affected by comput-

erization, which will lead to a hollowing-out of the distribution of jobs by skill. Comput-

erization substitutes for routine cognitive tasks, which affects mainly employees with

medium levels of education such as bookkeepers and bank clerks. Non-routine manual

tasks, in contrast, that at present cannot be accomplished by computers, are often found in

occupations held by employees with low levels of education, such as waiters or cleaning

staff. As a result, one would expect to see a polarization of employment into tasks origi-

nally performed by the lowest and highest skilled workers as a result of computerization.




28
   We also analyzed the relationship between task changes and workplace computerization for each educa-
tion group separately. Our overall conclusions also hold within education groups.


                                                                                                     22
       Given the initial distribution of tasks in 1979, we suspect that the polarization

pressure in the labor market was larger for women than for men in the last three decades.

The question of polarization concerns the evolution of employment across occupations

based on their levels of skills. As a proxy for skills, we divide occupations into 10 dec-

iles based on their median wages in 1979 (separately by gender), so that the occupations

in the first group have the lowest median wages in 1979 and the occupations in the 10th

group have the largest median wages in 1979. Figure 3 shows the proportion change in

(full-time) employment shares between 1979 and 1999 for the ten groups for men and

women separately. The graphs for men and women look quite different, with the “hol-

lowing out” tendency of the labor market being more pronounced for women than for

men. While the employment share for men has grown by about 37 percent and that of

women by more then 100 percent in the tenth group between 1979 and 1999, the decline

in the employment share in the first group was smaller for women (about 10 percent) than

for men (close to 20 percent). In contrast, the decline in employment shares in the “mid-

dle” occupations has been more pronounced for women, with the largest difference being

in the second group in which the employment share has shrunk by 52 percent for women

and by 23 percent for men.



                                    VIII. Conclusion


       Since the 1970s, women have experienced great improvements in terms of labor

market success. Most research has attributed this success story to supply factors, whereas

demand side explanations played only a minor role. In this study, we investigate the clos-

ing of the gender wage gap using direct measures of job tasks. The advantage of this



                                                                                       23
task-based approach is that we are able to directly compare the content of women’s work

to that of men. In addition, we are also able to relate the changes to technological devel-

opments, a major argument for demand side changes in the labor market.

        While we are using data from West Germany, there is no reason to believe that

technology adoption was different in West Germany relative to other countries. How-

ever, to examine this, we also analyzed a number of specifications that allow us to com-

pare our results to those of earlier work using United States data; these comparisons sug-

gest that the patterns we observe in West Germany are not unique to that country.29 In

addition, computer use has evolved quite similarly in the United States and West Ger-

many (with West Germany only lagging behind in the early-1980s), and we have little

reason to believe that the adoption of these new technologies would have different effects

in West Germany relative to the U.S. or other countries.

        We find that changes in work content have been larger for women than for men

along all dimensions we consider, a result that is particularly interesting in light of recent

work focusing solely on interactive, or “people” skills. We show that, although women

experienced large relative increases in non-routine interactive tasks and also in non-

routine analytic tasks, the most striking difference between the genders is the marked de-

cline in routine tasks experienced by women and almost not at all by men.
29
  The results in ALM (2003) and Spitz-Oener (2006) show that aggregate task changes have followed the
same pattern in both countries. In ALM (2003), the authors present task means broken down by gender.
Although the numbers themselves are not comparable, we can compare the relative distribution of tasks
across men and women. In their case, as in ours, men’s analytic skills exceed those of women in 1980 but
women make significant strides towards closing the gap by 1998/9. This is also the case for interactive
skills, though women actually catch up and surpass men by 1998/9. In the case of routine cognitive and
routine manual skills, in the U.S., women start out much higher than men but, by the end, women decline
by substantially more than men. In the case of routine cognitive skills, women are lower than men by
1998/9, whereas for routine manual, women have narrowed the gap substantially. In West Germany, we
see the same pattern except that women start higher and end lower than men in both categories. Finally,
ALM find almost no change in non-routine manual skills for men and women while we have evidence of
an increase in non-routine manual skills for women but a decline for men. Overall, the comparison sug-
gests that the relative distribution of skills may be similar in the U.S. and West Germany.


                                                                                                      24
       In addition, we find that relative task changes are important in explaining the clos-

ing of the gender wage gap. Task changes and price changes are able to account for a

substantial fraction of the closing of the gender wage gap in recent decades.

       When investigating the potential sources of task changes, we find that technologi-

cal change might be important in explaining the phenomena, as 1) task changes were

most pronounced within industries and occupations, and 2) task changes occurred most

rapidly in occupations in which computers have made major headway.

       The paper also contributes to the discussion on polarization that has experienced

revitalization owing to the task-based approach. We find evidence of polarization in em-

ployment for both women and men. Interestingly and in line with the task changes that

we observe for the two genders, the polarization tendency in the labor market has been

larger for women than for men in recent decades.




                                                                                         25
                                     References

Acemoglu, D. (2002), “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market”, Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 40(1), 7-72.

Autor, D.H., L.F. Katz, and M.S. Kearney (2006), “The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
Market,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 96(2), 189-194.

Autor, D.H., F. Levy, and R.J. Murnane (2003), “The Skill Content of Recent Techno-
logical Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
118(4), 1279-1333.

Bacolod, Marigee and Bernard S. Blum (2005), “Two Sides of the Same Coin: U. S. “Re-
sidual” Inequality and the Gender Gap,” Unpublished manuscript.

Black, S. and C. Juhn (2000), “The Rise in Female Professionals: Are Women Respond-
ing to Skill Demand”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 90(2),
450-455.

Blau, F.D., and L.M. Kahn (1997), “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
Differential in the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15(1), 1-42.

Blau, F.D., and L.M. Kahn (2003), “Understanding International Differences in the Gen-
der Pay Gap,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 21(1), 106-144.

Blau, F.D., and L.M. Kahn (2006), “The U.S. Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s: Slowing
Convergence,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 60(1), 45-66.

Borghans, L., B. ter Weel, and Bruce A. Weinberg (2006), “People People: Social Capital
and the Labor-Market Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups,” NBER Working Paper
11985.

Chennells, L., and J. van Reenen (1999), “Has Technology Hurt Less Skilled Workers”,
IFS Working Paper No. W99/27.

Fitzenberger, B. and G. Wunderlich (2002), “Gender Wage Differences in West Ger-
many: A Cohort Analysis”, German Economic Review, Vol. 3(4), 379-414.

Goos, M. and A. Manning (2007), “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of
Work in Britain,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 89(1), 118-133.

Katz, L.F., D.H. Autor (1999), “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality”,
in Handbook of Labor Economics, Ed. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, 1463-1555.

Katz, L.F. and K.M. Murphy (1992), “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107(1), 35-78.



                                                                                    26
Levy, F. and R. Murnane (1992), “U.S. Earnings Levels and earnings Inequality: A Re-
view of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations”, Journal of Economic Literature, 30,
1333-1381.

Mulligan, C.B. and Y. Rubinstein (2005), “Selection, Investment and Women’s Relative
Wages Since 1975”, NBER WP 11159.

Olivetti, C. and B. Petrongolo (2006), “Unequal Pay or Unequal Employment? A Cross-
country Analysis of Gender Gaps”, CEPR DP 5506 February.

O’Neill, J. and S. Polachek (1993), “Why the Gender Wage Gap Narrowed in the 1980s”,
Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1), 205-228.

Spitz-Oener, A. (2006), “Technical Change, Job Tasks, and Rising Educational De-
mands: Looking Outside the Wage Structure”, Journal of Labor Economics, 24(2), 235-
270.

Weinberg, B.A. (2000), “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 53(2), 290-308.

Welch, F. (2000), “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality among Men:
One Phenomenon or Two?” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol.
90(2), 444-449.




                                                                                  27
                                 1
    Female Relative Task Changes
-1.5   -1    -.5      0    .5




                                     1979                        1985                        1991                                  1999

                                                              Analytic                                  Interactive
                                                              Routine Cognitive                         Routine Manual
                                                              Non-routine Manual
                                      Note: Female relative task changes are defined as growth in female task inputs minus growth in
                                      male task inputs (both relative to 1979). Data source: BIBB-IAB


                                                        Figure 1: Female Relative Task Changes.
                 .82
                 .8
Wage Gap
    .78          .76
                 .74




                                     1975            1980               1985             1990              1995             2000
                                                                                  year
                                      Note: Low- and medium-educated persons aged 25-55 who work full-time, live in West Germany
                                      and are German nationals. The wage gap is a 3-year centered moving average of the ratio of un-
                                      conditional median male and female real daily wages.
                                      Data source: IAB employment sample


Figure 2: Evolution of the Gender Wage Gap—West Germany, 1975-2001.


                                                                                                                                          28
                                                                    Men                                          Female
Changes in Employment Shares (in Percent)
                                             100
                                             80
                                             60
                                             40
                                             20
                                             0
                                             -20
                                             -40
                                             -60




                                                   1                5                   10        1                5                   10

                                            Note: The figure shows percentage changes in (full-time) employment shares between 1979 and 1999
                                            for occupations that are ranked in 10 groups according to their median wages in 1979.
                                            Data: IAB Employment Sample


                                               Figure 3: Changes in Employment Shares by 1979 Median Wages




                                                                                                                                               29
                          Table 1: Assignment of Activities
Classification            Tasks
Non-routine analytic      researching/analyzing/evaluating and planning, making
                          plans/constructions/designing and sketching, working out
                          rules/prescriptions, using and interpreting rules

Non-routine interactive   negotiating/lobbying/coordinating/organizing,
                          teaching/training, selling/buying/advising customers/advertising,
                          entertaining/presenting, employ/manage personnel

Routine cognitive         calculating/bookkeeping, correcting of texts/data,
                          measuring of length/weight/temperature

Routine manual            operating/controlling machines, equipping machines

Non-routine manual        repairing/renovation of houses/apartments/machines/vehicles,
                          restoring of art/monuments, serving or accommodating

Note: Overview of how activities asked for in the Qualification and Career Survey (col-
umn 2) are grouped into the task categories.




                                                                                      30
                   Table 2: Summary Statistics: Full-Time Workers Only
                             (Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
                            Analytic Interactive     Routine      Routine Non-Routine          PC Use
                                                    Cognitive     Manual    Manual


Male
   1979                        8.3         13.3        48.8         31.0          23.4           7.8
   (N=12,361)                (16.2)       (16.1)      (44.8)       (41.1)        (37.4)        (26.9)
   1999                       17.3         35.4        40.9         21.9          48.6          65.5
   (N=9,986)                 (24.2)       (29.1)      (48.5)       (32.7)        (49.1)        (47.5)
Change 1979-1999               9.0         22.1        -7.9         -9.1          15.2          57.7

Female
   1979                        2.8          8.6        52.2         59.6          12.5           6.2
   (N=6,389)                  (9.6)       (11.4)      (46.9)       (44.5)        (28.8)        (24.0)
   1999                       12.9         34.2        24.0          9.9          56.1          61.6
   (N=5,989)                 (20.8)       (25.7)      (41.8)       (23.4)        (48.0)        (48.6)
Change 1979-1999              10.1         25.6        -28.2       -49.7          43.6          55.4

Difference (Male-Female)
    1979                       5.5           4.7         -3.4        -28.6        10.9          1.6
                               (.2)         (.2)         (.7)         (.6)         (.5)         (.4)
   1999                        4.4           1.2        16.8          11.9         -7.5         3.9
                               (.4)         (.5)         (.8)         (.5)         (.8)         (.8)
     Note: Sample includes persons aged 25-55 who work full-time, live in West Germany
     and are German nationals. Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                          31
                 Table 3: Summary Statistics by Education Group
                        (Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
            Analytic Interactive    Routine        Routine   Non-Routine        PC
                                   Cognitive        Manual     Manual           Use
                                  Low Education
  Male
   1979        6.4        8.0          45.1          38.5           20.8         4.7
(N=2,094)    (14.2)     (12.5)        (42.3)        (40.1)         (31.7)      (21.2)
   1999        8.8       16.4          30.8          27.2           36.3        31.3
 (N=910)     (16.4)     (23.2)        (44.9)        (34.7)         (46.1)      (46.4)
  Female
   1979        2.5        6.7        40.8            50.5           20.7         3.4
(N=1,909)     (8.6)      (9.7)      (44.6)          (42.2)         (33.7)      (18.1)
   1999        7.2       18.8        21.4            17.5           42.5        30.5
 (N=727)     (14.5)     (23.1)      (39.9)          (30.6)         (47.6)      (46.1)
                                 Middle Education
  Male
   1979        6.9       13.1          49.4          31.7           26.8         7.4
(N=8,910)    (14.3)     (16.1)        (44.7)        (41.6)         (39.4)      (26.2)
   1999       14.5       32.7          43.6          24.9           52.8        62.2
(N=6,844)    (22.3)     (28.8)        (48.9)        (34.2)         (49.0)      (48.5)
  Female
   1979        2.2        8.4         59.0        67.9               9.6         7.6
(N=4,061)     (8.3)     (11.5)       (46.4)      (43.1)            (26.4)      (26.5)
   1999       12.5       33.7         23.7         9.9              58.8        63.5
(N=4,400)    (20.1)     (24.9)       (41.6)      (23.3)            (47.3)      (48.1)
                                  High Education
  Male
    1979      20.1        22.4          50.2           14.7            4.6      15.5
(N=1,357) (23.9)         (17.5)        (48.8)         (34.5)         (20.4)    (36.3)
    1999      29.5        51.3          37.0           10.5           40.6      89.6
(N=2,232) (28.2)         (24.7)        (48.0)         (23.4)         (48.8)    (30.5)
  Female
    1979       9.6        19.1          38.7           21.3            3.4       4.5
  (N=419) (19.1)         (12.2)        (48.1)         (40.2)         (17.7)    (20.8)
    1999      19.7        49.1          27.2            4.2           53.2      77.1
  (N=878) (26.0)         (23.7)        (44.2)         (13.9)         (49.4)    (42.0)
Note: Sample includes persons aged 25-55 who work full-time, live in West Germany
and are German nationals. Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                  32
                           Table 4: Decomposition of the Wage Convergence: 1979-1999
Rate of Wage                   Changes in Changes in Changes         Changes    Predicted                             Percentage of
Convergence: .093              Quantities: Quantities: in Prices: in Prices     Change in                              Change in
                                 Female        Male       Female      Male       Gender                                Wage Gap
                                                                                Wage Gap                               Explained
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)                                     (6)

Analytic                              .116             .027            -.016           -.011            .084               90.3

Interactive                           .153             .100             .042           -.032            .126               135.5

Routine Cognitive                    -.119             -.003           -.117           .031            -.263               -282.8

Routine Manual                        .064             .002             .015           .003             .074               79.6

Non-Routine Manual                   -.025             -.017           -.056           -.081            .018               19.4

Total:                                .189             .109            -.132           -.090            .039               41.9

Predicted Change in                            .08                             -.042                                       41.9
Gender Wage Gap:
              Note: Task prices and changes in task prices are estimated using wage regressions; the detailed results of
              these wage regressions can be found in Table 6 in the appendix. Data: Qualification and Career Survey and
              IAB employment sample.




                                                                                                                     33
                                      Table 5
            Decomposition of the Change in the Task Difference: 1979-1999
                             Total      Within      Within      Between                                  Between
                          Change in      Male       Female        Male                                   Female
                          Difference
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)                                     (5)
Occupation
(N=46)
Analytic                      -1.1        8.1          9.4         1.0                                     .7
Interactive                   -3.4        20.6        23.2         1.5                                    2.3
Routine Cognitive             20.5        -8.2       -29.0          .4                                     .7
Routine Manual                40.6        -7.8       -47.1        -1.3                                    -2.6
Non-Routine Manual           -18.3        25.2        41.5         .01                                    2.1

Industry
(N=38)
Analytic                                       -1.8                 8.0                    9.6     .6      .8
Interactive                                    -5.6                 18.6                  24.2    1.0     1.0
Routine Cognitive                             28.6                   1.5                  -29.4    -.3     2.0
Routine Manual                                 44.6                 -3.1                  -47.8   -1.4    -1.4
Non-Routine Manual                            -24.0                 19.2                  43.1     .4      .5

Industry x Occupation
(N=288)
Analytic                                       -.9                   8.9                  10.1    .9       .6
Interactive                                   -2.4                   22.7                  24.0    .5     1.6
Routine Cognitive                             15.5                  -14.6                 -32.8   -.1     2.5
Routine Manual                                37.1                  -14.5                 -47.8   -.6     -4.3
Non-Routine Manual                           -15.4                  28.9                  43.7    1.9     2.4
Note: Sample includes persons aged 25-55 who work full-time, live in West Germany and are German na-
tionals. Each panel represents decompositions at different levels, first within/across occupation, then
within/across industry, and finally within/across industry*occupation cells. Means across panels are differ-
ent because of slightly different samples; however, results are entirely consistent when calculated using a
constant sample. Each row represents a separate component of the decomposition, where the columns are
numbered as follows:
(YM − YF ) 99 − (YM − YF ) 79 = ∑α Mj (YM 99 j − YM 79 j ) − ∑α Fj (YF 99 j − YF 79 j )
14444244443 j                                                j
              (1)               144424443 1                    44424443
                                              ( 2)                         (3)

                                + ∑YMj (α M 99 j − α M 79 j ) − ∑YFj (α F 99 j − α F 79 j )
                                  j                             j
                                  1 444  424444         3 1       44424443
                                               ( 4)                         ( 5)



Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                                             34
     Table 6: Predicting Occupational Computer Adoption
      Dependent Variable: Change in PC Use (1979-1999)
 1979 Value:

 Analytic                                       1.76
                                                (.50)

 Interactive                                    1.36
                                                (.53)

 Routine Cognitive                              .81
                                                (.10)

 Routine Manual                                 .26
                                                (.18)

 Non-Routine Manual                             -.68
                                                (.13)

  N=46
Each cell represents the coefficient from a separate regression estimat-
ing the relationship between the 1979 mean occupational level of the
specified task and the change in occupational PC use between 1979
and 1999. Regressions are weighted by the number of employees in
occupations in 1979. Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                           35
                                             Table 7
                                   Skills and Computerization
 Dependent Variable:           Analytic Interpersonal   Routine          Routine          Non-
                                                        Cognitive        Manual         Routine
                                                                                        Manual
 PC                               3.83          .54          13.55          2.11          -4.19
                                 (.71)         (.63)         (1.51)        (1.41)         (.89)
 Year_1999                        4.03         8.95           -1.82         -3.59         19.51
                                 (.31)         (.38)          (.91)         (.64)         (.87)
 PC*Female                       -3.75          -.89          -2.10         -2.46          3.79
                                 (.95)         (.87)         (2.67)        (2.66)        (1.30)
 PC*1999                          1.68        16.83          -20.76         -6.92         12.78
                                 (.81)         (.77)         (1.79)        (1.52)        (1.31)
 PC*Female*1999                   5.23         -4.70         -10.12         -7.08        -13.65
                                (1.12)        (1.14)         (3.03)        (2.79)        (2.02)
 Female                         -5.83          -7.70         23.39         19.88         -13.81
                                (1.68)        (2.83)        (14.35)       (11.08)       (10.85)
 Female*1999                      .92          7.02          -16.88        -37.32         24.21
                                 (.46)         (.63)         (1.45)        (1.06)        (1.40)

Regressions also include dummies for education and occupation, and the interactions of these
variables with the dummy variable for females. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The number
of observations in each regression is 34,725. Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                            36
                                             Appendix Table 1
                                            List of Occupations

1    Agricultural Worker                             48   Plasterer
2    Animal Producer and Related Worker              49   Interior decorator
3    Administration worker in agriculture            50   Wood and plastic processing worker
5    Gardener, horticultural worker                  51   Painter/varnisher
6    Forestry and Hunting Worker                     52   Product tester
7    Miner                                           53   Unskilled worker
8    Mineral processing worker                       54   Machine operator
10   Stone Cutter and Carver                         55   Machine installer
11   Construction Material Manufacturer              60   Engineer
12   Potter                                          61   Chemist, Physicist, Mathematician
13   Worker in glass production and processing       62   Technician
14   Chemistry worker                                63   Technical service worker
15   Worker in plastics production                   64   Technician draftsperson
16   Paper production and processing worker          65   Foremen
17   Printing and related trades worker              66   Sales person
18   Wood and textile worker                         67   Wholesale and retailing worker
19   Steel and smelter worker                        68   Sales representative
20   Foundry worker                                  69   Bank and insurance clerk
21   Metal molder                                    70   Other (unspecified) sales person
22   Metal machine-cutter                            71   Land traffic operator
23   Precision worker in metal                       72   Water and air traffic operator
24   Metal welder                                    73   Communication worker
25   Metal construction worker                       74   Storekeeper
26   Sheet metal and construction worker             75   Management Consultant
27   Machine construction and maintenance            76   Member of Parliament
     worker
28   Vehicle and aircraft construc-                  77   Computer scientist/accountant
     tion/maintenance worker
29   Tool and mould construction worker              78   Office clerk
30   Precision mechanics worker                      79   Guard/watchmen
31   Electrician                                     80   Security personnel
32   Assembler                                       81   Judicial officer
33   Weaver, spinner                                 82   Librarian/translator/publicist
34   Textile producer                                83   Artist/performer
35   Textile processing worker                       84   Physician/pharmacist
36   Textile refinement worker                       85   Medical service worker
37   Leather and fur processing worker               86   Social worker
39   Baker                                           87   Teachers
40   Butcher                                         88   Scientist in humanities and natural sciences
41   Cooks                                           89   Clergyman
42   Beverage and foodstuff production worker        90   Hairdresser/cosmetician/personal hygiene tech-
                                                          nician
43   Worker in other nutrition industries            91   Hotel and guesthouse worker
44   Building construction worker                    92   Housekeeper/dietician
46   Underground construction worker                 93   Cleaning and waste disposal worker
47   Unskilled construction worker




                                                                                                      37
                                      Appendix Table 2
                         Summary Statistics: Full-Time Workers Only
                                Alternative Measure of Tasks
                             (Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
                            Analytic Interactive     Routine      Routine         Non-Routine      PC Use
                                                    Cognitive     Manual            Manual


Male
   1979                         10.0         31.1         24.8         16.6           17.5           7.9
   (N=12,361)                  (21.7)       (32.7)       (28.2)       (25.8)         (30.1)        (26.9)
   1999                          9.4         47.2         12.2         14.9           16.3          65.5
   (N=10,012)                  (15.7)       (31.1)       (15.9)       (22.7)         (20.1)        (47.5)
Change 1979-1999                 -.6         16.1         -12.6        -1.7           -1.2          57.6

Female
   1979                          3.8         25.3         27.8         33.1           10.0           6.2
   (N=6,389)                   (14.4)       (32.8)       (28.7)       (28.8)         (24.2)        (24.0)
   1999                          8.5         55.3          7.8          7.6           20.9          61.6
   (N=6,007)                   (16.4)       (29.6)       (14.3)       (18.5)         (22.8)        (48.6)
Change 1979-1999                 4.7         30.0         -20.0       -25.5           10.9          55.4

Difference (Male-Female)
    1979                        6.2          5.8          -3.0         -16.5           7.5          1.7

   1999                         0.9          -8.1          4.4          7.3           -4.6          3.9

     Note: The task measure is the share of total tasks performed by an individual in each
     category. Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                              38
                              Appendix Table 3
                        Summary Statistics: Wage Sample
                           Full-Time Workers Only
                                N       Mean Std. Dev.       Minimum     Maximum
All
Age                             334,359 38.73          8.57       25           55
Real Daily Wage (in €)          334,359 77.77         28.24      2.02       143.07
Fraction of Woman               334,359 40.76         49.14        0          100
Low Educated
Age                              51,182 41.18          8.54       25           55
Real Daily Wage (in €)           51,182 63.79         23.30      2.02       143.07
Fraction of Woman                51,182 51.21         49.98        0          100
Medium Educated
Age                             283,177 38.29          8.50       25           55
Real Daily Wage (in €)          283,177 80.30         28.32      2.02       143.07
Fraction of Woman               283,177 38.88         48.74        0          100
Note: Persons aged 25-55 who work full-time, live in West Germany and are German
nationals. Data: IAB employment sample; Years 1979 and 1999.




                                                                                 39
                                            Appendix Table 4
                                             Cohort Analysis
Year of Birth:         Analytic        Interactive    Routine          Routine       Non-Routine
                                                     Cognitive         Manual          Manual
                     1979     1999    1979 1999 1979 1999            1979 1999       1979 1999
Males
After 1970                    11.9            26.8            40.8           24.0            56.1
1950-1969             7.0     17.9    10.7    36.0    46.6    42.1   35.8    22.7    28.4    48.0
1930-1949             9.0     19.2    14.4    39.1    49.3    37.9   28.6    18.4    22.3    45.4
Before 1930           7.7             13.2            50.0           31.4            19.8

Average Change:
Within Cohort         10.5            25.0            -7.9           -11.6           21.4
Within Age             8.4            21.2            -8.3           -10.2           26.3

Females
After 1970                    11.0            31.2            22.7            9.9            62.0
1950-1969             3.1     13.7    8.9     35.2    58.1    25.0   65.3    10.2     9.1    54.6
1930-1949             2.7     13.2    8.7     35.2    48.4    22.6   56.8     9.3    14.0    52.1
Before 1930           1.7             7.4             42.9           48.3            20.0

Average Change:
Within Cohort         10.5            26.4           -29.5          -51.3            41.8
Within Age            10.1            25.6           -26.4          -47.0            41.8
       Note: Each cell represents the average value of the task measure for a particular cohort in
       a particular year. Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                                40
                                                       Appendix Table 5
                                                        Cohort Analysis
                                                      By Education Group
Year of Birth:                Analytic           Interactive          Routine           Routine           Non-Routine
                                                                     Cognitive          Manual              Manual
                            1979      1999     1979      1999      1979 1999          1979 1999           1979 1999
Low Education
Males
After 1970                             9.9               15.1                31.4               25.7                43.6
1950-1969                    8.2       8.6      6.8      16.4      46.6      31.6      45.4     28.5      16.3      35.6
1930-1949                    6.0       8.1      8.3      17.6      43.2      27.8      35.9     25.1      22.5      31.2
Before 1930                  5.3                8.4                47.5                37.3               21.7

Females
After 1970                             6.9               18.8                18.6               14.5                58.0
1950-1969                    3.8       6.9      8.2      19.2      51.1      23.1      54.5     18.9      14.1      39.5
1930-1949                    2.1       8.1      6.1      18.1      37.1      20.3      51.2     17.2      22.6      33.7
Before 1930                  1.2                5.5                32.5                43.1               26.8

Middle Education
Males
After 1970                            10.3               27.3                43.1               25.1                59.6
1950-1969                    5.5      15.1      10.8     33.1      46.3      44.6      35.3     25.6      32.9      52.5
1930-1949                    7.6      16.2      14.1     35.7      50.4      41.1      29.7     22.6      25.5      48.5
Before 1930                  6.8                13.4               51.0                32.1               21.7

Females
After 1970                            10.7               31.7                23.3                9.7                63.5
1950-1969                    2.4      13.3      8.3      34.4      61.6      24.8      71.9     10.3      7.9       57.6
1930-1949                    2.1      13.2      8.6      34.7      56.0      21.0      64.9      8.7      10.6      54.9
Before 1930                  1.7                8.2                55.3                56.7               15.3

High Education
Males
After 1970                            27.9               37.5                34.1               13.1                44.1
1950-1969                   19.4      29.5      18.4     51.6      49.9      38.8      21.1     12.2       7.9      39.4
1930-1949                   20.5      29.7      23.5     53.7      50.8      33.4      13.6      6.2       4.4      42.5
Before 1930                 19.1                22.5               48.4                12.2                2.2

Females
After 1970                            19.8               44.0                22.1                5.3                51.0
1950-1969                    9.8      20.0      18.4     48.6      40.0      27.0      22.2      4.0       5.0      52.2
1930-1949                   10.4      18.3      20.0     54.1      39.6      31.2      20.1      4.1       2.9      58.2
Before 1930                  5.4                17.7               30.3                23.5                0.0
           Note: Each cell represents the average value of the task measure for a particular cohort in a particular year.
           Data: Qualification and Career Survey.




                                                                                                                       41
                          Appendix Table 6: Task Prices
                     Dependent Variable: Log Real Daily Wages

Analytic                                     .383 (.012)               .430 (.017)
Interactive                                  .593 (.006)               .810 (.013)
Routine Cognitive                            .130 (.002)               .126 (.007)
Routine Manual                               -.047 (.004)              -.064 (.007)
Non-routine Manual                           -.086 (.003)              .007 (.007)

Analytic*woman                               .838 (.029)               .893 (.053)
Interactive*woman                            .085 (.016)               -.323 (.042)
Routine Cognitive*woman                       .264 (.007)               .371 (.011)
Routine Manual*woman                         -.080 (.009)               .028 (.013)
Non-routine Manual*woman                     .016 (.006)               .061 (.016)

Analytic*d_99                                                          -.112 (.025)
Interactive*d_99                                                       -.154 (.016)
Routine Cognitive*d_99                                                 .070 (.009)
Routine Manual*d_99                                                     .010 (.010)
Non-routine Manual*d_99                                                -.214 (.010)

Analytic*woman*d_99                                                    -.113 (.067)
Interactive*woman*d_99                                                  .374 (.051)
Routine Cognitive*woman*d_99                                           -.392 (.017)
Routine Manual*woman*d_99                                               .034 (.023)
Non-routine Manual*woman*d_99                                           .059 (.020)

Woman                                        -.211 (.009)              -.285 (.016)
d_99                                          .010 (.002)              .073 (.009)
Woman*d_99                                                             .116 (.017)

R^2                                              .355                      .359
N                                                           334,359

Note: The regressions are based on the IAB employment sample with task measures from
the Qualification and Career Survey merged to the data on the occupational level. The
regressions include controls for education, age (linearly), education-gender interactions
and age-gender interactions, as well as industry dummies. Only employees with low and
medium level of education are considered. Regressions are weighted by the number of
days worked per year. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                      42
