                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              tJUONS AND    EQUAIJ   ELOYNT OPPORTUNITY

                           Jonathan S.   Leonard



                      Working Paper No. 1311




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MP 02138
                                March 19814




This work was supported in part by the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Policy Evaluation of the U.S. Department of Labor, and
by the Institute of Industrial Relations and School of Business
Administration, University of California at Berkely. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the Department of Labor, University of California or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 1/1311
                                                  March 1984


               Unions and Equal Employment Opportunity

                                 ABSTRACT


      This paper analyzes differences in the growth of minority and female

 employment between union and non-union manufacturing plants in California

 during the late l970's, In this sector, unionized plants do not exhibit any

more gross employment discrimination than do non—union plants against black or

Hispanic men, or against black or white women, despite the recessions of the

1970's that displaced low seniority workers. Black males actually enjoy faster

growth of employment share in unionized plants, suggesting that Title vii has

been effective in increasing opportunities for blacks.   This may help explain
why unionization, though decreasing in the private sector, has been increasing

among blacks. The role played by unions in mediating affirmative action

regulations is also examined.



     There are significant differences across particular unions, especially

between craft and industrial unions, within industries that correspond with

each union's public record on EEO. Black employment increases most rapidly in

industries with a long history of black employment, in plants organized by

unions that take a liberal position towards EEO, and in industries with a large

union wage effect. As least in California manufacturing during this period,

the belief that unions have hindered minority and female employment does not

seem to hold true for industrial unions.




                                            Jonathan 5. Leonard
                                            350 Barrows Hall
                                            Schools of Business Administration
                                            University of California at Berkeley
                                            Berkeley, CA 94720
     How harmful or helpful have unions been to the employment interests of minori-
 ties and females? In the political sphere, the AFL-CIO has often joined with blacks and
females in a familiar coalition. In the workplace, these groups have not been able to
forge a unity of interest. Open conflicts, including litigation and demonstrations, have
often emerged at the local level.
     This paper asks one main question: what impact have unions had on the employ-
ment of minorities and females in manufacturing? To determine whether minority and
female employment has been helped or hindered by unionism, the change during the
late 1970's in the employment of male and female Hispanics, blacks, whites and Asians
is compared across union and non-union plants.
     Two secondary issues are also addressed. First, how have unions mediated
affirmative action pressure? The success of federal policies to improve employment
opportunities for minorities and females depends not only on the response of
employers, as this problem has usually been modeled, but also on that of unions. The
study of the impact of federal anti-discrimination and affirmative action regulation is
still young, and has yet to seriously address the role played by unions in mediating
regulatory pressure1. Union seniority provisions came into sharp conflict with equal
employment opportunity policy during the stagnant seventies. While this provoked
many anecdotes and law cases, the actual impact on employment of this conflict
involving federal, corporate, and union policy has never been studied with the atten-
tion it deserves.
    Second, why has unionization increased so dramatically among blacks at the
same time that private sector unionism is in decline? The study design here isolates
from the confounding eflects of regional, industry or establishment growth, directly
controls for affirmative action pressure, and attempts to separate individual union,
establishment and demographic group effects in explaining this growth.
    This study analyzes a new and detailed longitudinal set of data on 1273 California
                                         -2-
manufacturing establishments between 1974 and 1980. The ethnic diversity of this
state provides informative contrasts across Hispanics, Asians, blacks and whites. The
analysis proceeds in five stages. First, we establish the expected roles played by
unions, firms, demographic groups, and the government within the framework of a
model of the supply and demand for union and non-union labor. Second, we estimate
the mean difference in demographic changes in employment between union and non-
union plants using both T-tests across means and weighted log-odds regressions, and
find that in the late 1970's blacks' employment share increases faster in the union
sector. Third, to isolate a general proclivity toward unionism among minorities or
females from the behavior of unions themselves, we exploit the distribution of unions
across establishments and industries to estimate differences across individual unions
in minority and female employment growth. Fourth, to test for spillover and omitted
variable bias, employment patterns among white-collar workers are also studied. The
interaction of affirmative action with unionism is analyzed in the fifth section, and our
conclusions are summarized in the final section.
     The goal here is to open a new level of empirical research on the question of the
impact of unionization on minority and female employment. The central finding is
that unions have not been a significant detriment to the employment of minorities or
females.

 Section 1. Background
     Why should the unionized sector in manufacturing be any different than its non-
 union counterpart in its employment of Hispanics, blacks, Asians, and women? In
 broadest terms, there are four major actors whose policies and preferences are of
 immediate concern. These are the unions, the companies, the demographic groups,
 and the federal government. In this section, we shall first place each of these actors
 within a model of minority and female employment, and then proceed to discuss their
 expected roles.
                                               -3-
        The demand for labor may usefully be thought of as:

           L=f(USF5,D,w5)                                                             (1)
 where


       =      demand for labor of demographic group j by firm i
 U=           unionization
 S=           skill requirements
F=            federal anti-discrimination and affirmative action pressure
D=            firm tastes for discrimination
W=            wage



The supply of labor is given by:

         L=F(G5,S.,71,)                                                              (2)
where


G = geographic commuting cost
S = skill availability
T = average group preferences

       This model is presented chiefly to structure the following discussion of expected
impact and paths. We shall return to it again at the end of this section to set up
empirical tests that isolate union, demographic group, establishment, and government
e tTe ct s.


The Role of Unions
      The first impulse is to ascribe diflerences between the union and non-union sec-
tors to the policies and practices of the unions themselves. The most obvious way
unions can aect the demographic composition of the workforce is by directly
                                         -4-
controlling hiring. The key distinction here is between craft and industrial unions, or
more precisely and tautologically, between referral and non-referral unions. Under
Landrum-Griffin, construction unions have what is in practice a closed shop with the
union often controlling who may be hired. The broad scope this gives to discrimina-
tion is revealed in studies which show evidence of discrimination against blacks in the
unionized construction trades, but not in other unionized occupations. As the history
of the construction, longshoring, maritime and printing trades shows, the legal res-
trictions on unions control of hiring are not always honored in practice. In California
manufacturing, typically thought of as non-referral, it is not uncommon to find
modified referral clauses in collectively bargained contracts. Typically, the company
agrees to notify the union first when a job opens2. The question of referral practices
in the unions is an empirical one that cannot be resolved by reference to contractual
provisions or labor law. While the substantial differences between construction craft
unions and others is universally acknowledged, there is no evidence that rules out the
power of unions in the manufacturing sector to influence the hiring decisions of
employers.
     If, as seems reasonable, we grant the unions in manufacturing some influence,
then their attitudes become important, and these attitudes are strongly shaped by
circumstances3. To bargain effectively an industrial union must organize enough of
its industry to reduce the elasticity of demand. for union labor. Unions faced with an
industry employing substantial numbers of blacks or females have typically found it in
 their hearts to take a more liberal stand toward the employment and organizing of
 such potential competitors. (Ashenfelter 1973, Fogel, Marshall). But these cross-
 industry patterns cannot easily explain the relative prevalence of blacks, for example,
 in union plants within an industry. Differences are relative, so an egalitarian union
 may appear angelic next to a discriminating non-union sector. But the historical
 record shows unions following, and forced to adapt to the relative lack of discrimina-
                                          -5-
tion in the non-union sector. (Marshall, Fogel).
     Seniority is one of the ruling principles of industrial unionism. It is well known
that quit rates are much lower in the union sector, in response to strong seniority
benefits, high compensation, and the union voice mechanism. (Block, Freeman). This
in itself will tend to freeze the workforce and slow the entry of any previously discrim-
inated against group, a point we shall return to in Section 5. So even in the absence of
current discrimination, we would expect minorities and females to make slower pro-
gress in increasing their share of employment in the union sector.
     Since 1965 the courts have often struggled with the problem raised by facially
neutral seniority systems that lock in the effects of past discrimination. The conflict
between union seniority clauses and federal anti-discrimination and affirmative action
policy has been painfully exposed by recent recessions when last-in first-out union
seniority clauses have helped undo years of federal pressure to increase minority and
female employment. The problem has been exacerbated by the unionized sector's ten-
dency to resort to layoffs during a downturn. (Medoff). The Supreme Court in its 1977
Teamsters decision overruled a series of lower court decisions in which seniority sys-
tems had come under attack for freezing out a generation of blacks.4 This ruling gave
greater weight to Section 703(h) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, largely insulating
seniority units that are created and administered in a non-discriminatory fashion
from charges of locking in pre-1965 discrimination. An employer who might be suc-
cessfully sued under Title VII for his low representation of females or minorities is
largely immunized from such suit if this underrepresentation is due to the functioning
of a seniority system that has been non-discriminatory in intent and administration
since 1965.
    We would expect then that during the late seventies minorities and females would
make smaller employment gains in the union sector, both because union seniority sys-
tems reduce workforce turnover, and because such systems tend to insulate the firm
                                          -6-
from Title VII damages.
    Unions' attitudes toward minorities and females may also be influenced by their
desire to maintain one rate of pay for each job no matter who holds it, and by the con-
tingencies of liberal coalition politics at the national level. But it is a long road down
to the locals, which respond more closely to their own local problems than to the
noble words of their national leaders. (Marshall). While the nationals have some con
cern with maintaining the union's share of an industry, the locals have typically taken
a more exclusionary stand.

The Role of the Federal Government
    The protection afforded unionized plants under Section 703(h) of Title VII has
already been noted. The other arm of federal policy in this arena is affirmative action
regulation under Executive Order 11246 and its successors. This pressure is directed
towards federal contractors, not directly against unions in the manufacturing sector.
The legal limits of such compulsion are largely circumscribed by reference to Title VTI,
so the same judicial interpretations that immunize unionized establishments under
Title VII tend also to insulate them from affirmative action pressure.
    Unionized establishments are more likely than their non-union counterparts to
be federal contractors in the study sample. A more important finding is that among
contractors, union plants are not any more likely to undergo a compliance review, the
chief affirmative action enforcement procedure. While there are major cases in the
past of the government setting out after construction unions, most notably in the Phi-
ladelphia Plan and its progeny, the government appears to be largely neutral between
the union and non-union sectors of manufacturing.

The Employers
    There seems little reason to expect unionized employers to act dierently, ceteris
paribus, in their employment of minorities and females for reasons other than the
 indirect influence of the unions or the government mentioned above, or the direct
 impact of the union wage effect. Unions have been estimated to raise wages by 15 to
 20 percent in the manufacturing sector, (Lewis). This will tend to reduce employment
in the unionized sector and may work against minorities or females in hiring if they
are less skilled. But it is not clear that these groups are any less productive than
whites in ways that are material to manufacturing. (Leonard). In addition, unionized
plants tend to be larger, and are more likely to be part of a multi-plant corporation.
These two factors, along with the fact of unionization itself, contribute to more for-$
malized personnel procedures that may reduce discrimination.

Demographic Group Differences
     The relative employment of blacks may be greater in the union sector than in the
non-union sector not because of the preferences of the unions, the government, or
the employers, but rather because of the preferences of blacks themselves. In a
number of studies during the 1970's, blacks are reported to have much stronger
preferences than whites for unions. (Farber and Saks, Freeman and Medoff, Kochan).
The evidence is less clear on preferences among women and Hispanics. This need not
imply that blacks have different utility functions, but rather that blacks face a
different set of constraints and so value unions more highly. It is in this latter sense
that preferences shall be referred to here. This preference is usually attributed to
the relative freedom from discrimination afforded blacks and others by unions' egali-
tarian policies. For example, a recent study found no evidence of a racial differential
in the impact of unions on opportunities for occupational advance or on job tenure.
(Leigh, 1979). This explanation must be tempered by the abundant litigation charging
unions with maintaining discriminatory seniority units, although it cannot be denied
that unions tend to protect workers from arbitrary treatment at the hands of the
employer. Both the NLRB and the courts have upheld the responsibility of unions as
exclusive bargaining agents to fairly represent minority and female employees. The
                                           -8-
relative egalitarianism of the union sector has probably diminished over time as condi-
tions have improved in the non-union sector. Recent studies of racial wage discrimi-
nation in CPS samples find that the difference between the union and non-union sec-
tor has narrowed, largely because of the overriding equalizing force of Title VII. (Free-
man and Medoff).
    Of greater importance perhaps in explaining black preferences is the union wage
effect. in 1967, this was greater for black males and for white females than for white
males, although black females lagged behind the others. (Ashenfelter, 1973). At this
time, black males and white females had more to gain from working in a union plant.
The higher return for blacks among experienced men is still observed when probabil-
ity of selection into the union sample is controlled for. (Leigh, 1980). During the 1974
recession, as the union wage effect for white males increased, this difference nar-
rowed. The ratio of black male to white male union wage effects dropped from a
remarkable 2.24 in 1967 to 1.38 in 1975. (Ashenfelter, 1979). Just as striking, during
this stagnant period for white male unionization, the proportion of black males org an-
ized increased from .32 in 1965 to .37 in 1975, and the proportion of black females
unionized increased from .13 to .22. (Ashenfelter, 1979). The substantial increase in
black unionization is concentrated between 1970 and 1975, and cannot be explained
by changes in the distribution of blacks across occupations or industries. (1-loizer).
This growth may give some measure of the strong impact of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 in allowing blacks to realize their preferences in the job market, a ques-
tion we hope to shed some light on here.

Empirical Strategy
     To summarize these countervailing forces briefly, the question to be addressed
empirically in the next section is whether blacks' stronger preferences for unions
outweighs the impact of unions in slowing change in the composition of the workforce.
The government's role is expected to be essentially neutral across sectors, and is
                                            -9-
  directly controlled for since we know which establishments are federal contractors
  subject to affirmative action, and which have undergone a compliance review. Bias due
  to the possible impact of individual establishment effects is guarded
                                                                        against in two
  ways. First, all regressions control for past establishment employment patterns, and
  so essentially difference out time invariant individual effects. Secondly white-collar
  employment patterns in which the unions have little say, are compared to blue-collar
 patterns, with the difference attributed to unions. Union effects, as distinct from
                                                                                     a
 generalized preference for unions by any particular demographic group, are tested
 both by differentiating the union impact on blacks, Hispanics, and females;
                                                                             and by
 estimating the impact of individual unions.

 Section 2. Unions and the Employment of Hispanics, Blacks, and Females
     Unionized establishments exhibit strikingly different employment patterns than
 non-unionized establishments in the same industry and SMSA. In light of the fact
                                                                                    that
 unions in the manufacturing sector
                                      cannot legally control hiring and in light of the
 prevalent view that they do not directly influence hiring, this is a remarkable finding
 made more so by the direction of the effect.
   Table 1 presents T-tests of the equality across union and non-union establish-
ments of the levels and changes in the racial and sexual composition of the blue-collar
workforce between 1974 and 1980 in a longitudinal sample of 1273 California
                                                                            manufac-
turing establishments with at least one hundred employees each. The characteristics
and construction of this new sample are described in the appendix.
    Unionized establishments start out in 1974 with a higher representation of black
males, 6.6% compared to 4.9% for the non-union establishments. More
                                                                        importantly,
black males' employment share grows faster in the union sector5. It reaches 7.7% in
1980, compared to 5.3% among the non-unionized. The rate of change in
                                                                      means is 17
percent in the union sector in just six years, far greater than the 6 percent in the
flOfl-Ufljon sector. The mean rates of change in both sectors are even greater,
                                         - 10 -


suggesting   that growth in employment share has been relatively greater where that
share was initially low6.
    Comparing the changes in employment patterns of black males to that of Hispanic
males, black females, or Hispanic females warns that there can be no simple monol-
ithic explanation of the higher level and faster growth rate of black male employment
share in the union sector. Whatever process preferentially sorts black males into
union jobs has not similarly affected black females, Hispanic males, or Hispanic
females.
     Hispanic males do start out with higher representation in the union sector but
faster non-union growth renders this difference insignificant by 1980. Female Hispan-
ics are initially significantly more heavily represented in non-union jobs, and this
differential grows over time. Black females also start out with greater employment
share in the non-union sector, but their growth rates do riot differ significantly across
sectors. In both sectors, the greatest proportional employment gains are enjoyed by
Asians of both sexes, because they begin with such small shares. Asian growth has
been significantly greater in the non-union sector. It is also remarkable that between
 1974 and 1980 whites lost their majority position in California manufacturing. Their
 share dropped by 21 percent from .61 to .48 of blue-collar employment. White females
 share fell faster in the non-union sector. For white males, there is no significant
 difference in the decline across sectors.
      It is important to note that total employment has not increased in the union sec-
 tor, although smaller plants have grown. Absolute minority and female employment in
 this sector has grown while white male employment has clec].ined. This finding stands
 out in view of the commonly held belief about the impact of union seniority ladders on
 minority and female employees. Last-in first-out would be expected to reduce minor-
 ity and female share during a recession because these groups typically have lower
 seniority than white males. The explanation may simply be that California manufac-
                                            -11-
  turing did not suffer from a great recession between 1974 and 1980. In the
                                                                                study sam-
  ple, employment in the union sector was stable. According to the Department
                                                                                    of
  Labor, total employment in California manufacturing increased by 18 percent between
  1974 and 1980, with an insignificant decline between 1979 and 1980, and
                                                                               a 6 percent
  decline between 1974 and 1975. (Employment and Training Report of the
                                                                        President
  1981, Table d-2, p. 230).
      California serves as a strong warning against the facile identification of
                                                                               minority
 with black. Hispanics are the largest minority group in California, onstituting
                                                                                 38 per-
 cent of blue-collar employment in manufacturing in 1980. This compares with black's
 9 percent and Asians' 8 percent, and is not far behind white's 48
                                                                    percent. Moreover,
 Hispanics have grown the fastest, increasing their share fully 10 percentage
                                                                              points in
 just six years from .28 in 1974. This sharp growth has not been accommodated
 without conflict. The California State President of the Mexican-American
                                                                                   Political
 Association, Julio Calderon, has said that the:
     "[Civil Rights movement] has pitted the black community against the
     Mexican-American community. This may be unspeakable, but to deny that it
     exists is to put blinders on oneself" (Oakland Tribune 3/24/83 p. A-14)
     It must at once be recalled that the dominant pattern we find here is an increase
in Hispanic share and a corresponding decrease in white share, alongside
                                                                         a smaller
increase in black share.

Log-Odds Estimates
     The basic results found in the means above stand up well in more rigorous tests.
The definitions and sample statistics of the variables used in this analysis
                                                                             are given in
Table 2. Table 3 presents our central regression results. These
                                                                   are estimates of log-
odds models, weighted by the establishment's total blue-collar employment,
                                                                                and con-
trolling for past employment share, two or three digit SIC industry, SMSA, and the
                                                                                     per-
cent of blue-collar workers who are craft workers. The essential findings here
                                                                                   are in
                                        - 12 -

                                                                       control for
general not significantly changed by weighting. These regressions also
establishment size and growth rate, and whether or not the establishment was union-
ized, part of a multi-plant company, a federal contractor subject to affirmative action
in 1974, or reviewed for compliance with affirmative action between 1974 and 1980.
With these extensive and detailed controls, black male share still increases
significantly faster in the union sector. As can be seen in equation 2 of Table 3, this
difTerence of 1.3 percentage points is not small. It amounts to 19 percent of their ini-
tial share.
     The relative size of the union impact here can best be appreciated by comparing
it with that of affirmative action. Equation 2 also shows that the increase in black
male employment share is significantly larger among federal contractors subject to
affirmative action, and among contractors that are reviewed for compliance7. The
impact of unionization is just slightly less than that of undergoing a compliance
review, and actually greater than that of being a federal contractor. Before entering
into the question of causality, it is remarkable that in the case of California manufac-
turing unionization appears to act as a more powerful affirmative action program for
black males than does the federal affirmative action program itself.
     It has often been argued that black males' employment is limited by their lack of
 skills. It is then worth noting that in this sample their share of blue-collar employ-
 ment among all males has increased most in craft-intensive work-forces. In addition,
 the overall importance of growth in facilitating the entry of minorities and females
 into manufacturing can be seen in the significant negative impact of establishment
 growth on white male employment, a summary measure.
     In contrast to the faster increase in black male employment in the union sector,
 unionization has had no significant impact on Hispanic male employment, nor on that
 of black females, white females, or Asian males8. If black males' improved employment
 under unionism were due only to blacks' attitudes toward unions or proximity to
                                           13 -

 unionized establishments, or to unionized establishments' employment
                                                                      practices, one
 might reasonably expect similar patterns among blacks of both sexes, but we find no
 significant evidence of such a pattern for black females. Black males not only differ
 from black females, they also differ from Hispanic males. The theory of discrimination
 that explains why predominantly white unionized establishments should favor the
 employment of black males, while treating Hispanic males indifferently at best, cannot
be a simple one9.
     The salient finding in this section is that black male employment share has
increased faster in the union sector. In the following sections we turn to questions of
causality and attempt to determine how much of this difference can be explained by
union policy, or by differences in employer or government behavior across sectors.

Section 3. Differences Across Unions
     Unions are not undifferentiated in either their attitudes or their policies toward
affirmative action, or in their actual minority and female membership. Because many
large unions have organized plants across a number of industries, and because most
industries have been organized by a number of unions, it is possible to separate out
the impact of individual unions. If there were no significant differences across unions
once industry, SMSA, and plant occupational structure were controlled for, that would
constitute strong evidence that the swifter expansion of black male employment share
in the unionized sector was primarily due to black males' stronger preference for
union jobs, rather than to any policy or practice of any individual unions. That does
not appear to be the case here. There are significant differences in minority and
female employment growth across unions that in a number of cases correspond
closely to differences in these unions' public statements on discrimination and
affirmative action.
     Here only the most striking cases can be alluded to. Union A, long noted for its
liberal stance, has been among the most outspoken proponents of equal rights for
                                         - 14 -

blacks. In contrast to most AFL unions, Union A accepted and integrated      blacks into
existing locals as blacks entered this union's primary industry during the depression.
In these early years the union was among the pioneers in formally establishing an
internal fair employment practices department. While taking a strong stand on civil
rights at the national level, Union A has also been a co-defendant in a plethora of Title
VII litigation charging that it maintained discriminatory seniority ladders at the local
level. It would seem the union had reached only partial accommodation with its black
members.
    in 1982, Union A held contracts in eight dierent two-digit SIC industries in Cali-
fornia manufacturing. Table 4 shows that both black and Hispanic males have aug-
mented their share of blue-collar employment significantly more in the twenty-five
plants organized by Union A than in most other unionized plants. However discrimina-
tory union seniority ladders may have been, they have not discouraged black or
Hispanic males from gaining employment. While the average union impact is to raise
black male employment share by 1.3 percentage points, the corresponding increase in
plants organized by Union A is 2.8 percentage points. For Hispanic males the
diflerence is even greater. Their employment share grows slower, insignificantly, in
the union sector as a whole, but grows by 4.1 percentage points in Union A plants. In
fact, Union A is the only union with a significant positive impact on Hispanic employ-
ment. This reinforces the interpretation of these patterns as directly influenced by
union policy rather than just reflecting ethnic group preferences.
     Union B's history has been similar in many ways to Union A's. While blacks have
 long been employed in large numbers in Union B' primary industry, the union has
 been the target of a large number of Title VII cases charging discriminatory seniority
 ladders. But once again, black male employment share has grown significantly faster,
 by two percentage points, than elsewhere in the union sector.
      One explanation advanced for blacks' strong preference for union employment is
                                          - 15 -

 that egalitarianism within most unions limits the
                                                scope for any discriminatory treat-
 ment, including racial discrimination. The multitude of Title VII charges concerning
 discriminatory promotion ladders at both Union A and B would seem to belie this
 thesis, but one must consider the alternative. Blacks may prefer a unionized plant not
 because discrimination is absent, but simply because it is weaker. Moreover, these
 discrirninatory seniority systems have been frequently and successfully attacked in
 the courts since 1965. At the same time, members of both Union A and B are among
 the most well paid industrial workers in America. The substantial union wage efTect in
 these unions are likely to be even larger for blacks, and may well outweigh the finer
 costs of occupational segregation within the plant. Better to ride second class than to
walk.

     While minority male employment gains at Union A correspond to the union's long
liberal history, Union C was prominently known before 1965 for its racially segregated
locals. By the late seventies things had changed. Black male employment share in the
57 plants organized by Union C significantly increased by 2.3 percentage points, more
than the average of other unions.
    At the other extreme are a number of craft oriented unions in which minority and
female employment has fallen relative to other union or non-union plants. The exclu-
sionary ethic of these unions appears to carry over and influence employment pat-
terns in manufacturing, where their referral rights are not so strongly established.
    The evidence here suggests that an important part of the explanation for the
observed patterns of minority and female employrrient in general, and of the growth of
black male share in the union sector in particular, is to be found in the policies and
practices of individual unions. This stands out in the contrast between the craft-
oriented unions which appear to retard minority and female employment, and Union A
which increases black and Hispanic male employment share more so than do other
unions.
                                        - 16 -


Section 4. White Collar Workers in Unionized Establishments
    Establishments hire both white and blue collar workers, but typically it is only the
blue collar workers who are unionized, a difference which will be exploited in this sec-
tion. This institutional fact allows us to test whether the union effect found above is
really an establishment effect. The establishments that are unionized may differ in
some ways, such as location or skill requirements that are uncontrolled for, but
correlated with unionization. This is a priori unlikely because our controls are quite
detailed and include two or three digit SIC industry, SMSA, establishment size and
                                                                                 it
growth, and the proportion of craft workers among the blue-collar. Nevertheless,
cannot be entirely ruled out. While unionization may influence blue-collar employ-
ment it is difficult to see how unionization in itself can affect white-collar demograph-
ic s10.
    It does. Black males share of white-collar jobs increases significantly faster in
unionized establishments, as seen in Table 5. Tn absolute terms the effect is small, less
 than a quarter percentage point. However, relative to blacks males' 1974 share of 1.5
 percent this is a substantial increase. The interpretation of this estimate is compli-
 cated by the further findings in Table 5 that Hispanic males' share also increases
 significantly faster in the union sector, while white females share increases
 significantly less11. The result for white-collar Hispanic men may be due to stronger
 affirmative action pressure in favor of Hispanic men in the union sector, particularly
 for white-collar jobs.
      Unionization affects white- collar employment demographics both directly and
 indirectly through its impact on blue-collar demographics. The tests in Table 5 expli-
  citly control for the indirect path by holding fixed past blue-collar employment share.
  In every case higher past blue-collar share is significantly correlated with subsequent
  white-collar share. even conditioning on past white-collar share, SMSA, and industry.
  This suggests either strong spillover from blue-collar to white-collar or an omitted
                                           - 17 -

  variable such as proximity to minority neighborhoods.
                                                        The spillover hypothesis is con-
  siderably strengthened by observing the same pattern for females, who do not live in
  ghettos. Taken together, this evidence of spillover and tipping accords with the
                                                                                 essen-
  tially tribal model of the labor market that informs many of the arguments in favor
                                                                                            of
  affirmative action.
      The tests in Table 5 may then qualify the previous findings for black male
                                                                         produc-
 tion workers because the union effects on white-collar demographics persist
                                                                             even
 when indirect paths through blue-collar employment are controlled for. In other
 words, black male employment share in unionized establishments has increased in
 white-collar jobs as well as in blue-collar jobs. It is important to remember that the
 union effect among white-collar workers is less than that among the blue-collar.
 Nevertheless, it is possible that unionization is correlated with some Uncontrolled for
 establishment characteristic that favors the growth and not simply the level, of black
 male employment12.
     This section has shown that unionized
                                             establishments not only employ more black
males in blue-collar jobs, to a lesser extent they also employ more black males in
white-collar jobs. Part of this effect may be accounted for by spillover from blue-
collar demographics, but part remains and may suggest establishment specific effects.

Section 5. Unions and Affirmative Action
    Under most circumstances, unions should retard the progress of minorities and
females under affirmative action for reasons that have much to do with unions but lit-
tie to do with current discrimination. It is well known that unions reduce quits. Lower
turnover will in itself reduce the rate of penetration of minorities and females into the
workplace, as we shall now prove.
    The change in stock is equal to hires less terminations. This identity is:

     B = B_1 +    RH —   Br
                                                                                     (3)
                                               - 18   -



where


B=       stock of blacks in year t
BH = total number of blacks hired between t-1 and t
Br =     total number of blacks terminated between t-1 and t

This may also be expressed as:

      PN=PN_1+IH—OT                                                  (4)

where


     = blacks' share of employment stock in year t
     = total employment stock in year t
I-I = blacks' share of hires
I    = total hires
T=      blacks' share of terminations
o       total terminations

Dividing through by N gives the identity in share form:

        Pt=XPti+aH—bT                                                (5)

where


a       the ratio of total hires to total end of year stock
b=      the ratio of total terminations to total end of year stock

 x   = 1—oH-b
                  N1

      The annual change in share of stock is:

          —      = (x—i)P1     + aH   —   bT                          (6)
 with derivatives
                                            - 19 —

   dP
          a
   dP         b
   dH

 An increase in black's share of hires or terminations has a greater impact on black's
 share of stock the greater is the hire or termination rate respectively.
        In theory the impact of affirmative action on protected groups' share of flows and
 stock could be hidden by disparate turnover rates between union plants and non-
 union plants. If a and b are both small (or of similar magnitude), then A is close to 1
 and A is close to 1. In this case P changes only slowly from Pg_n. By the same token,
 firms characterized by high turnover rates can show large improvements in minorities'
 and females' employment share without large changes in hiring and firing policy. Thus
 if affirmative action requires equal efTort from all firms, rather than equal results,
 then high turnover firms should be held to higher employment goals along an adjust-
ment path13.
     For our purposes here, the important point to remember is that the seniority
                                                                                     sys-
tems that are part and parcel of unionism will tend to freeze the workforce at a plant,
a fact which the Supreme Court in its 1977 Teamsters decision has come to accept.
When this is combined with the fact that unionized employment did not grow in the
study sample, one would expect affirmative action to appear less successful in union-
ized establishments for two reasons that have nothing to do with discrimination: low
turnover and low growth.
     On the other hand, we have already seen that while other protected groups have
not progressed significantly faster in the union sector, black males have. Black males
also start with a higher 1974 share in the union sector. Similarly, while other
                                                                                pro-
tected groups have not significantly benefited from affirmative action in California
manufacturing, blacks have. One might then reasonably expect two such positives to
interact in a larger positive, but this would embody an oversimplified conception of
                                         2D -


how affirmative action works.
     The pressures under affirmative action are to remedy underutilization of minori-
ties and females. If black males are relatively overrepresented in the union sector,
affirmative action can act to increase black males' overall share while bringing no
direct pressure to bear in the union sector. But of course, with a limited supply of
blacks, the non-union sector's gain may well be the union sector's loss. This is espe-
cially likely to occur if at the same time Hispanics are relatively underrepresented in
the union sector. The combined impact of the contract compliance program may then
be to substitute Hispanic males for black males in the union sector,
     Table 6 tests for such interactions between unionization and affxmative action
pressure and finds significant evidence of a negative interaction only for black males.
Black males' employment share increases 3.1 percentage points more in unionized
 non-contractors than in non-unionized non-contractors. By contrast, this share
 increases by just 1.1 percentage points in unionized contractors compared to non-
 unionized contractors. This is balanced by changes in the employment of Hispanic
 men, where there is a positive interaction between union and contractor status. In
 the union sector, black males' share decreases by .004 among contractors, while
 Hispanic males' share increases by .021. Affirmative action does not always and every-
 where lead to increases in black employment, nor is it intended to. These estimates
 suggest that while Hispanic male employment has increased faster under affirmative
 action in the contractor sector, black male employment has increased slower, if at all.
 This may reflect to some degree the relative abundance of black males in the union
  sector, and correspondingly less affirmative action pressure to increase their share.
  In 1974, 6.6 percent of all employees in the union sector were black males, compared
  to only 4.9 percent in the non-union sector. While Hispanic males were also relatively
  abundant in the union sector, the proportionate disparity was not so great, .21 in the
  union sectors compared to .19 in the non-union sector. A plausible explanation of the
                                           - 21 -

  observed interactions is not in terms of the
                                                 way Unions mediate affirmative action pre-
  sures, but rather in terms of the different immediate goals toward which that pressure
  is directed in the union sector14. Judged on the evidence
                                                             among contractors, the
  union sector appears more concerned with increasing Hispanic male
                                                                         employment than
  that of black males.

 Section 6. Summary and Conclusion
      This paper has presented four main findings.
     (1) Black males share of blue-collar employment has increased faster in union
 plants than in non-union plants in California manufacturing between 1974 and 1980.
 This indicates that the growth in unionization among blacks is not due
                                                                        simply to
 different regional or industry growth rates. We find a positive union effect even when
 industry, region, size, growth, and affirmative action pressure are controlled for. This
 suggests that the wide precedents set by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 has
 opened doors for blacks to express their preferences in employment.
    (2) While union seniority systems force the layoff of low-tenure workers during a
recession, the recessions of 1974 and 1979 did not harm minorities and females
                                                                                  any
more in the union than the non-Union sectors, judging on the basis of growth in
employment share between 1974 and 1980.
     (3) Unionization has no significant impact on blue-collar employment share of
other groups, with the exception of a significantly negative impact on Hispanic
females. The notion that industrial unions as a whole are any more or less discrimina-
tory is belied by the absence of significant effects for Hispanic males, black females,
and whites.
    (4) There are significant differences across particular unions within industry and
region that correspond with each unions public record of EEO policy and practice.
Black male employment increases most in industries with a long history of black
employment, in unions that take a liberal position towards EEO, and in industries with
                                          - 22   -



a large   union wage efcct. Craft type unions have a negative impact.
     Changes in employment share among Hispanics, blacks, Asians, whites, and women
are a response to forces on both the supply arid demand sides of the market. Union-
ized establishments in California manufacturing do not exhibit any more discrimina-
tion than do non-union establishments against black or Hispanic men, or against black
or white women. Title VII appears to have been efective in increasing employment
opportunities for blacks, allowing them to obtain the union jobs they prefer.
                                          - 23 -

  Appendix. Data
      A new and detailed set of information at the
                                                   establishment level of disaggregation
 was assembled for this study. EEO-i reports detailing establishment level demograph-
 ics were matched for the years 1974 and 1980 to produce a longitudinal file. All of
                                                                                     the
 data on establishment demographics,
                                        occupational structure, employment growth,
 industry, location, and contractor status comes from this file. This was in turn
 matched with OFCCP administrative records made available by the OFCCP's Division of
 Program Analysis to determine which establishments had undergone an affirmative
 action compliance review. These reviews essentially count only those performed by
 the Department of Defense, and so are concentrated in the durable goods manufac-
 turing industries. The characteristics of this EEO sample are discussed in greater
 detail in other work. From this national longitudinal file, the 1273 establishments in
 the manufacturing sector in California with more than 100 employees were selected.
 California, while interesting in its own right, also accounted for 8.9 of all U.S.
manufacturing employment in 1977. For comparison, the 1977 Census of Manufac-
tures counted 3278 California manufacturing establishments with at least 100
                                                                               employ-
ees. Since all of these plants are required by law to file IEEO forms, the undercount is
significant. Roughly half the EEO sample is lost in the construction of the longitudinal
file. A careful study of similar sample attrition by Ashenfelter and Beckman
                                                                             con-
cluded that non-matches were largely random. The remaining undercount is unex-
plained. While one might imagine that plants with poor EEO records simply do not
report, this in itself should not bias our union/non-union comparison.
     The union status of each of these establishments was determined by
                                                                            examining
the 1982 collective bargaining contract collection of the California State Department
of Industrial Relations. The Department has more than 3,400 private-sector agree-
ments on file, and makes intensive efTorts to obtain all contracts covering 50 or
                                                                                  more
employees. In 1982 this file included 1,364 contracts in the manufacturing sector,
                                         - 24 -

                                                                                in
covering 450,310 employees. Since unions never achieve contracts in many plants
which they are certified as exclusive bargaining agents, only plants with collective
bargaining agreements will be referred to as unionized in this paper.
    The coverage of this file is extensive, especially for contracts covering more than
50 employees. According to the US Department of Labor there were 2,001,000 employ-
ees in California manufacturing in 1980. (Employment and Training Report of the
President, 1980, table d-2. p. 230). Applying the 1977 California average of 35 percent
non-production workers in manufacturing yields 1,300,650 production workers. (U.S.
Census of Manufactures, 1977, Vol. III, Geographic Area Series-California, Part I, Table
2b, pp. 5-8.) In a pooled 1973-1975 CPS sample of 6022 private-sector production
workers in California, Freeman and Medoff estimate the proportion unionized at .35,
close to the national average of .36. (Freeman and MedofT, 1979, p. 166, Table 4).
Nationally, Freeman and MedofT report that 49% of production workers in manufactur-
ing were union members. On this basis, we would expect to find 637,320 union
members among production workers in California manufacturing.
     88 percent of all employees covered by collective bargaining agreements covering
at least 100 workers in California manufacturing are subject to union shop or modified
union shop security clauses. (California Department of Industrial Relations, 1982,
Table 1). So the contract file then includes about 396,000 union members, or 62 per-
 cent of the number we would expect to find by applying the Freeman-Me dofT estimates
 of percent unionized to BLS totals. Part of this discrepancy may be due to the strik-
 ing decline in unionism in California. Union members as a proportion of all production
 workers in California manufacturing dropped from .56 in 1975 to .42 in 1979. (Califor-
 nia Department of Industrial Relations, 1980, p.2, Table 1). If we adjust Freeman and
 MedofT's 1973-1975 benchmark downwards by the same 25% to .37, then we would
 expect 481,240 union members in California manufacturing. On this basis the con-
 tract file includes 82% of all union members in California manufacturing. The
                                        - 25 -

remainder are likely to be in establishments of less
                                                     than 100 employees which     are
excluded from the study sample. To the extent that some unionized
                                                                       establishments
are still not identified as such, this measurement error will bias our results
                                                                               against
finding any difference between the union and non-union sectors.
                                            - 26 -


        NOTES
      See   Brown for a discussion of recent work in this area.
2.    Of coursc, these clauses are carefully worded to comply both with the closed-shop
      prohibition and with Title VII, but there is no law against discriminating in favor of
      friends of union members per se. Obviously, if it happens that all these friends
      are white males, Title VII comes into play.
3. Note that minorities and females can undercut the union grievance system by
      taking their case directly to the courts or the EEOC, as established in the case of
      Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Company, and this internal political consideration
      may influence unions' attitudes.
4. The law in this area is still developing, and was undergoing significant changes
    during the period studied. Before 1977 the lower federal courts, most notably in
      the case of Quarles v. Phillip-Morris, had judged seniority systems that per-
      petuated the eects of past discrimination to be illegal, and these early decisions
      may have influenced some of the companies studied here. The blunt edge of
      these court decisions gave rise in a number of cases to difficult negotiations to
      reassign seniority rights and redraw seniority units. (Ichniowski). While the EEOC
      has argued that 703(h) should only apply to collectively bargained seniority sys-
      tems, one district court has recently extended it to non-union cases. (EEOC vs.
       E.I. duPont De Nemours & Co. [D. Del. 1978]).

 5.    Despite the increase in black male share in the union sector, the percentage of
       black males who are unionized in the study sample faIls slightly from .72 in 1974
       to .70 in 1980 because of the faster growth of total employment in the non-union
       sector. While the number of black males employed in the union sector increased
       by 17 percent, the number employed in the non-union sector increased by 27
       percent.
                                                  27
     6.     On the other hand, with finer controls we shall later see contrary evidence
                                                                                          show-C
            ing tipping.
     7.     Concerning the impact of affirmative action, in California manufacturing the
                                                                                           prc
            gram has significant impacts on blacks and on white males. Both female and male
            black employment shares increase significantly faster in establishments that
                                                                                         are
           federal contractors, and at establishments that undergo a compliance review.
           Although white males' share of total blue-collar employment does increase
           significantly at contractor establishments, the increase in proportion to initial
           1974 share is larger for black males, 19% compared to 14%, so black males' share
           of male employment does increase among contractors. The observed pattern for
           white males is not obviously compatible with an effective affirmative action
                                                                                         pro-
           gram, and is anomalous in the sense that it is not generally observed in the econ-
           omy as a whole. A possible explanation is that since the union and defense con-
           tractor sectors tend to be high-wage sectors, white males are relatively slower to
           leave these sectors than others within
                                                   manufacturing. The largest minority in
           California, the Hispanics, have not been greatly affected by affirmative action.
          Their employment share grows slower at contractors and faster at reviewed
                                                                                          con-
          tractors, but the effects are not significant. At the same time, white females
          gained under affirmative action, but not significantly. Blacks may benefit by
          being both small and vocal. It is more difficult to make room for a large protected
          group, such as Hispanics or females, and the pressure to accommodate a quieter
          group may not be great. Questions concerning the impact of affirmative action
          are the focus of a companion paper.
8.        The distribution of each minority group in California is markedly different,
                                                                                       and
          provides useful test variation. These regressions include five SMSA dummies,
          whose coefficients and selection reflect
                                                   population demographics. The areas are
          the Los Angeles SMSA, containing 47 percent of the sample; the combined San
                                          - 28 -

                                                                          Jose SMSA,
     Diego, Anaheim, and Riverside SMSAs; the San Francisco SMSA, the San
     all other Northern California counties, and all other Southern California counties.
     Reflecting their respective population concentrations, black employment share
     increases faster in Los Angeles and San Francisco than elsewhere in California.
     Hispanic increases faster in Los-Angeles and San-Diego, and Asian increases fas-
     ter in San Francisco and San Jose.
9.   In this regard. there are two factors that may help explain the observed pattern
     for Hispanic males. First, compared to blacks, Hispanics are on average more
     recent immigrants to California, and a large but unknown fraction are here iiC
     gaily. They may well be further back in line for union jobs, and the illegals may
     have greater trepidation and difficulty in obtaining employment at the larger and
     more formal union establishments. Second, most studies of Hispanic-white earn-
     ings ratios have found little evidence of discrimination once language and educa-
     tion are controlled for, (Reimers). If black males are attracted to union shops by
     the insulation from discrimination they enjoy under the umbrella of union egali-
     tarianism, it is possible that Hispanics may not feel as acute a need for such pro-
      tection, but this is doubtful. It helps to compare Hispanics with blacks among
      females. While unionization has had an insignificant positive impact on black
      females, Hispanic female employment grows significantly slower in the union sec-
      tor. This is more consistent with the view that Hispanics, as more recent immi-
      grants, are further back in the queue for union jobs. A more closely knit Hispanic
      family cannot explain the difference in employment across sectors.
 10. There are, of course, indirect paths such as the company that promotes from the
     ranks, or that hires supervisors who match the race or sex of its production
      workers, who we have found are more likely to be black in the union sector.
      Alternatively, this could come about through the clustering of blacks in establish-
      ments that already employ many blacks. Plants, like neighborhoods. may tip. In
                                         - 29 -

     fact, one of the major arguments in favor of affirmative
                                                              action rests upon just
     such externalities: the costs of searching for and obtaining a job are lower if
     merribers of one's group are already employed at a given plant. Firms are
     required to reach out to potential minority and female employees to counteract
     such clustering among predominant white males. Leaving these indirect, but
     potentially important, paths aside, we would not expect the presence of a collec-
     tive bargaining contract among the production workers of a plant to have
                                                                                  any
    impact on the demographic composition of the non-production work-force.
11. These last two patterns for white-collar workers are reversed among blue-collar
    workers, although the coefficients in the latter case are insignificant. This sign
    reversal on the union efTect between white-collar and blue-collar workers sug-
    gests that a simple omitted variable bias story is not likely to explain the union
    efTect on Hispanic males and white females.
12. Since SMSA is controlled for, this would require, for example, that the unionized
    plants in Los Angeles be closer to Watts and other concentrations of black popula-
    tion than are non-union plants. Since the sample of plants is longitudinal, this
    cannot simply be due to the establishment of new plants in the suburbs after
    1974. Also note that this within SMSA geographic proximity cannot explain why
    white-collar Hispanic males are more heavily represented at union plants at the
    same time relative gains for their blue-collar brothers are nowhere to be seen.
   Moreover, while black male employment has increased relative to that of white
   males in the union sector, no such efTect was observed in Tables 3 among blue-
   collar females. Unionisni is associated with a 5 percent greater employment
   share for black females, which is less than the 9 percent for white females. It is
   also interesting to note that a pioneering study of Chicago establishment demo-
   graphics between 1967 and 1970 also found a positive union effect on growth of
   black male share even after controlling for distance from black residence area.
                                       - 30 -


   (Burman).   To t' othe example, since two arid sometimes three digit SIC
   inductry is controlled for, along with the percent of craft workers among blue-
   collar, arid the percent of clerical workers among white-collar, this omitted vari-
   able bias argument would require that the skill requirements of union plants
   diner in very fine ways that favor blacks not only in blue-collar jobs, but also in
   white-collar jobs, yet at the same time hinder Hispanic employment. While possi-
   ble, in my opinion these scenarios are unlikely. The question of geographic prox-
   iruity is addressed in detail in a companion paper. In a sub-sample of Los Angeles
   and Orange County establishments, the union eflect on both white and blue-collar
   workers persists even when distance from the ghetto is controlled for. The sim-
    plest explanation is that many of the white-collar workers in this sample are in
    fact unionized, as fully 29 percent of all black male managerial workers were
    reported to be in 1967. (Ashenfelter, 1973).
13. Affirmative action might be successful in increasing blacks' share of hires, H, and
    reducing their share of terminations, T, at union establishments. But since these
    establishments typically have lower turnover rates a and b than non-union estab-
    lishments, the change in stock      is expected to be lower, masking the impact of
    affirmative action. Unionized plants are characterized by relatively stable work
    forces of long tenure. Unless long-tenure jobs are themselves the product of an
    intention to discriminate, which is unlikely, it is appropriate to judge affirmative
    action in such stable industries by its impact on minorities' and females' share of
    new hires and terminations rather than their share of employment. Since the
    workforces turnover slowly, a positive change in flow shares will have to cumulate
    for years before it has a significant efTect on employment stock shares
14. Absent strong demonstration etTects, that pressure should be most obvious in the
    case of compliance reviews but here the interactions terms are insignificant and
     the evidence inconclusive.
                                             - 31 -


                                         REFIRENCES

  Ashenfelter, Orley, "Racial Discrimination and Trade Unionism", The Journal
                                                                                of Politi-
      cal Economy, 80(May/June 1972), pp. 435-464.
  Ashenfelter, Orley, "Discrimination and Trade Unions", in Lhscrirnjnatjon in Labor
     Markets, Orley Ashenfelter and Albert Rees, eds., (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
      University Press, 1973), pp. 88-112.
 Ashenfelter, Orley, "Union Relative Wage Effects: New Evidence and a Survey of Their
      Implications for Wage inflation", in Econometric contributions to Public Policy, R,
      Stone and W. Peterson, eds., (New York: St. Martins, 1979).
 Block, Richard N, "The Impact of Seniority Provisions on the Manufacturing Quit
                                                                                   Rate",
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 31(July 1978), pp. 474-481.
 Brown, Charles, "The Federal Attack on Discrimination: The Mouse that Roared?"
     Unpublished paper, 1983.
 Burman, George. The Economics of Discrimination. The Impact of Public Policy,
    unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,
     1973.

Farber, Henry and Daniel H. Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions: The Role of Relative
    Wages and Job Characteristics", Journal
                                            of Political Economy, (April 1980), pp.
     349-69.
Freeman, Richard B., "The Effect of Unionism on Worker Attachment to Firms", Journal
    of Labor Research, 1(Spring 1980), pp. 29-62.
Freeman, Richard B., and James Medoff, "New Estimates of Private Sector Unionism"
    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 32(January 1979), pp. 147-174.
Freeman, Richard B., and James Medoff, What Do Unions Do? (New York: Basic Books,
    forthcoming).
Fogel, Walter A., The Negro in the Meat Industry (Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
    vania Wharton School of Finance and Commerce, 1970)
                                         - 32 -

Hoizer, I-larry, Rccent Trends in Labor Union Membership for Blacks, unpublished
    thesis, Harvard College, 1978.
Ichniowski, Casey, "Rave Angels Done More? The Steel Industry Consent Decree',
    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 36(January 1983), pp. 182-198.
Kochan, Thomas, How American Workers View Labor Unions Monthly Labor Review,
    (April 1979), pp. 23-31.
Leigh, Duane E., "Unions and Non-Wage Racial Discrimination", Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review", 32(July 1979), pp. 435-450.
Leigh, Duane E., "Racial Dierences in Union Relative Wage Eects- A Simultaneous
    Equations Approach", JournaL of Labor Research, 1(Spring,1980),pp.95ll4.
Leonard, Jonathan S., "Anti-Discrimination or Reverse Discrimination: The Impact of
    Changing Demographics. Title VII and Affirmative Action on Productivity", The
     Journal of Human Resources, 1984.
Lewis, H. Gregg, Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States, (Chicago: University
     of Chicago Press, 1963).
Marshall, Ray, The Negro and Organized Labor, (New York: Wiley, 1965).
Medo, James, "Layofls and Alternatives Under Trade Unions in United States
     Manufacturing", American Economic Review, 69(June 1979) pp. 380-395.
 Reimers, Cordelia, "Sources of the Wage Gap Between Hispanics and Other White Amer-
     icans", mimeograph, Princeton University, 1980.
 State of California, Department of Industrial Relations, "Provisions of California Col-
     lective Bargaining Agreements 1981", November 1982.
 State of California, Department of Industrial Relations, "Union Labor in California
     1979", November 1980.
 U.S Employment and Training Report of the President, (Washington D.C: Government
     Printing Office, 1981).
                                         - 33 -

  Table 1: T-Tests of Changes in
                                Demographic Proportions of Blue-Collar Employment
           by Union Status. 1974-1980.
           N=806 Non-Union and 467 Union Establishments
        Demographic Union               1974                       1980
  Line Group        Status          Mean                a Mean_— a Meani              MeanZ_—
      1     Black       N           .049          .08      .053       .07
      2     Males       Y           .066
                                                                             .003     28
      3                                           .07      .077       .08    .011     44
                                    (3.8)                  (5.6)             (2.7)    (1.6)
      4   Hispanic     N            .187          .19     .255
      S                                                               .22    .067     75
            Males      Y            .213          .18     .263        .19
      6                                                                      .049     47
                                    (2.4)                 (0.7)              (2.5)    (1.6)
   7        Asian      N            .013          .02     .030
   8        Males                                                     .04    .017     1.31
                       Y            .014          .02     .026        .03    .012
   9                                                                                  L41
                                    (0.6)                 (1.6)              (2.2)    (0.4)
  10        White      N           .427           .27
  11                                                      .332       .24     —.098    —.18
            Males      Y           .522           .23     .428       .25
  12                                                                         —.093    —.13
                                   (7.0)                  (6.2)              (0.3)    (1.1)
  13       Black       N           .020       .10         .026
  14                                                                 .06     .006    .68
          Females      Y           .016       .03         .023       .04
  15                                                                         .007    1.01
                                   (1.9)                  (1.2)             (0.4)    (0.8)
  16      Hispanic     N           .106       .15
  17
                                                          .142       .18    .037     .68
          Females      Y           .056       .05         .075       .11    .019
 18                                                                                  .92
                                   (6.3)                  (7.4)             (3.5)    (2.0)
 19        Asian       N           .016       .06
 20                                                      .028        .01    .013     1.67
          Females      Y           .004       .02        .009        .01    .005
 21                                                                                  1.21
                                   (59.7)                (57.8)             (7.8)    (11.9)
 22        White       N           .176       .20        .129
 23                                                                 .14     —.046    .17
          Females     Y            .100       .13        .091       .11
 24                                                                         —.009    .40
                                   (7.3)                 (5.1)              (5.9)    (2.1)
 25        Total      N                      255 232
 26                   Y
                                   197                              316 35           .57
 27
                                   381       789 381                774 0            .24
                                   (6.1)                 (4.8)              (2.1)    (1.7)
     Note: T-Tests across means in parentheses, on every third line. In
                                                                        every
case, F-tests reject equality of variances across union and non-union estab-
lishments, with more than 99 confidence. The last column is th mean of per-
centage changes, not the percentage of change in means, and is calculated                     -
only for those with positive initial share.
N = non-union in 1982. Y union in 1982.
                                    - 34 -


    Table 2: Va abIe Definitions, Means, and Standard
                                                      Deviations.
             N = 1273.


Variable          Standard
Name        Mean fleviation    Definition

UNION       .367       .48     = 1 if establishment was unionized
                               in 1982.

CONTRACT .724          .45      = 1if establishment was part of a
                                contractor company in 1974.

REVIEW       .186      .39      = 1 if establishment completed a
                                compliance review between 1974 and
                                1980 exclusive.

SIZE         264       527      Total number of blue-collar employees
                                in 1974.

GROWTH       .450      3.20     Rate of growth of blue-collar
                                employment from 1974 to 1980.

SINGLE       .280       .45     = 1 if establishment was not part of
                                a multi-establishment company.
 PCRAFT      .248       .31     Proportion or blue-collar employees
                                who are craftworkers.

 PCLERK      .295       .14     Proportion of white-collar employees
                                who are clerical workers.
                                                           i'i3           LoçI-CkcJ% Eqi..u jO'c..             ot   th EV r€ct
                                                                          ..::j   tion
                                                                                    on 1ue•- Col 1.r                 Eriorn9flt               Euci.-
                                                                          '—lri•hii t3rotij.
                                                                                                                                          fbJjir,i
                                                                          N     1273.

    IIt?flC.)lT.      .rh i c              tJhi f..i.
    C.                                                                                      lii
          r .jti r'                                                       r
                                                                          N.! [OS                  H   19 '.
                                                                                                                                n te                                     I] ;v'n:i
                                                                                                                                                                              g.
                                                   1
                                                                                                       3                             4                       5
   I. fN    [flU                               58                  1 .27                       -   •
                                           •   02                                                                             1 . ('iR                   1   34
                                                                           212                     •
                                                                                                   04                                                                    -2.89
                                           .041)                                                                                •   104              •
                                                                   (.055)                   ( •04/)                                                      048                         •   273
                                                                                                                                .063)               (.062)                   (.070)
  CONTR(iCT                            6,45                       1   .03                  —1.04
                                           •   278                                                                             .94
                                                                      •
                                                                     1/2                                                                            .54                  -1. [2
                                                                                            —.054                           .090
                                       (.062)                     (.084)                           .011)                                            .197                                 106
                                                                                                                          (.096)                (.095)                       (       ,
                                       - .25                      1   .43
                                       -.011                          •   239
                                                                                                   •7                     1.20                      .37                              •   24
                                       (.043>                     (.058)
                                     81.66                                                                                                                                (.074>
                                                              60.6                         86,21                      67.18
                                      3.52                    10,10                                                                            44.58                    88.8:3
                                      (.096)                                                4,79                       6.46                    16,38
                                                               (.374)                          .145)                      (.1EHD                                         8.38
 SIZE                                                                                                                                           (.700)                    (.311>
                                       .0013                       .00025
                                       •   000057                                                  000038                     .00016                                     --
                                                                      000041               —                                                      .00030                   000064
                                                                                               . (>00002
                                      (.000013)                   (.000018)                                                    000015             .00011                   00O0O •
                                                                                            (.000015)                    (.000021,              (.000021)                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                         ( 000023)
                                     —2.00                        —.059                        .27                            .33
                                      —.096                       —.0098                                                                       —.016                     1 43
                                      (.025)                                                   .014                            032
                                                                  (.0.34)                  (.079>                                              —.0060                         •      1.33
                                                                                                                         (.039)                 (.039)                   (.044)
SIML.r                               —2.92                    -.55
                                      —.126                                                2.86                      -3.28                                               —
                                                              —.091                          .149                     -. :315                  -.32                          , 35
                                      (.057)                      (.077)                   (.066)                                               -. 191                        0:3:3
                                                                                                                      (.089)                   (.080)                    (.098>
'crirr                               11.02                    3.02                         4.03
                                       .4/3                       .514                                                   —.99                 -1.29
                                       .093>                                                .21<)
                                                              (.117)                        .100)                        (.136>                                                  967
                                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                               ( ].35)                  (.133)
                                                                                         122.4                      22..5                    710.4
                19c0                   36,                                                                                                                            2:16.4
                                                                  . 0o4
    f                                                                                          259                        •   118               .029                      . 12
                           fh'                 .

ciuit              tr.rn
                                                  i j        100(.j /.IX)            t'.'trj 1m F.
r1iir 2'               1
                                thcj1c.,iI o..k1
                                 I                                              Ih
                                                                                 'vtir'J               1
                                                                                                                                     fl                               rfj
                                     -u,       ij      5     'n                                                    .
                                                                                             t,h !t..I)dpu1 rrcr.r'n-$  d                           J
 y-r.)I    .•                                                     'i'.'mi.p .• .  P74 :ij t:' i '74                                                                      in-
                                                                                                                 liftij                                  oi       l   1i..'n-i
                                              35




TABLE 4: DIFFERENCES IN DEMOGRAPHIC CHANCES ACROSS UNIONS IN MANUFACTURING
           N= 1273


DEMOGRAPHIC       WHITE     BLACK     HISPANIC     WHITE     BLACK     HISPANIC
GROUP             MALES     MALES     MALES        FEMALES   FEMALES   FEMALES


UNION     N
                    .58      1.27     —.86          1.08       .13     —2.89
ALL      466        .025      .212    —.045          .104      .048     —.273
                   (.041)    (.055)    (.047)       (.063)    (.062)      (.070)

A         25       1.42      2.81      4.11        —1.40       .60     —6.42
                    .061      .469      .215        —.135      .215     —.606
                   (.088)    (.117)    (.099)       (.133)    (.132)      (.148)

B         43       5.27      2.04     —2.83        —3.06      —.42     —9.54
                    .227      .340     —.148        —.294     —.150     —.900
                   (.105)    (.140)    (.120)       (.162)    (.158)      (.176)

C         57       1.93      2.27     —1.55         1.97       .50     —1.45
                    .083      .378     —.081         .189      .177     —.137
                    .076     (.100)    (.086)       (.116)    (.113)      (.127)

D         23       2.78     —1.87     —7.49        -.5.99     —.40       —1.40
                    .120     —.312     —.392        —.576     —.144       —.132
                   (.184)    (.244)    (.209)       (.280)    (.276)      (.308)

E             2   19.49     —9.67     —6.78         1.44     —2.56 -     —6.90
                    .841    —1,611     —.355         .138     —.913       —.651
                   (.593)    (.788)    (.674)       (.905)    (.893)      (.994)

F             3    5.8      —9.60     —9.87         3.07     —5.10       —8.14
                    .250    —1.600     —.517         .295    —1.821       —.768
                   (.281)    (.373)    (.319)       (.429)    (.423)      (.471)




Note: The first line is 100 (P/X) evaluated at mean P. The second is the
       coefficient from the log—odds equation. The third is the standard error.
       ALL is the average union effect from Table 3. The individual union effects
       are estimated in the same sample with the same additional controls 1us
        twenty union dummies and are relative to the non—union sector.
                                 T6h1e
                                                                                                                                                                              on
                                            5: Losi-Odris Eqintjon at' the E1'fect of' Unicmiz4tjon
                                               Lihjt?—1jo113r Entpio'ipieiit by ['ernocjr4phj' Orotir'.
                                               N     12/C,
                                 (Julie                                                     IIisp4nj                          Whtte                                 B] tcI'
  hr cup                         Fit! e.;                      tl.j les                                                                                                                    Flici               iii':
                                                                                                 F1.1 es                    F er'i
                                                                                                                                1 es                              F eutal e5                    F   "nil ip';
  f' cflf, 1 C))):                  1                              2                               3                                 4                                        5                           /4


  Iit4Jf)N                      .522.                      .224                                 .644               -1 .34                                            .151                  - .061
                                .071                     .0/7                                   . 101
                                .018)                                                                                   mOc?                                         .0/.2                      .015
                                                       (.030)                               L034)           .               (.02!)                           (.044)
  CON I RACT             - (Mo
                                                           .291                                 , 7>5                       .562                                     . 744                 '-
                        '—.034                             .100                                                                                                                                  061
                                                                                                .124                        .029                                     . 1O                 --.01
                         (.034)                       (.0/1)                                (.OoS')                     (.040)                               tOOl)                         (.027)
 REVIEW                 —. .
                                 771                       .                                                            -
                                                               2                             .394                           .893                                  .7/1)                     .009
                         -.031                             .0/6                              .063                   --.043                                        .114                          .002
                                .018)                      .039)                        (.036)                          (.012)                           (.045)
 (.1/4*                72.37                     43.72                                 54.20
                                                                          .
                                                                                                                  62..ol                           49.94                                52.10
                        2.91                     1.5.04                                 13.3'                      3:23
                                .091)             t . 987)                                                                                         20.49                                 11      ia
                                                                                            .43)                        (.114)                     (3, fl)
 P24*                   7,4&.                     0.37                                 7.50                       10.06                             3.73
                                .300              2.19                                  1.20                                .519                         1.53
                        ( .044)                                                                                                                                                           1.73
                                                  ( .291)                               ( .160)                     (       .0613)                       ( .517)                          4     .234)
6171.                   — .0000075
                                                           .000035                     — . 000013
                        —
                                                                                                                            .00073                               . 000073                 -'.00001               ()
                                    00 50                  0000L                       — 000<10 1
                                                                                                                             000013
                        (
                                                                                                                                                                   ('00030
                             .0000028)            i.
                                                                                            .
                                                           . 00u00e0)                   (       0000055)            (       .0000034)                    4       .   00000/)?)            (     .00000/i
"3R0(J{f4               —'473
                        —
                                                           .076                             .069'                    .233                            —.0150                               -".0247
                          .01'                             .026                             .011                      .012                                   .0064                       -- .0053
                        (.01!)                    '.021)                               (.021)                       (.013)                           (.02/)                               (.02C)
61N131.E                    ,47                  -.Oi),,.
                                                  .
                                                                                                                                                     —.12:'                               m790
                                                       ,                                        ('012               --q"i
                        If)cc"                    (        I       1
                                                                                                                                                     --. 1/2
                                                                                                                    1                                (               i,tl                             3

FCLFF4<
                                                                                                                            ))                                                           ii
                                                 ....j                                 i.;'o                      1'!
                                                                                                                             1/.                     i. o2                               494
                                                  .13':                       .             .i3.:                   1./f.'                                           /''"4               1.06
                                                 CI.'!)                                '.1!.';;,                    (.105)                           1.2Cc))                             (.1.8)
fl'!'                  ii " .
                                                                                                                  iJt, ',                         /)I•       ,       J                 491)
hf OtJ       1   'H0                                   .   r
 ;f ORE.


                                                                                                        ,
     Fh,fr. N,          ln is 1t)3(0V/.j)          ..                             ..
  in1 ("fr, ti IL)                                                                                                                   )4v::ç,, )fl1.j                     i'           Cr('I'l'i
                jc odds '1t.i'iC,I, Tiie thrU        U,.         H                                          ::;                            ,                             it') ifit;
 20 1nd(tr—j wcJ S rejicH) c1'.U'u'I                                                                                               1974                                   1
                                     W') Mi u' i'v':, :Jcccii'';'                                                                              .,t..a
         ,
jch- P74 is the 'u-len jru'_t. I'I'.4 Uii,'i'' ci blue cc) L:r' 3d
                                                          37




TABLE 6:    I NT ERA CTT ON S    BETWEEN UNIONS AND AFFIR1IATIVE ACTION
            N= 1273


                   White           B lack     Hispanic         •Th i te      Black     Hispanic
                                   'ta1es                      Females       Females   Females
                   Males                      Na 1 e S


UNION (U)             —.231          3.04     —4.97              1.11          .41     -1.34
                      —.010           .506     —.   260           •   107       147     —.127
                      (.101)         (.135)     (.115)           (.155)       (.154)    (.173)
CONTRACT (C)          5.61           1.57     —2.20                .97         .58      —.76
                       .242           .261     -.115              .093         .207     —.072
                      (.070)         (.094)     (.080)           (.108)       (.107)    (.120)

REVIEW (R)            1.83           1.56         .038           1.13           62       .77
                       .079            260        .00 20           109         .223      .073
                      (.063)         (.085)     (.072)           (.097)       (.097)    (.108)
UxC                   2.39         —1.97        4.34             -.080        —.16     -1.44
                       .103          —.328       .227            —. 008       —.058     —.136
                      (.112)         (.150)     (.128)           (.172)       (.171)    (.192)
UxR                —3.67             —.25       1.20              .104        —.42      —.95
                      —.   158       — .042      .063             .010        —.151     -.090
                      (.081)         (.108)     (.092)           (,125)       (.124)    (.138)
P8O*                   .056           .016      —.022              .010       —.006     -.008
         u=O

                       .080          —.004          .021              .009     .004     —.022
         u1
                       .018           .016          .0004             .011     .006      .008
3P8O     =o
P80                   —.018           .013          .012              .012      .002    —.002
         u1



 Note:     These equations are estimated in the same sample and with the same additional
           controls as Table 3. P80 is 1980 share of blue—collar mp1oyment of given
           demographic      group.
