NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY IS THE DOLLAR SO HIGH?
Martin Feldstein
Working Paper 13114
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13114

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2007 meeting of the American Economic Association.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Why is the Dollar So High?
Martin Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13114
May 2007
JEL No. F3,F32
ABSTRACT
The level of the dollar is part of a complex general equilibrium system. Nevertheless, it is helpful to
recognize that the high level of the dollar is necessary to generate the current account deficit equal
to the difference between national saving and investment. Understanding the high level of the dollar
therefore requires understanding the reasons for the low level of national saving in the United States.
Reducing the large current account deficit will require both a higher rate of national saving and a more
competitive dollar. Although the necessary decline in the real value of the dollar can in theory occur
without a decline in the dollar's nominal value, the implied magnitude of the fall in the domestic price
level is implausible. A decline of the real value of the dollar that is large enough to reduce the current
account deficit significantly requires a significant decline in the nominal value of the dollar.
Martin Feldstein
President and Chief Executive Officer
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Why is the Dollar So High?
Martin Feldstein*

Although there is no natural measure of how high a currency is, the
magnitude of the U.S. trade and current account deficits makes it clear that the
dollar is very high relative to a long-run equilibrium level. The trade deficit in
2006 was about $750 billion or nearly six percent of GDP and the current account
deficit was some $100 billion larger. These enormous deficits are unprecedented
for the United States or for any other major industrial country.

In attempting to explain why the dollar is so high it is necessary to begin by
recognizing that the dollar is one price in the complex general equilibrium system
that describes the global economy. The level of the dollar is influenced by and in
turn influences the interest rates, the trade volumes, and the levels of saving and
investment, to name only some of the key variables. However, while this is clearly
true, it doesn’t help to understand the fundamental process of dollar determination.

A more useful way to explain the high level of the dollar is to note that the
dollar must be this high to generate a trade deficit1 equal to the difference between
national investment and national saving. The basic national income accounting
identity tells us that investment minus saving equals imports minus exports. If
*

Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. These remarks were presented at the 2007 meeting of the American
Economic Association.
1

Technically, the current account deficit that includes both the trade deficit and the net
investment deficit. I will use the term trade deficit as a convenient short hand.
-1-

saving is low relative to the investment (in plant and equipment, inventories and
housing), we must have a trade deficit to bring in the resources to fill the gap.
While many things influence the size of the trade deficit, the level of the dollar is
one of the key determinants. Given an approximately full employment level of
income at home and abroad and given the tastes of domestic and foreign
consumers, the dollar is the key determinant.

This line of reasoning leads us to the low level of the U.S. saving rate as the
primary cause of the high level of the dollar. The national saving rate includes
business saving and government saving as well as the saving of households.
Business saving (i.e., corporate retained earnings) is quite high, reflecting the
strong level of profits. The fiscal deficit is relatively small at less than 2 percent of
GDP. It is the low and falling level of household saving that is keeping national
saving so low and thereby causing the saving-investment gap, and, in turn, the need
for a high dollar to generate an equivalent trade deficit.

Personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income has been
falling in the United States since the beginning of the 1990s. At that time, personal
saving was about 7 percent of disposable personal income. It declined gradually
until it reached just 2.3 percent of disposable income in mid-2003. It then dropped
sharply over the next two years to a negative minus 1.5 percent of disposable
income. It remains at about that level now.

Two primary forces have been driving down the household saving rate:
increasing wealth and, more recently, mortgage refinancing. The value of portfolio

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-2-

wealth has increased as share prices have risen, with the S&P index in real terms
120 percent higher now than in 1990, a period during which real GDP rose only 60
percent. Even more striking has been the rise in the value of owner occupied
housing. The value of that housing stock (divided by the consumer price index)
rose even faster with a greater rise in the real value of the housing stock net of
mortgage debt.

Individuals who are saving for retirement can rightly conclude that, because
of these wealth increases, they can afford to save less. And retirees who are
dissaving can look at their wealth and conclude that they can afford to dissave
relatively more than previous generations of retirees. This has progressed to a
point where the depressed saving of the savers and the increases dissaving of the
dissavers has caused the net saving rate to be negative.

In addition to the effect of rising wealth, saving has recently been depressed
by a surge in mortgage refinancing. When the Federal Reserve responded to its
concern about the possibility of deflation by lowering the federal funds rate to 1
percent and promising to raise it only slowly, the long term rates fell, including the
rates on long term mortgages. Since households can pay off and refinance their
mortgages without penalty, many households did just that. They repaid their
existing mortgages by borrowing at new lower interest rates. Because of the rising
value of their homes, they were able to borrow more than the amount needed to
repay their existing mortgages. Some of the extra funds that they extracted in this
way were reinvested in financial assets but some were used to purchase consumer
durables or spent on home improvements. Although the individuals might have

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-3-

regarded such spending as a form of investment, these outlays are treated as
consumption in the national income accounts.

It is natural to ask why the low rate of saving did not reduce the rate of
investment by a corresponding amount. As Charles Horioka and I showed many
years ago (Feldstein and Horioka, 1980), countries with a sustained low saving
rate tend to have a low rate of investment. But that is a relationship that holds
over decade long periods. In the short run, a decline in saving generally leads to a
capital inflow to maintain the previous level of investment (Feldstein, 1983).

More specifically, the rate of investment continued at a relatively high level
because the fall in saving did not cause the rate of interest to rise. The rate of
interest did not rise because of the large availability of capital from abroad. Three
sources of such capital inflow have been particularly important. First, the Chinese
government stabilized the exchange rate between the dollar and the rinminbi by
buying large volumes of U.S. Treasury securities, thus keeping down the interest
rate on those bonds. Second, the Bank of Japan has pursued a low interest strategy,
with the short rate close to zero. This encouraged private individuals in Japan and
abroad to borrow yen, sell the yen for dollars, and invest the funds in dollar
securities. This “yen carry trade” kept US rates lower than they
would otherwise have been. And the rapid rise in the price of oil has created large
amounts of investable funds in the oil producing countries which have been
temporarily invested in dollar securities.

Reducing the Trade Deficit

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-4-

What will it take to reduce the U.S. trade deficit? Reducing the trade deficit
requires an increase in the U.S. saving rate or an equally large fall in business
investment and residential construction. I believe that the adjustment will come
primarily through a higher saving rate and that this will happen without any
specific change in government policy. The household saving rate will rise because
the two primary forces that have driven savings down will come to an end. First,
the sharp rise in wealth caused by abnormal gains in share prices and house prices
will not continue. Home prices are already beginning to decline and the prices of
stocks are not likely to outperform earnings in the future in the way that they did in
the past. Second, the mortgage refinancing will not continue to generate
spendable cash for households as it has in the past. The decline in mortgage
refinancing has not yet begun. But at a certain point there will be very few
households with mortgage rates that exceed the rates available on new mortgages.
There will also no longer be a stock of net equity that can be accessed by
borrowing.

The increase in saving (or, more accurately, of saving relative to investment)
is a necessary condition for reducing the trade deficit but it is not sufficient.
Households and businesses in the United States and abroad must be given an
incentive to spend more on American made goods and services and less on the
goods and services made elsewhere in the world. That incentive, of course, is a
change in the relative prices of American and foreign goods and services. The way
in which this will come about is a decline in the value of the dollar relative to the
value of other major currencies – the euro, the yen, the Chinese RAB, the British
pound, etcetera. When the dollar declines relative to the euro, as it has been over

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-5-

the past year, American goods are cheaper relative to European goods. That makes
American households and businesses buy less in Europe and more in America.
And the same happens in reverse for European buyers.

It is, of course, possible in theory for the relative prices of American and
foreign goods to change without any change in the nominal exchange rate. If the
prices of all American goods and services were to fall by (say) 20 percent while the
exchange rates remained unchanged, that would achieve a 20 percent real
devaluation of the dollar. That would have the same effect as a 20 percent fall in
the nominal exchange rate while the prices of US and foreign goods remained
unchanged (or rose together as the same rate). There is, of course, no chance that
U.S. prices would actually fall by anything like that. Similarly, while a 20 percent
rise in all foreign prices would also cause such a change in the real exchange rate if
nominal exchange rates remained unchanged, there is no chance of such an
inflationary shift now that most countries are managing monetary policy to keep
inflation very low. In short, changing relative prices will require a change in the
nominal exchange rate.

Some people worry that even a large decline in the value of the dollar would
not be able to change purchasing patterns enough to reduce the U.S. trade deficit.
It is common to hear the concern that the U.S. no longer has the ability to
manufacture and export. Or the worry that we will never be able to compete with
the low labor costs that drive imports from countries like China or Vietnam.

Both of these worries are unfounded. The U.S. is a major exporter, selling

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-6-

more than $1 trillion of goods to the rest of the world in the past 12 months. And
as a lower dollar causes the price of those goods to become more competitive
relative to the goods made in other countries, our exports will rise more rapidly.
Caterpillar tractors compete with the Komatsu tractors made in Japan. Boeing
airplanes compete with European airbus planes. California wine competes with
wine from France, Italy and Spain. And as the dollar declines, these U.S. products
will be mor e attractive to buyers at home and abroad.

About half of our imports come from high-wage countries including Canada,
western Europe and Japan. A lower dollar relative to those currencies will cause a
substitution of American-made goods for the similar goods that we import from
abroad.

But what about the goods that come from countries in which wages are very
low? It is certainly true that American workers will not be able to compete in the
production of such low-cost goods. We will not see American factories making the
products which are now produced in very low cost factories in some Asian
countries. But instead of substituting American-made goods for very similar
imports, the lower dollar will cause Americans to buy a different mix of goods and
services that are produced in the United States.

As the dollar declines relative to the Chinese yuan, the Korean won, and the
Thai bhat, the dollar prices of those products will rise. American consumers will
find them less attractive and will shift to buying U.S. goods and services. Much of
that substitution will be to services which can only be produced in the U.S. For

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-7-

example, as imported t-shirts and sneakers become more expensive, American
consumers will spend more on meals away from home and on travel in the United
States.

The Sticky Dollar

Why has this not happened already? Why has the saving rate not increased
and the dollar declined? I have already explained the special conditions that have
caused the saving rate to remain low: rising wealth and continued opportunities to
refinance mortgages. The continued high value of the dollar is more of a puzzle.

As I noted at the beginning of these remarks, the low saving rate creates a
natural pressure for an overvalued dollar. But if the dollar were to fall before the
saving rate declined, the level of aggregate demand in the U.S. would rise (more
exports, fewer imports). That would push up interest rates, causing business
investment and housing construction to decline and speeding up the end of
mortgage refinancing. This would shrink the current saving-investment balance
and provide room for the increased net exports induced by the decline of the dollar.

A decline of the dollar would naturally be driven by the combination of an
expectation that the dollar must fall to shrink the trade deficit and the small
difference between interest rates on dollar bonds and euro denominated bonds.
Financial investors who believe that the dollar must fall over the next few years at
an average rate that exceeds the interest differential between US and foreign
interest rates should prefer to hold foreign bonds. That portfolio shift should occur

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-8-

until the dollar reaches a level at which further falls are no larger than the
prevailing interest difference. The difference between dollar interest rates and the
interest rate on similar European securities is now less than one percent. So, an
investor who believes that the dollar will decline by more than one percent a year
should want to hold foreign bonds rather than dollar bonds.

Why has that not occurred? Why has the dollar declined only slowly
relative to the euro and the pound and hardly at all relative to the Japanese yen and
the Chinese yuan? A variety of forces have delayed the full adjustment of the
dollar. The most obvious of these has been the massive intervention policy of the
Chinese government that is designed to prevent an appreciation of the yuan and the
resulting loss of competitiveness of Chinese products in global markets.

Although economists generally agree that a country cannot use exchange
rate intervention to prevent the eventual decline of an overvalued currency
(because they lack sufficient foreign exchange reserves to offset sustained foreign
selling of their currency), a government can depress its own currency by supplying
more of it. The Chinese have responded to the large trade surpluses and
investment inflows by buying dollars for yuan and then sterilizing the increased
money creation. In this way, the Chinese have accumulated more than $1 trillion
of foreign exchange reserves, mostly dollar assets. That buying of dollar bonds has
strengthened the dollar and offset the effect of those who would shift dollars to
yuan in anticipation of a fall of the dollar relative to the yuan.

The government of Japan now follows a different strategy to stimulate

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-9-

exports by depressing the value of the yen. Until a few years ago, the Bank of
Japan engaged in massive currency market intervention, effectively buying up
surplus dollars that came to Japan as a result of its trade surplus and investment
inflow much as the Chinese now do. More recently, this intervention ended and
was replaced by a more traditional policy of depressing the currency by
maintaining a very low rate of interest. With short term interest rates close to zero,
it was and is attractive for investors to borrow yen, then convert that yen into
dollars on which they can earn a higher interest rate. The interest difference has
been as high as five percentage points, implying that an investor who borrows yen
and lends dollars will gain, as long as the dollar does not fall by more than five
percent during the year. This “yen carry trade” has been a major source of demand
for dollars, keeping the dollar artificially high.

In addition to these government policies, the dollar has been supported by
private investors whose strategy does not accurately reflect the risks and returns of
their investments in dollars. Although many investors in the foreign exchange
markets may be sophisticated, there is substantial evidence of trading based on socalled momentum strategies (“The trend is your friend.”) and other false views
about this market.

There are at least four examples of these “false views.” First is the belief
that the U.S. government favors a strong dollar and would take steps to reverse a
dollar decline. U.S. Treasury secretaries for at least the past 15 years have repeated
the mantra that a strong dollar is good for the United States . In fact, the Treasury
department has taken no steps to resist or reverse the fall of the dollar against the

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-10-

euro and the pound. A no-intervention policy seems a more accurate description of
the likely future policy as well.

Second is the belief that the trade deficit can be eliminated without a decline
of the dollar. The statements of eminent economists and widely read financial
journalists reinforces this view. As I have already noted, this is theoretically
feasible but would require implausibly large movements of the price level in the
United States and our trading partners.

The idea that the trade and current account imbalances can be corrected
without a change in exchange rates is reinforced by the rhetoric of the International
Monetary Fund that point to the need to reverse global imbalances and then
describe what it believes will be needed to bring that about: higher saving in the
US, increased productivity in Europe, more investment in the OPEC countries, and
greater exchange rate flexibility by the Chinese. A general adjustment of the dollar
relative to all currencies is not mentioned. The same is true of the pronouncements
of the G-8 and other official bodies.

A third source of confusion is the belief that the current level of the dollar
may be satisfactory because “the U.S is an attractive destination for private
investments and therefore has no trouble financing its trade deficit at this level of
the dollar.” The evidence for this position comes from the monthly reports of the
U.S. Treasury department (the Treasury international capital reports) that appear
to show that the capital inflow often exceeds the trade deficit and that these funds
are coming from private investors.

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-11-

Neither inference is warranted by the actual evidence. Since the U.S.
government does not intervene in the foreign exchange market, the monthly capital
inflow must exactly equal the size of the current account deficit that needs to be
financed. Any difference between this current account deficit and the Treasury
report’s measure of the capital inflow simply reflects the fact that the Treasury data
exclude certain forms of capital movements, including non-financial foreign direct
investment, short term portfolio investments and bank loans and deposits. So there
is no evidence in the Treasury reports about the ease or difficulty in financing the
trade deficit.

The classification of the capital inflow as coming from private sources is
also misleading because transactions are classified according to the nature of the
transactor, rather than of the ultimate source of funds. When the government of an
oil producing country buys U.S. Treasury bonds through a British bank, the
transaction is recorded as a purchase by a private British buyer.

These widely reported monthly statistics no doubt convince some investors,
as they appear to convince the journalists who report these numbers, that the U.S.
attracts large volumes of private capital because of the attractiveness of investing
in the United States economy. In fact, the funds that come to the U.S. now are
almost exclusively in the form of bond purchases rather than equity inflows and
therefore, given the small interest difference, are likely to be primarily government
funds rather than private investors.

Fourth, market participants focus on very short term conditions rather than

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-12-

longer term fundamentals. The trade deficit and the growing exposure of foreign
investors to dollar assets should persuade investors that the dollar will have to fall
by more than the small interest differential - but much of the movement of the
dollar exchange rate responds to short term shifts in economic conditions that are
expected to cause small changes in interest rates.

I believe that all of these forces that are supporting the dollar will change in
the period ahead. The Chinese are unhappy with their large dollar exposure and
are committed to increasing domestic consumption as the way to maintain
aggregate demand and increase employment. The Japanese see their economy
improving and will allow interest rates to rise. More importantly, the investors
who are pursuing the yen carry trade will increasingly recognize that this is a risky
strategy in which the appreciation of the yen relative to the dollar may outweigh
the interest differential. The four false views about the sustainability of the current
exchange rate will change as investors learn more about each of these issues and as
they see the dollar decline relative to major currencies.

The primary risk going forward is that the decline of the dollar and the rise
of the saving rate will happen at different speeds, leading to domestic imbalances.
If the dollar falls while the saving rate remains very low, the increase in net exports
will cause a rise in interest rates and a decline of fixed investment and other
interest sensitive forms of spending. This narrowly focused decline of demand
would be more destabilizing to the economy than a rise in net exports balanced by
a broad-based decline in consumption.

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-13-

Alternatively, if the saving rate rises significantly without a corresponding
decline of the dollar the reduction in consume spending will cause a general
decline in U.S. aggregate demand and a rise in unemployment. Because of lags
between the dollar decline and the rise of net exports, the domestic weakness will
occur unless the dollar decline precedes the rise in saving.

Weakness of the U.S. economy would eventually cause the dollar to decline
unless foreign governments seek to protect their own net exports by policies that
prevent a rise in the value of their currencies, either by intention or by the pursuit
of an expansionary monetary policy rather than a fiscal policy. The perception that
foreign governments are preventing a recovery of the U.S. economy by such
policies would exacerbate already troubling rise in protectionist sentiment in the
United States.

The best hope for a smooth adjustment of both the global and U.S.
imbalances would be a substantial fall of the dollar followed by a significant rise in
the U.S. saving rate and a policy of fiscal stimulus in other countries. Achieving
this will require both good policies and good luck.

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-14-

References

Feldstein, Martin (1983) “Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements
in the Long Run and Short Run,” European Economic Review 21 (1-2) pp 129-51

Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka (1980) “Domestic Saving and International
Capital Flows,” Economic Journal, 90 (358) pp 314-29

DollarSoHigh.wpd

-15-

