                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ARE SHOCKS TO THE TERMS OF TRADE SHOCKS TO PRODUCTIVITY?

                                          Timothy J. Kehoe
                                            Kim J. Ruhl

                                        Working Paper 13111
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13111


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




We would like to thank Narayana Kocherlakota, Ellen McGrattan, Edward Prescott, and Katheryn
Russ for helpful advice and comments. This work was undertaken with the support of the National
Science Foundation under grant SES-0536970. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Are Shocks to the Terms of Trade Shocks to Productivity?
Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 13111
May 2007
JEL No. E23,F41,F43

                                              ABSTRACT

International trade is frequently thought of as a production technology in which the inputs are exports
and the outputs are imports. Exports are transformed into imports at the rate of the price of exports
relative to the price of imports: the reciprocal of the terms of trade. Cast this way, a change in the
terms of trade acts as a productivity shock. Or does it? In this paper, we show that this line of reasoning
cannot work in standard models. Starting with a simple model and then generalizing, we show that
changes in the terms of trade have no first-order effect on productivity when output is measured as
chain-weighted real gross domestic product. The terms of trade do affect real income and consumption
in a country, and we show how measures of real income change with the terms of trade at business
cycle frequencies and during financial crises.

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
271 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
tkehoe@econ.umn.edu

Kim J. Ruhl
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
BRB 3.148
Austin, Texas 78712
ruhl@eco.utexas.edu
1. Introduction
       The terms of trade — the price of imports relative to the price of exports — vary greatly
over time and country. This variation makes the terms of trade a natural candidate for explaining
country performance. Intuitively, we can think about foreign trade as a production technology:
a country’s exports are the inputs to the technology, and these inputs are turned into outputs that
are recorded as a country’s imports. Exports are transformed into imports at the rate that is the
ratio of the price of exports to the price of imports, which is just the reciprocal of the terms of
trade. Viewed in this way, an increase in the terms of trade acts much like a technology shock:
the same amount of exports now produces a smaller amount of imports.
       In figures 1 and 2 we plot two well-known examples of terms of trade shocks. Figure 1
shows the contractions in real GDP in the United States that accompanied the sharp increases in
the terms of trade, these coming largely from the OPEC oil embargo in 1973 and the Iranian
Revolution in 1979. In fact, writing in the early 1980s, Hamilton (1983) points out that all but
one of the post–World War II economic downturns in the United States up until that time had
been preceded by an upward spike in the price of imported oil. Figure 2 presents the analogous
data for Mexico, which in 1983 and 1995 suffered severe debt crises that brought with them
sharp increases in the price of imports. These deteriorations of the terms of trade were
accompanied by large contractions in real GDP. The correlation coefficient for changes in real
GDP and changes in the terms of trade is −0.30 for the United States and −0.73 for Mexico. In
these figures, we also plot total factor productivity (TFP), which is even more strongly correlated
with the terms of trade for the United States and almost as correlated for Mexico, with
correlation coefficients −0.54 and −0.71, respectively. Data like these certainly seem to support
the intuition that shocks to the terms of trade affect the economy as shocks to productivity.
       In this paper, we show that standard models do not support this line of reasoning. The
problem lies in the construction of real gross domestic product (GDP), the most common
measure of a country’s output. The effect of a shock to the terms of trade on real GDP is not the
same as the effect of a productivity shock and is highly dependent upon the method used to
construct real GDP. When real GDP is constructed using the chain-weighting method specified
in the United Nations System of National Accounts, terms of trade shocks have no first-order
effects if inputs of factors are constant. When real GDP is constructed using fixed base year
prices, the effect of a terms of trade shock is ambiguous: in some cases a deterioration of the

                                                  1
terms of trade can even increase real GDP! In this paper we bring this accounting to bear on the
terms of trade and productivity relationship. As productivity is computed using GDP as the
measure of output, the terms of trade cannot have a direct effect on a country’s TFP. An increase
in the terms of trade lowers the purchasing power of the country, which can be very painful in
terms of consumption and welfare, but does not impact TFP directly.
       The empirical literature on growth is replete with examples of the association of the terms
of trade and output growth. Easterly, Kremer, Pritchett, and Summers (1993) study a large panel
of countries to uncover the sources of long-run growth and aggregate volatility. They conclude
that “shocks, especially to the terms of trade, play a large role in explaining variance in growth.”
In setting out a framework for studying developing country growth, Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz
(2001) find that the terms of trade volatility are more correlated with output volatility than are
the standard deviations of many of the usual suspects: money growth, fiscal balance, and capital
flows to name a few. Becker and Mauro (2005) use a large panel of countries to study how
output drops are related to various external shocks and, using the likelihood of the shock and the
associated output drop, compute the cost of the different shocks. They find that the costliest
shocks, particularly for developing countries, are terms of trade shocks. The idea underlying
many of these conclusions is succinctly summarized by Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2001), who
write, “For small open economies, adverse terms of trade shocks can have much the same effect
as negative technology shocks, and this is one of the important differences between
macroeconomics in these economies and that which underlies some of the traditional closed
economy models.”
       In line with the above reasoning, we show that, in standard models, a shock to the terms
of trade has an effect on consumption and welfare that is similar to a TFP shock. The analogy
between the terms of trade and productivity breaks down when we calculate their effects on real
GDP and productivity. When real GDP is measured at base period prices and domestic factors
of production are held fixed, the effect of a terms of trade shock on real GDP is determined by
the current terms of trade relative to the base period terms of trade. If the current import price is
the same as the base period price, then the shock has no effect. If the current price is higher
(lower) than the base period price, the effect is negative (positive). In this case, a change in the
terms of trade can have a first-order effect on GDP, but this result follows from an artifact of the
deflation method and not from an underlying structural relationship. When we consider real


                                                  2
GDP calculated as a chain-weighted index — as is now the standard for many countries — these
artifacts disappear. Changes in the terms of trade do not have a first-order impact on real GDP,
and TFP remains unchanged. These ideas are well understood by economists interested in index
numbers and national income accounting. See, for example, Diewert and Morrison (1986) and
Kohli (1983, 2004).

       We expand the simple examples to show that our results easily generalize to richer
environments. We show that a shock to the terms of trade can affect the supply of productive
factors like labor and that the effects of these shocks, as in the simple examples, also have an
ambiguous impact on real GDP. A third set of results shows how the effect of a terms of trade
shock on real GDP and consumption varies with the elasticity of substitution between the
domestic factors and the imported input. As the elasticity of substitution decreases, changes in
the terms of trade have larger impacts on consumption but smaller impacts on real GDP. When
the production function uses domestic and imported inputs in fixed proportions, changes in the
terms of trade have a large impact on consumption, but no impact on real GDP.
       If the terms of trade do not have a clear effect on measures of real GDP and TFP, where
are their effects visible? In national accounting measures, the terms of trade affect gross
domestic income (GDI). In a closed economy, real GDI and real GDP are the same, but in an
open economy they are not. In section 5 we discuss alternative measures of real income,
including the concept of command basis GDP used by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
These measures do respond to changes in the terms of trade and reflect how the purchasing
power of an economy changes as foreign prices change.
       The problems highlighted in this paper are part of a much larger issue faced by
quantitative researchers. Developing good intuition is paramount in understanding how models
work, and constructing analogies, such as the one between the terms of trade and productivity,
can be very helpful in developing intuition. When evaluating the quantitative properties of a
model, however, the statistics taken from the model must be constructed in the same way as they
are in the data. As we show below, it is exactly in this dimension that the analogy between the
terms of trade and productivity breaks down. In comparing models to data, the researcher is
faced with two choices. Either the statistics can be collected from the model as they are by the
economists at the statistical agencies, or the data can be reconfigured to mimic the constructs in
the model. We take the first approach in sections 2 through 5 and show how the model’s GDP


                                                 3
— as it would be constructed by a national income accountant — behaves in unexpected ways.
In section 6 we take the second approach and use the data that underlies GDP to construct a
measure that corresponds to the variables relevant in the terms of trade and productivity shocks
analogy.
       This paper identifies a puzzle. As figures 1 and 2 illustrate, deteriorations in the terms of
trade are frequently accompanied by declines in productivity. If there is a causal mechanism that
links shocks to the terms of trade to movements in productivity, researchers need to identify it.

2. Simple model

       We begin by considering a simple model in which the single factor of production, labor,
is supplied inelastically, and in which there are no distortions or rigidities. We subsequently
show how our results extend to models with variable labor supply and models with distortions.
We begin with the case where real GDP is measured in terms of base year prices because the
calculations are simpler. We then show how the results can be extended to the case where real
GDP is calculated with chain-weighted prices.

2.1. Closed economy

       We first consider a closed economy in which labor is supplied inelastically, A = A . Here
we show that a fall in productivity in the intermediate goods sector produces a fall in GDP and in
TFP, a result that does not carry over when we reinterpret the model as that of an open economy
in which intermediate goods are imported.
       There are two goods produced in this economy at each date t . The first good, the y
good, is consumed by consumers and used in the production of the second good, the m good.
The y good is produced using labor and intermediate inputs of the m good according to the
production function
                                       yt = f (A t , mt ) .                               (1)

We assume the production function, f , has constant returns to scale, is concave, and is
continuously differentiable. We later analyze the case where f is a fixed proportions
production function. The m good is produced using only intermediate inputs of the q good.
The production function is



                                                    4
                                                     xt
                                              mt =      ,                              (2)
                                                     at

where at is a unit output requirement that is stochastic. We assume that the m good is sold in

competitive markets at price pt . The m good producer chooses mt and xt to minimize costs
and to earn 0 profits. The condition that equilibrium profits be 0 is

                                              pt = at .                                (3)

The feasibility condition is

                                           ct + xt = yt .                              (4)

       We normalize the price of the y good to be 1. Expenditure on final goods in the closed
economy is only consumption, so on the expenditure side, real GDP, Yt , is

                                         Yt = ct = yt − xt .                           (5)

On the output side, real GDP is calculated as the base period value of gross output minus the
base period value of intermediate inputs:

                           Yt = ( yt + p0 mt ) − ( p0 mt + xt ) = yt − xt ,            (6)

where p0 = a0 is the base period price of the m good.

       To calculate the impact of an increase in a , a decline in productivity in the m good
sector, we note that a competitive economy chooses mt to solve

                                      max f ( A, mt ) − at mt .                        (7)

The first-order condition for this problem is

                                          f m ( A, mt ) = at .                         (8)

Using the implicit function theorem we obtain

                                                      1
                                  m′(at ) =                     < 0.                   (9)
                                              f mm ( A, m(at ))




                                                       5
Suppose that at +1 > at increases, that is, that productivity in the intermediate goods sector falls.
How does real GDP change? The first-order change is

                                Y (at +1 ) − Y (at ) ≈ Y ′(at )(at +1 − at ) ,              (10)

where

                                  Y (at ) = f ( A, m(at )) − at m(at ) .                    (11)

Differentiating (11), we use (8) to obtain

                Y ′(at ) = f m ( A, m(at ))m′(at ) − at m′(at ) − m(at ) = − m(at ) < 0 .   (12)

Real GDP and productivity decline.
        Equation (12) provides an expression for first-order changes in real GDP when the
production function f is continuously differentiable. When f is a fixed proportions function,
where

                                         yt = min [ A t , mt / b ] ,                        (13)

we can obtain exact expressions. In this case, m(at ) = b A and real GDP is

                                           Y (at ) = A − at b A ,                           (14)

which implies that the first-order expression in (12) is exact.

2.2. Open economy

        Now consider an open economy with the same structure as that of the closed economy in
which m is an imported intermediate input, x are exports of the y good, and p is the terms of
trade. To make the analysis identical to that in the closed economy, we assume balanced trade,

                                                pt mt = xt .                                (15)

By comparing (15) to (2), we see how the terms of trade in the open economy, p , and the
productivity parameter in the closed economy, a , are similar. Real GDP is now

                      Yt = ct + xt − p0 mt = yt − p0 mt = f ( A, mt ) − p0 mt ,             (16)




                                                           6
where p0 is price of imports (relative to exports) in the base year. A competitive economy

continues to choose mt to solve

                                         max f ( A, mt ) − pt mt                               (17)

with the corresponding first-order condition defining an implicit function m( p) :

                                             f m ( A, mt ) = pt                                (18)

                                                          1
                                     m′( pt ) =                      <0                        (19)
                                                  f mm ( A, m( pt ))

       An increase in p — a deterioration in the terms of trade — has the identical impact on
consumption and welfare as the decline in productivity in the closed economy. But what
happens to real GDP and productivity?

                                  Y ( pt ) = f ( A, m( pt )) − p0 m( pt )                      (20)

                 Y ′( pt ) = f m ( A, m( pt ))m′( pt ) − p0 m′( pt ) = ( pt − p0 )m′( pt ) .   (21)

To the extent that the terms of trade in the period before the deterioration takes place, pt , are

close to the terms of trade in the base period, p0 , there is no first-order change in measured real

GDP or in productivity. Notice that, if pt < p0 , real GDP may even increase in response to a
negative terms of trade shock. When we use chain-weighted real GDP, this sensitivity to the
base period price is eliminated.
       In the case where f is the fixed proportions function (13), real GDP is

                                          Y ( pt ) = A − p0b A ,                               (22)

which does not change at all as the terms of trade change. Notice that the fixed proportions case
is where consumption,

                                          c( pt ) = (1 − pt b) A ,                             (23)

and therefore welfare, falls the most in response to a deterioration in the terms of trade.
       The intuition for our results is simple. A deterioration in the terms of trade causes
domestic output to fall, but it also causes imports valued at base period prices to fall. Real GDP

                                                          7
is the difference between the two, (20), and the envelope theorem says that the two effects cancel
to first order. With fixed proportions production, the two effects are exactly equal.

3. Extensions to the simple model

        In this section, we add variable labor supply and distortions to the model. To the extent
that shocks to the terms of trade change the labor supply, they can change real GDP, but not
productivity. Real GDP can even rise in response to a negative terms of trade shock, although
welfare falls. The model with distortions is more complicated. We analyze a model with tariff
distortions and show that an increase in tariffs acts like a shock to the terms of trade but has no
first-order effects on GDP if initial tariffs are 0.

3.1. Variable labor supply

        Suppose that there is a representative consumer who values both consumption and leisure
z = A − A . The utility function of this consumer is u (c, z ) , and the consumer solves

                                                max u (ct , A − A t )                                       (24)

                                                   s.t. ct = wt A ,

where wt = f A (A t , mt ) . The first-order condition for this problem is

                                      wt uc (ct , A − A t ) = u z (ct , A − A t ) ,                         (25)

which implicitly defines the function A( w) :

                        wt uc ( wt A( wt ), A − A( wt )) = u z ( wt A( wt ), A − A( wt ))                   (26)

                               uc (ct , A − A t ) + ucc (ct , A − A t ) wt A t − ucz (ct , A − A t )A t
                A′( wt ) = −                                                                            .   (27)
                               ucc (ct , A − Av) wt2 − 2ucz (ct , A − A t ) wt + u zz (ct , A − A t )

Consider the constant elasticity of substitution case, where

                                   ⎧⎪( c ρ + γ z ρ − 1 − γ ) / ρ for ρ ≤ 1, ρ ≠ 0
                       u (c, z ) = ⎨                                              .                         (28)
                                    ⎪⎩log c + γ log z             for ρ = 0

Here



                                                                8
                                                       ρ c ρ −1
                              A′( w) =                                            .             (29)
                                       (1 − ρ ) ( w2 c ρ − 2 + γ ( A − A) ρ − 2 )

Notice that A′( w) has the same sign as ρ .
       How do w and m vary with p ? We can use the first-order conditions for profit
maximization to define implicit functions w( p ) and m( p)

                                      f A (A( w( p)), m( p)) = w( p)                            (30)

                                        f m (A( w( p)), m( p)) = p .                            (31)

Differentiating, we obtain

                         f AA (A, m)A′( w) w′( p) + f Am (A, m)m′( p) = w′( p)                  (32)

                             f Am (A, m)A′( w) w′( p) + f mm (A, m)m′( p) = 1                   (33)

We can solve this system of two equations in the two unknowns w′( p) and m′( p) to obtain

                                                       f A m ( A, m )
                 w′( p ) =                                                                      (34)
                             f mm (A, m) − ( f mm (A, m) f AA (A, m) − f Am (A, m) 2 ) A′( w)

                                                 1 − f AA (A, m)A′( w)
                 m′( p) =                                                                       (35)
                             f mm (A, m) − ( f mm (A, m) f AA (A, m) − f Am (A, m) 2 ) A′( w)

As long as the denominator of these expressions is negative, real wages fall with an increase in
p , a deterioration of the terms of trade. If 1 − f AA (A, m)A′( w) is positive, imports fall. Notice

that we can construct perverse examples if ρ < 0 , which implies that A′( w) < 0 , where
deteriorations to the terms of trade force the consumer to work more.
       Letting c( p) = f (A( w( p)), m) − pm( p) , we can use the envelope theorem to show that the
change in consumer welfare is

                      d
                         u (c( pt ), A − A( w( pt ))) = −uc (ct , A − A t )mt < 0 .             (36)
                      dp

       What happens to real GDP and productivity when the terms of trade change? First
consider real GDP:



                                                            9
                                Y ( pt ) = f (A( w( pt )), m( pt )) − p0 m( pt )                        (37)

                 Y ′( pt ) = f A (A t , mt )A '( wt ) w '( pt ) + f m ( A, mt )m′( pt ) − p0 m′( pt )   (38)

                         Y ′( pt ) = f A (A t , mt )A′( wt ) w′( pt ) + ( pt − p0 )m′( pt )             (39)

Notice that real GDP can either rise or fall with an increase in the terms of trade, but, if
A′( wt ) > 0 , which implies that w′( pt ) < 0 , and if ( pt − p0 )m′( pt ) is small, real GDP falls.

        Now consider productivity Y ( pt ) / A( w( pt )) :

                          d Y ( pt )       A( wt )Y ′( pt ) − Y ( pt )A′( wt ) w′( pt )
                                         =                                              .               (40)
                         dpt A( w( pt ))                     A( wt ) 2

Substituting in the expressions Y ( pt −1 ) in (37) and for Y ′( pt −1 ) in (39), we obtain

                      d Y ( pt )      ( p − p0 ) ( A t m′( pt ) − mt −1A′( wt ) w′( pt ) )
                                     = t                                                   .            (41)
                     dpt A( w( pt ))                          A 2t

Once again, this term is close to 0 if pt − p0 is close to 0, and this sensitivity to base period
prices is eliminated with chain-weighted real GDP.
        In the fixed coefficients case, real GDP is

                                        Y ( pt ) = (1 − p0b)A( w( pt )) ,                               (42)

and productivity does not change as the terms of trade change.

3.2. Tariffs

        In this section, we consider a model with tariff distortions. Tariff changes are much like
terms of trade shocks, except that tariff revenues are spent domestically. We model tariff
revenues as a lump-sum rebate to the representative consumer. In the presence of tariff
distortions, changes in the terms of trade can have first-order effects on real GDP and
productivity, although these effects are small to the extent that tariffs are small or the production
function f is close to fixed coefficients.
        Once again, a useful benchmark is provided by the closed economy model. We assume
that the government imposes an ad valorem tax τ on intermediate inputs. To keep the



                                                              10
discussion simple, assume again that the labor supply is fixed. A competitive economy chooses
mt to solve

                                    max f ( A, mt ) − (1 + τ t )at mt .                        (43)

In the case where f is continuously differentiable, the first-order condition is

                                         f m ( A, mt ) = (1 + τ t )at .                        (44)

        We first consider the case where τ t = τ is fixed and at fluctuates. The implicit function
theorem implies that

                                                        1+τ
                                    m′(at ) =                       < 0.                       (45)
                                                  f mm ( A, m(at ))

How do real GDP change and consumption change?

                                  Y (at ) = f ( A, m(at )) − at m(at )                         (46)

               Y ′(at ) = ( f m ( A, m(at )) − at ) m′(at ) − m(at ) = τ at m′(at ) − m(at )   (47)

Notice that the tariff distortion introduces an additional term into (12).
        We now consider the case where at = a is fixed and τ t fluctuates:

                                                          a
                                     m′(τ t ) =                      <0                        (48)
                                                  f mm ( A, m(τ t ))

                                   Y (τ t ) = f ( A, m(τ t )) − am(τ t )                       (49)

                                           Y ′(τ t ) = τ t am′(τ t )                           (50)

To the extent that the tax before the increase, τ t , is close to 0, the first-order impact of increasing

it is small. In the fixed coefficients case, where m′(τ t ) = 0 , real GDP does not change.

        In the calculations in the open economy case, where τ is an ad valorem tariff on imports,
fluctuations in tariffs have the same impact on real GDP as fluctuations are the same:

                                Y ′( pt ) = ((1 + τ ) pt − p0 ) pt m′( pt )                    (51)

                                 Y ′(τ t ) = ((1 + τ t ) pt − p0 ) pt m′(τ t )                 (52)

                                                           11
Notice that the effect on real GDP of an increase in the terms of trade, or of an increase in the
tariff, is close to 0 to the extent that either (1 + τ t ) pt − p0 is close to 0 or to the extent that f is
close to a fixed proportions function. In terms of the impact on consumption and welfare, the
two cases are very different:

                            c′( pt ) = ((1 + τ ) pt − p0 ) pt m′( pt ) − m( pt )                 (53)

                                 c′(τ t ) = ((1 + τ t ) pt − p0 ) pt m′(τ t )                    (54)

Consumption falls much more in the case of a deterioration of the terms of trade than it does
when tariffs are increased because the revenue generated is rebated to the representative
consumer.

4. Chain-weighted real GDP

        Currently, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis in its National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA) and the U.N. Statistics Division in its System of National Accounts (SNA)
recommend the use of chain-weighted price indices to deflate GDP. In this section we show how
the results of the previous two sections carry over to chain-weighted real GDP. Although the
calculations are a little more complicated, an advantage of using chain-weighted real GDP is that
the annoying terms involving base period prices disappear.
        The United States’ NIPA accounting uses Fisher chain-weights. So does Statistics
Canada. Most countries that follow U.N. SNA national income accounting use Laspeyres chain-
weighting, although both Fisher weighting and Paasche weighting are allowed. We start by
showing that Fisher chain-weighting eliminates the terms involving p0 − pt and then briefly
discuss how this result extends to Laspeyres weighing and Paasche weighting.
        To keep our discussion simple, we consider the open economy model with fixed labor
supply and no tariffs. The extension to the more general model is obvious. Fisher chain-
weighted real GDP is

                                               f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt )
                                 Yt ( pt ) =                                ,                    (55)
                                                            Pt

where the Fisher chain-weighted price index is the geometric average of the Paasche and the
Laspeyres index between the current period and the previous period:


                                                           12
                                                                   1                                 1
                       ⎛ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 ) ⎞ 2 ⎛ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt +1m( pt ) ⎞ 2
               Pt +1 = ⎜                                      ⎟ ⎜                                  ⎟ Pt ,             (56)
                       ⎝ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) ⎠ ⎝ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt ) ⎠

where P0 = 1 in the base period.
         We can write chain-weighted real GDP as
                                                   f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 )
            Y ( pt +1 ) =                                              1                                  1
                                                                                                              ,       (57)
                            ⎛ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 ) ⎞ ⎛ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt +1m( pt ) ⎞
                                                                       2                                  2
                            ⎜                                      ⎟ ⎜                                ⎟ Pt
                            ⎝ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) ⎠ ⎝ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt ) ⎠
which yields a Fisher chain-weighted quantity index.
                                                               1                                      1
                      ⎛ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 ) ⎞ 2 ⎛ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) ⎞ 2
        Y ( pt +1 ) = ⎜                                      ⎟ ⎜                                      ⎟ Y ( pt ) .    (58)
                      ⎝ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt +1m( pt ) ⎠ ⎝ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt ) ⎠
The natural logarithm of chain-weighted real GDP is

                        1                                              1
      log Y ( pt +1 ) = log ( f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 ) ) − log ( f ( A, m( pt )) − pt +1m( pt ) )
                        2                                              2
                                                                                                              (59)
                       1                                             1
                     + log ( f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) ) + log
                                                                         ( f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt ) )
                       2                                             2                 Pt 2

Differentiating, we obtain

      d log Y ( pt +1 ) f m ( A, m( pt +1 ))m′( pt +1 ) − pt +1m′( pt +1 ) − m( pt +1 )
                       =
          dpt +1                  2 ( f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 ) )
                                                                                                                      .(60)
                                            m( pt )                  f ( A, m( pt +1 ))m′( pt +1 ) − pt m′( pt +1 )
                            +                                      + m
                              2 ( f ( A, m( pt )) − pt +1m( pt ) )     2 ( f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) )

Since f m ( A, m( pt +1 )) = pt +1 , this simplifies to

           d log Y ( pt +1 )                m( pt +1 )                           m( pt )
                             =−                                   +
               dpt +1           2 ( f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt ) ) 2 ( f ( A, m( pt )) − pt +1m( pt ) )
                                                                                                                  .   (61)
                                        ( pt +1 − pt )m′( pt +1 )
                               +
                                 2 ( f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) )

Evaluating this expression at pt +1 = pt , we obtain




                                                                       13
                                             d log Y ( pt )
                                                            = 0,                           (62)
                                                 dpt +1

which implies that any effect of changes in the terms of trade on chain-weighted real GDP is of
second order.
        Suppose that, instead of Fisher weighting, the national statistics agency uses Laspeyres
weighting. The relationship that corresponds to (58) is

                                       ⎛ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) ⎞
                         Y ( pt +1 ) = ⎜                                    ⎟ Y ( pt ) .   (63)
                                       ⎝ f ( A, m( pt )) − pt m( pt ) ⎠

Notice that, in this case, the deflator in (55) is
                                     ⎛ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt +1m( pt +1 ) ⎞
                             Pt +1 = ⎜                                      ⎟ Pt ,         (64)
                                     ⎝ f ( A, m( pt +1 )) − pt m( pt +1 ) ⎠

that is, a Paasche price index. In the case where the prices in (63) are those of the second period,
pt +1 — that is, where the quantity index is Paasche — the deflator in (64) uses the quantity

weights in the first period, f ( A, m( pt )) and m( pt ) — that is, the price index is Laspeyres. In
either case, a simple argument that follows that in equations (59)–(62), but with less algebra,
proves that the first-order effect of a change in the terms of trade on chain-weighted real GDP is
0.

5. Elasticity of substitution

        Except for the case where the production function f combines domestic inputs and
imported inputs in fixed proportions — where there are analytical formulas for real GDP — we
have relied on the implicit function theorem and first-order approximations to determine the
impact of terms of trade shocks on real GDP. In this section, we investigate the impacts of large
shocks for the case where f is constant elasticity of substitution:

                                                                            1
                                  f ( A t , mt ) = ( (1 − β ) A ρt + β mtρ ) ρ ,           (65)




                                                           14
where the parameter β determines the share imports in production. The elasticity of substitution

between imported intermediates and labor is σ = 1 (1 − ρ ) . This elasticity is frequently referred

to as the Armington elasticity. Producers choose inputs A t and mt to minimize costs,

                                           min wt A t + pt mt                                               (66)
                                                                                 1
                                 s.t.   ( (1 − β ) A ρt + β mtρ ) ρ                      ≥ y,

and, in equilibrium, profits are 0,
                                                          1

                            ( (1 − β ) A ρt + β mtρ ) ρ − wt A t − pt mt = 0 .                              (67)

Fixing A t = A , we can use these conditions to obtain the demand for imports


                                                              (                                )
                                                                                                   −1
                                                                       ρ         −ρ                ρ
                             m ( pt ) = (1 − β ) A pt β
                                                      1
                                                      ρ            1− ρ         1− ρ
                                                                                         −β             .   (68)

This allows us to express real GDP in base period prices as
                                                                                     1

                                  (
                       Y ( pt ) = (1 − β ) A ρ + β m ( pt )
                                                                            ρ
                                                                                )    ρ
                                                                                         − p0 m ( pt ) .    (69)

       Before studying how real GDP changes are related to the elasticity of substitution, we
must choose a value for β . The first-order conditions for the producers’ problem (66) imply
that
                                                                                           1

                                             mt                             ⎛ p ⎞ ρ −1
                                                                           =⎜ t ⎟ .                         (70)
                                ( (1 − β ) A       + β mtρ ) ρ              ⎝β ⎠
                                                                   1
                                               ρ




The left-hand side of the equation is the share of imports in gross output. For each value of ρ
we choose the parameter β so that imports make up 8 percent of gross output when the import
price is 1. This value is consistent with U.S. data, where imports average 7.8 percent of gross
output in the NAICS classified data over the period 1998–2005.
       In figure 3, we plot the changes in real GDP that result from changes in the terms of trade
for different values of the elasticity of substitution. In this example, we have assumed that the
terms of trade in the period prior are the same as those in the base year, so the first-order effect is


                                                                  15
0 in equation (21). The first-order effect can be seen in the figure, where the change in real GDP
from a small change in the terms of trade is negligible. The figure also shows the impact of
larger changes in the terms of trade. The elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign
inputs is commonly specified at or around 2.0 in international real business cycle models. The
average annual change in absolute value of the terms of trade for OECD countries is 3.5 percent.
A 3.5 percent increase in the relative price of imports leads to a 0.0058 percent decrease in real
GDP when the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign factors is 2.0. When the
elasticity of substitution is 6.67, the same deterioration of the terms of trade causes a 0.032
percent decrease in real GDP, and, when the elasticity is 0.33, a 3.5 percent increase in the terms
of trade decreases real GDP by 0.0019 percent.
       Although an increase in the terms of trade has little effect on real GDP, its effect on
consumption can be significant. In figure 4, we plot the change in consumption that results from
changing the terms of trade. The less substitutable imports are in production, the more painful
are increases in the price of imports. In the fixed proportions case, in which real GDP does not
change at all with the terms of trade, the consumption and welfare effects of a change in the
terms of trade are the largest.

6. Alternative income measures

       If real GDP does not accurately reflect the real purchasing power of an open economy,
are there measures that do? In this section we discuss measures of real domestic income that
incorporate the terms of trade.
       GDP in current prices represents the current value of both production and income in both
open and closed economies. Real GDP and real income, though equivalent in a closed economy,
are not necessarily equivalent in an open economy. The difference between real GDP and real
gross domestic income (GDI) in the open economy arises from the deflation of the trade balance.
Real GDP is computed by deflating the current value of the components of GDP by their
respective implicit price deflators, P ,

                                      Ct     I   G    X    M
                             GDPt =      C
                                           + tI + Gt + Xt − Mt ,                         (71)
                                      Pt    Pt   Pt   Pt   Pt

while one method of computing real income is



                                                 16
                                       Ct     I   G    X −M
                             GDI t =      C
                                            + tI + Gt + t M t .                          (72)
                                       Pt    Pt   Pt     Pt

Notice that real GDP, as a measure of production, values exports as an output and imports as an
input, while real GDI values the nominal trade balance in terms of the amount of imports that can
be purchased. The U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2006) refers to GDI as command-basis
GDP, rather than real gross domestic income as it is defined in the United Nations’ 1993 System
of National Accounts (2001). United Nations (2001) also allows for several definitions of real
GDI that differ by the index used to deflate X t − M t , including the export price index or the
domestic absorption price index.
       The United Nations (2001) allows for various definitions of the GDI because there is no
natural way to deflate the proceeds from foreign trade. The debate over the real trade balance in
the national income and product accounts is a long one, going back to the early era of national
income accounting. Working within the NIPA framework, Nicholson (1960), Bjerke (1968), and
others proposed different methods of deflating the income from trade, with most of them arguing
for either the import or the export price deflator, though some (Burge and Geary 1957) propose
using one deflator when the trade balance is positive and another when the trade balance is
negative. As index number theory progressed, prominent researchers in the field developed
alternative indices of welfare and productivity (Diewert and Morrison 1986) and real domestic
income (Kohli 2004) that accounted for the terms of trade.
       Which method should we use? Mahdavy and Silver (1989) compare these methods and
find that, for most industrial countries, the choice of deflator is not important. They find the
choice of deflator can be important for non-industrial countries. For simplicity, and to be
consistent with the methods used by the BEA, we will use the command basis GDP measure (72)
in what follows.
       Command GDP offers an alternative way of viewing a country’s performance. For
countries in which either the terms of trade have been stable or trade is not an important factor in
output, real GDP and command GDP are similar. The United States is a good example of this
case. In figure 5 we plot real GDP and command GDP for the United States, as well as the terms
of trade. The terms of trade have stayed fairly steady over the last 20 years, and command GDP
and real GDP are almost indistinguishable. In contrast, Switzerland’s terms of trade have
steadily improved, falling 21.4 percent since 1981, as can be seen in figure 6. The figure also

                                                 17
shows how command GDP has grown significantly faster than real GDP in Switzerland; from
1981Q1–2006Q2 command GDP grew 18.1 percent more than real GDP. Command GDP grew
at 2.0 percent per year over this period, compared to the dismal 1.5 percent per year growth in
real GDP. Some Swiss economists, notably Kohli (2004), have used measures similar to
command GDP to help explain why many do not believe the Swiss economy is doing poorly,
despite the lack of growth in real GDP since 1973. For further discussion of Switzerland’s
economic performance, including the impact of the terms of trade, see Kehoe and Ruhl (2003,
2005).
         Recently, Feenstra, Heston, Timmer, and Deng (2004) have proposed adding a new
variable, which they call expenditure-side real GDP to the Penn World Tables. This variable is
the purchasing power parity equivalent of the SNA concept of GDI where the domestic
absorption price index is used to deflate the trade balance. They argue that it is this concept of
national income that should be used when researchers are interested in studying welfare, while
the traditional concept of real GDP, which they refer to as output-side real GDP, should be used
when researchers are interested in studying production. What concept of GDP is currently
reported in the Penn World Tables? Feenstra, Heston, Timmer, and Deng (2004) argue that
inconsistencies in the GDP calculations make it neither one nor the other and that these
inconsistencies need to be eliminated and both variables need to be reported.

6.1. Business cycle frequencies

         It makes sense to model some countries as small open economies. These countries are
small in the sense that they do not influence world prices, and thus the country’s terms of trade
are exogenously given. It is easy to imagine one of these small open economies being buffeted
by shocks to its terms of trade and this in turn affecting the county’s GDP. Although terms of
trade shocks cannot have much of an effect on real GDP, particularly given the magnitude of
these shocks and the low level of substitutability usually assumed in these models, we can use
the command GDP measure to calculate how real income changes over the business cycle.
         Figures 7 and 8 plot Hodrick-Prescott filtered log real GDP and log command GDP for
the United States and Switzerland. In both cases, the volatility of command GDP is lower than
that of real GDP. Command GDP is 20.1 percent less volatile than real GDP in the United States
and 24.1 percent less volatile than real GDP in Switzerland. For the United States, real and


                                                18
command GDP move together; the correlation coefficient is 0.91. For Switzerland, the two
series do not move as closely; the correlation coefficient is 0.50.

6.2. Depressions

       A crisis in a developing economy may be accompanied by deteriorations of the country’s
terms of trade. Mexico, for example, has weathered two crises in the last 20 years, the first in
1982–86, and the second in 1994–95. As shown in figure 9, the terms of trade increased by 85
percent from 1981 to 1986 and by 8.6 percent from 1994 to 1995. These periods were also
periods of significant declines in output: from 1981 to 1986 real GDP fell by 2.6 percent, and
from 1994 to 1995 real GDP fell by 6.2 percent. We have seen in the previous sections that the
change in the terms of trade cannot be the cause of the declines in real GDP. How does the
situation change when the changing terms of trade are also taken into account?
       Figure 9 plots both real GDP and command GDP in Mexico. During the first crisis, real
GDP fell by 2.6 percent, but command GDP — real domestic income — fell by 10.0 percent.
Command GDP fell by more during the second crisis as well, declining 8.7 percent from 1994 to
1995 compared to the 6.2 percent decline in real GDP over the same period. The output drops
associated with financial crises like the ones in Mexico are frequently used as evidence of the
painful nature of the withdrawal of credit to a country. The evidence on real domestic income
suggests that these “sudden stop” episodes are even more painful than the GDP evidence
suggests!

7. Concluding Remarks

       In standard models, an adverse shock to the terms of trade acts like an adverse shock to
productivity along many dimensions: income and consumption fall. In one crucial dimension,
however, a terms of trade shock acts nothing like a productivity shock: real GDP, the most
common measure of a country’s output, is often unchanged in standard models. In returning to
our original question, if we are to use real GDP as a measure of production, then total factor
productivity also remains unchanged. Although the terms of trade are shocks to a country’s
income, they are not shocks to a country’s productivity.
       So how can we account for the relationships in figures 1 and 2? This paper shows that
we cannot expect standard models to do so. One line of promising research argues that there are


                                                 19
other responses to terms of trade shocks. The change in relative prices may induce reallocations
across goods and sectors that involve nonproductive activities like retraining, or capital may go
idle, both contributing to lower output and measured TFP. The literature on developing country
crises is one area in which progress is being made in modeling the frictions that may help
account for the relationship between the terms of trade, real GDP, and productivity. Beginning
with standard models, Meza and Quintin (2006) introduce labor hoarding and variable capital
utilization, Mendoza (2006) introduces financial market frictions, and Kehoe and Ruhl (2006)
introduce frictions in reallocating labor across sectors. These papers have had some success in
replicating the relationships discussed above, but the exact specification and the quantitative
importance of these frictions remains a question for future research.
       Figure 10 presents some data that should serve as a caution to researchers. In
Switzerland over the period 1970–2000, improvements in the terms of trade have been associated
with declines in real GDP and in productivity, with correlation coefficients of 0.53 and 0.58,
respectively.




                                                20
                                         References

Becker T. and P. Mauro (2005), “Output Drops and the Shocks that Matter,” IMF Working Paper
       06172.

Bjerke, K. (1968), “Some Reflections on the Terms of Trade,” Review of Income and Wealth, 14,
       183–98.

Bureau of Economic Analysis (2006), “A Guide to the National Income and Product Accounts of
      the United States,” http://www.bea.gov/bea/an/nipaguid.pdf.

Burge, R. W. and R. C. Geary (1957), “Balancing of a System of Accounts in Real Terms,” A
       System of Price and Quantity Indexes for National Accounts. United Nations.

Diewert, W. E. and C. J. Morrison (1986), “Adjusting Output and Productivity Indexes for
      Changes in the Terms of Trade,” Economic Journal, 96, 659–79.

Easterly, W., R. Islam, and J. E. Stiglitz (2001), “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth
       Volatility,” in B. Pleskovic and N. Stern, editors, Annual World Bank Conference on
       Development Economics 2000. The World Bank, 191–211.

Easterly, W., M. Kremer, L. Pritchett, and L. H. Summers (1993), “Good Policy or Good Luck?
       Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
       32, 459–83.

Feenstra, R. C., A. Heston, M. P. Timmer, and H. Deng (2004), “Estimating Real Production and
       Expenditures across Nations: A Proposal for Improving the Penn World Tables,” NBER
       Working Paper 10866.

Hamilton, J. D. (1983), “Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II,” Journal of Political
      Economy, 91, 228–48.

Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl (2003), “Recent Great Depressions: Aggregate Growth in New
       Zealand and Switzerland, 1973–2000,” New Zealand Economic Papers, 37, 5–40.

Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl (2005), “Is Switzerland in a Great Depression?” Review of Economic
       Dynamics, 8, 759–75.

Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl (2006), “Sudden Stops, Sectoral Reallocations, and Real Exchange
       Rates,” University of Minnesota and the University of Texas at Austin.

Kohli, U. (1983), “Technology and the Demand for Imports,” Southern Economic Journal, 50,
       137–150.

Kohli, U. (2004), “Real GDP, Real Domestic Income, and Terms of Trade Changes,” Journal of
       International Economics, 62, 83–106.




                                              21
Mahdavy, K. and M. Silver (1989), The Measurement of a Nation’s Terms of Trade Effect and
     Real National Disposable Income within a National Accounting Framework,” Journal of
     the Royal Statistical Society, 152, 87–107.

Mendoza, E. G. (2006), “Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with Collateral
     Constraints: a Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s Q,” University of Maryland.

Meza, F and E. Quintin (2006) “Financial Crises and Total Factor Productivity,” Universidad
      Carlos III and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Nicholson, J. L. (1960), “The Effects of International Trade on the Measurement of Real
       National Income,” Economic Journal, 70, 608–12.

United Nations (2001), System of National Accounts 1993, Internet Access System,
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/introduction.asp.




                                              22
                                                       Figure 1

                                                      United States

                0.20


                                        terms of trade
                0.15



                0.10
                                                                                     real GDP
 growth rate




                0.05



                0.00


                          total factor productivity
               -0.05



               -0.10
                   1970      1972    1974    1976      1978        1980    1982    1984    1986       1988   1990




                                                       Figure 2

                                                         Mexico

               0.35

               0.30
                                                terms of trade
               0.25

               0.20
growth rate




               0.15

               0.10
                                                          real GDP
               0.05

               0.00

               -0.05
                                                                          total factor productivity
               -0.10
                   1980      1982    1984    1986      1988        1990   1992    1994    1996    1998       2000




                                                              23
                                                                    Figure 3
                                          Real GDP and the elasticity of substitution

                             0.50



                                     σ = 0.33
                             0.00
change in real GDP (%)




                                     σ = 2.0
                             -0.50


                                                  σ = 6.67
                             -1.00




                             -1.50




                             -2.00
                                 -15.0          -10.0        -5.0          0.0        5.0   10.0   15.0
                                                             change in terms of trade (%)



                                                                    Figure 4
                                         Consumption and the elasticity of substitution

                             2.50
                                         σ = 6.67
                             2.00

                                                  σ = 2.0
 change in consumption (%)




                             1.50


                             1.00
                                     σ = 0.33
                             0.50


                             0.00


                             -0.50


                             -1.00


                             -1.50
                                 -15.0          -10.0        -5.0          0.0        5.0   10.0   15.0
                                                             change in terms of trade (%)



                                                                      24
                                       Figure 5

                                     United States

                     220

                                                        command GDP
                     200


                     180
index (1980Q1=100)




                                                                      real GDP
                     160


                     140


                     120

                                            terms of trade
                     100


                     80
                      1980   1985   1990             1995      2000         2005




                                       Figure 6

                                      Switzerland

                     180



                     160

                                           command GDP
index (1981Q1=100)




                     140



                     120
                                    real GDP

                     100



                     80
                                    terms of trade

                     60
                      1980   1985   1990             1995      2000         2005




                                           25
                                            Figure 7

                                          United States

                        0.04

                        0.03

                        0.02
                                                                         command GDP
deviations from trend




                        0.01

                        0.00

                        -0.01

                        -0.02
                                                                real GDP
                        -0.03

                        -0.04

                        -0.05
                            1980   1985   1990         1995       2000         2005




                                            Figure 8

                                           Switzerland

                        0.04

                                                 real GDP
                        0.03

                                                          command GDP
deviations from trend




                        0.02


                        0.01


                        0.00


                        -0.01


                        -0.02


                        -0.03
                            1980   1985   1990         1995       2000         2005




                                                 26
                                                           Figure 9

                                                            Mexico

                   140


                   130

                               terms of trade
                   120
                                                             real GDP
index (1994=100)




                   110


                   100


                    90
                                                                                  command GDP
                    80


                    70


                    60
                     1980              1985           1990                1995          2000          2005




                                                          Figure 10

                                                          Switzerland

                   0.08

                   0.06
                                                                            real GDP
                   0.04

                   0.02
growth rate




                   0.00

                   -0.02

                   -0.04

                   -0.06

                   -0.08      total factor productivity                    terms of trade

                   -0.10
                       1970           1975         1980            1985          1990          1995     2000




                                                              27
