NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TIME AND TIMING COSTS OF MARKET WORK
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Stephen Donald
Working Paper 13127
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13127

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2007

Patterson-Bannister and Murray Johnson Chair and Faculty Fellow, and Professor of Economics, University
of Texas at Austin; Edward Everett Hale Centennial Professor of Economics, University of Texas
at Austin, and research associate, NBER and IZA. We are indebted to Leora Friedberg, Alain Jousten,
Joseph Quinn, James Rebitzer, David Ribar, Manuelita Ureta and participants in seminars at several
universities for helpful comments, and to Rick Evans and Deniz Gevrek for excellent research assistance.
Part of the research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security
Administration (SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC) and a subcontract to the
University of Texas at Austin. The opinions and conclusions are solely those of the authors and should
not be construed as representing the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government,
the MRRC, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Stephen Donald. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Time and Timing Costs of Market Work
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Stephen Donald
NBER Working Paper No. 13127
May 2007
JEL No. D13,J22,J26
ABSTRACT
With the American Time Use Survey of 2003 and 2004 we first examine whether additional market
work has neutral impacts on the mix of non-market activities. The estimates indicate that fixed time
costs of market work alter patterns of non-market activities, reducing leisure time and mostly increasing
time devoted to household production. Similar results are found using time-diary data for Australia,
Germany and the Netherlands. Direct estimates of the utility derived from goods consumption and
two types of non-market time in the presence of these fixed costs indicate that they generate a utility-equivalent
of as much as 8 percent of income that must be overcome before market work becomes an optimizing
choice. Market work also alters the timing of a fixed amount of non-market activities during the day,
away from the schedule chosen when market work imposes no timing constraints. All of these effects
are mitigated by higher family income. The results provide a new supply-side explanation for the frequently
observed discrete drop from full-time work to complete retirement.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
Stephen Donald
Dept. of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
donald@eco.utexas.edu

The reason I am retiring fully is to have control of my schedule, so that I can travel,
concentrate on big research projects, etc. Since it’s scheduled at certain times, teaching
always pushes other activities away. [Comment by astronomy professor]
I. Introduction
Theoretical models and empirical analyses of the allocation of time have nearly universally
dichotomized work and non-work.

A few exceptions do exist (e.g., Becker, 1965, Gronau, 1980;

Kooreman and Kapteyn, 1987, and Biddle and Hamermesh, 1990); but in general such mundane activities
as eating, washing or sleeping are implicitly assumed to be aggregable with such activities as enjoying a
Mahler symphony or a round of golf, and their opportunity costs are assumed to be the same. This
treatment may be correct; but among many other questions it precludes analyzing such important topics
as: 1) The interaction of market work and people’s choices about undertaking household production
versus enjoying leisure; 2) The role of fixed costs of labor-market entry on the mix of non-market
activities, an issue that is inherently related to labor-force participation; and 3) How spouses interact in
choosing how to divide household chores and leisure. In this study we concentrate on the first two topics.
We examine several aspects of the potential role of the fixed costs of market work in affecting the
allocation of non-market time. The bulk of the study focuses on answering the analytical question of
whether and how market work—both the amount of time devoted to it and its timing—generates an
impediment to optimizing the amount and sequencing of non-market activities. In the first part we
analyze how the decision to make the discrete choice to work in the market alters the mix of non-market
activities. To the extent that households’ allocations of time suggest that entering or remaining in the
labor market changes time allocations outside the market, we may infer that the fixed time costs of work
may make remaining in the labor force unattractive for older workers who would not choose complete
retirement given other incentives. In line with regression results suggesting the importance of this
phenomenon, we then construct and estimate a structural model of an individual’s choice of whether or
not to work in the market, and how to allocate his/her time among market work, leisure and household
production/personal maintenance in the possible presence of fixed time costs. This allows us to measure
the utility-equivalent of the fixed time costs and to infer the dollar amount needed to offset the utility loss
when labor-force entry occurs.

The second part concentrates on discovering when people perform different activities and
examining the determinants of this timing. There is an excellent theoretical study of the timing of
activities (Winston, 1982), and some empirical work has been done (Hamermesh, 1999, 2002) on the
general population; but there has been no examination of how the timing of different non-market
activities interacts with the choice of whether and how much market work to undertake. Given the likely
importance of scheduling in employers’ demand for labor and the spillovers that these constraints may
impose on people’s schedules outside the labor market (see the epigraph), discovering what scheduling
looks like when the constraint of market work is not relevant would seem crucial for understanding how
this dimension of choice may alter the supply of labor to the market. This consideration too may be useful
in analyzing motives for retirement from the labor force.
II. Defining Time Aggregates in the American Time Use Survey, 2003 and 2004
The usual retrospective records that form the bases for most of the analysis of labor-force
behavior in the economics and sociology literatures ask individuals how many hours they worked in some
recent time period, be it last week (as in the Current Population Survey) or last year (as in the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics). A number of data sets also provide information on how people divide their hours
in a typical day (with no information on timing), or the most recent week or month, among a number of
non-market activities that are either exhaustive (as in the Health and Retirement Survey) or partial (as in
the PSID and other longitudinal household surveys, e.g., the Australian HILDA and the German SOEP),
but that are not constrained to equal the total number of minutes or hours in the day or other time period.
A time-budget survey gives respondents a daily log and asks them to indicate when they started each new
activity and what that activity was. These are then coded into a variety of categories. The surveys have
the virtue of immediacy and exhaustiveness, both of the time period covered and of the panoply of
possible activities.
While there is a very long history of large-scale time-budget surveys in the United States
(Sorokin and Berger, 1939), the U.S. lagged behind many other countries in developing these surveys
from the 1970s through 2000. That changed in 2003 with the fielding of the American Time Use Survey.
This data set initially provides time diaries from one person per household, for a total of 20,720 in 2003

2

and 13,973 in 2004 (and similar numbers in subsequent years). Because the respondents are recent
members of the CPS panel, substantial information is also available on their work and earnings, on their
families, and on other demographics.1
The choice of how to aggregate the 406 individual activities that are reported in the ATUS is
inherently arbitrary. We take two approaches to aggregation. At the highest level of aggregation, and in
most of this study, we divide activities into four groups: 1) Market work; 2) Household production—
those activities for which the individual might have purchased market substitutes. These activities satisfy
Reid’s (1934) third-party rule defining household production. 3) Tertiary activities, those that one must
perform for oneself but that are essentially personal maintenance; and 4) Leisure.2 Also included is a
category “Other,” which accounts for a few miscellaneous activities and those few minutes in some
respondents’ days for which no activity is recorded. At a slightly less aggregated level we also include
such sub-aggregates in household production as household work and shopping, and child and other care,
including volunteering; and we disaggregate tertiary activities into sleeping, eating and drinking, and
personal care. The allocation of the individual activities in the ATUS to the four major aggregates is
shown in Appendix Table A.
To obtain a feel for the importance of these aggregates, in the 2003-04 ATUS samples these
choices about aggregation yield 220, 222, 634 and 353 minutes of market work, household production,
tertiary activities and leisure respectively for the typical American on a representative day of the week.
Unclassifiable or unclassified activities constituted the remaining 11 of the daily 1440 minutes. Among
individual activities sleep is by far the most important, with work for pay second and television-watching
third.

Together, these three individual categories of activities alone account for 62 percent of the

representative day.

1

See Hamermesh et al (2005) for a description of the survey, and Horrigan and Herz (2005) for details on its origins
and construction.

2

The choice of aggregation is always arbitrary. That marginal choices may not affect the conclusions too much is
suggested by the results of Aguiar and Hurst (2007), who show that various aggregations into the category leisure
yield the same trends across time-diary studies in the U.S.

3

III. A Model of the Fixed Time Costs of Market Work
Consider the simplest possible formulation, in which there are three uses of time: M, market
work; S, household production and tertiary activities; and L, leisure. Assume that the individual is single
and faces a parametric wage w and unearned income I. Each minute devoted to market work must
necessarily reduce the time devoted to other activities by one minute. This is obviously true in reality,
and it is also necessarily true in time-diary data. There may also be fixed time costs of market work such
that the efficiency of the remaining time devoted to S and L is reduced by constant fractions μS and μL
when even a small amount of market work is undertaken.3 The fixed time costs might, for example, stem
from a need to hurry in one’s other activities (e.g., racing through one’s breakfast in order to get to work
on time, foregoing watching The Tonight Show in order to be rested for work the next morning). They
might induce workers to engage in different and perhaps less satisfying mixes of other activities (tying a
necktie as personal care rather than enjoying a relaxing bath, work-related socializing with clients rather
than playing a game of tennis with a personal friend). Working even a small amount may also reduce the
worker’s efficiency in non-market activities, as s/he spends non-market time worrying/thinking about
work-related problems.
Assuming no saving, the person’s utility is:
(1a)

U(I, S, L) ,

if M = 0;

and
(1b)

U(I + w[24- S - L] , μSS, μLL), 0 < μS, μL<1, if M > 0.4

The utility cost of the first moment of market work—the fixed (utility) cost of market work—is:
(2)

V = U(I, S, L) - U(I, μSS, μLL) > 0.

The individual maximizes utility, choosing maximizing time allocations S* >0 and L*>0, and M* ≥ 0. If
M* = 0 is maximizing:
(3a)

U2/U3 = 1;

3

These differ from the possible fixed money costs of work discussed by Cogan (1981) and assumed to be absent
here.
4

In this formalization we thus ignore Becker’s (1965) notion of substituting goods for time, although we bring it in
later in the discussion of the role of differences in unearned income.
4

if M* > 0 is maximizing:
(3b)

U2/U3 = μL/μS.
Because of the presence of these fixed costs, it is only optimal to set M* > 0 if the benefits of

supplying positive hours of market work exceed the fixed costs, i.e., if:
(4)

U(I + w[24- S* - L*] , μSS*, μLL*) - U(I, μSS*, μLL*) > V,

for some combination of S* and L* such that M* = 24 – S* – L* > 0.5 If s/he does so, the effective relative
price of S to L changes from unity to μS/μL ≠ 1. We will observe that the very first minute of market work
alters the relative amounts of secondary/tertiary and leisure activities chosen. Thus while we cannot
observe the fixed time costs of work directly, we can observe whether their impact on the individual’s
allocation of time across other activities is neutral by examining how patterns of time use change in
response to an initial moment of market work.
Unlike prices of market goods, the relative price change generated by the existence of fixed time
costs of work can differ among individuals. Those who have a higher I might use their additional
unearned income to substitute purchased goods and/or services for those household production/tertiary
activities whose price has risen because the individual has chosen to bear the fixed time costs of working.
One benefit of additional unearned income may be to mitigate the impact of the fixed time costs of work.
This discussion suggests that there may be discontinuous changes in the allocation of individuals’
time when they leave the labor force. It also implies that these potential effects will differ depending on
the income in the household to which the worker belongs. Taken together, the model provides guidelines
for an indirect test for the presence of fixed time costs of work in order to analyze how market work may
impose costs on workers and hints about estimating a formal structural model that embodies these costs.
IV. Inferring the Presence of Fixed Time Costs of Market Work
A. Basic Results
One way to infer the existence of fixed costs would use some kind of instrument that might help
to identify the determinants of labor-force participation. No such instrument is available in the ATUS;
5

One could instead model the fixed costs simply as a loss in available time, F, so that this inequality becomes M* =
24 – S* – L* - F > 0 with the μi ≡ 1. This seems less appealing, partly because it is worthwhile identifying the
separate reductions in inefficiency in the household as the μi, partly because doing so would make any effects of the
fixed time costs dependent solely on the shape of the cross-partial derivatives U12 and U13.
5

nor would one even appear to be imaginable were more data available. While instruments that might
determine selectivity into market work have been used with some success (e.g., the now-classic use of the
presence of young children by Heckman, 1976), it does not seem possible to find an one that might
convincingly determine selection into only a small amount of market work and that is independent of the
mix of non-market activities (such as child care).
Given this difficulty, we initially rely instead on examining how a person’s allocation of nonmarket time changes when s/he crosses the threshold into market work. There are unobserved differences
between those who engage in market work and those who do not; but if we still observe an apparent
impact of fixed time costs as we restrict the sample to non-workers and those with successively fewer
hours of market work, we may be more confident that we are measuring the effects of fixed costs.
Essentially we provide a regression discontinuity approach to the impact of hours of work on time
allocation outside the market.
In this section we thus estimate regressions relating minutes spent in household production,
tertiary activities and leisure to minutes spent in market work and an indicator WORK equaling one if any
market work is performed. In these three equations the estimated coefficients on the former variable must
sum to –1, except for tiny differences due to the few minutes unclassifiable or unaccounted for in some
diaries. The estimated coefficients on the indicator for positive market work must sum to 0 (again with
the minor exception). If the fixed time costs of market work on time allocation outside the market create
neutral effects, each of these latter three coefficients will equal zero. Thus a test for the neutrality of
labor-force participation (essentially a test for whether we can treat non-market activities as separable
from market work) is a test of the null hypothesis that these coefficients differ from each other.
We restrict the sample to people under age 60 to avoid concerns about how the availability of
public or private pension benefits might affect the allocation of non-market time.6 In addition to the
measure of market work time and the indicator for market work we also include in the equations
describing the allocation of non-market time a quadratic in age and indicators for whether the respondent
is African-American or Hispanic and for the presence of children in various age categories (ages 0-2, 3-5,
6

The results hardly differ if all adults in the ATUS survey are included.

6

6-13, 14-17). In equations describing all individuals indicators for gender and marital status are included,
while those equations, and the equations describing married people, also include a measure of spouse’s
hours of market work (CPS-style retrospective data on usual weekly hours, since only one time diary is
collected per household). All the equations are weighted so that the estimates reflect behavior on a
representative day of the week.7
Table 1 presents the estimates of the three equations for the entire sample and then separately by
marital status and gender.8 The first column in each panel lists the estimated effects of moving from no
market work to an infinitesimal amount of work, while the second column shows the effect of adding one
additional minute of market work. The results are striking: Among all adults the impact of beginning
market work is not neutral across household production, tertiary activities and leisure. The estimates
suggest a substantial negative effect on leisure activities and a nearly equal but opposite-sign effect on
household production. A test of the equality of the three estimated parameters demonstrates that they are
jointly significantly different from each other (and thus ipso facto jointly significantly different from
zero).9
Disaggregating the sample by marital status and gender changes the results somewhat, but the
results still show the same significant impacts. Among all four marital/gender categories, beginning
market work generates a shift of non-market time away from leisure and toward household production.
The negative impacts on time spent in leisure activities are not greatly different from each other across the

7

The ATUS final weights are used, so that the results also reflect the behavior of the adult population of the U.S. on
a representative day of the week.

8

In order to examine later the impact of differences in family income on the non-neutrality of fixed time costs we
restrict the samples to those ATUS respondents for whom a measure of family income by income bracket is
available from the monthly CPS.
9

A nearly infinite number of alternative categorizations might be tried. One obvious possibility is to include
eating/drinking, which accounts for 69 minutes of the representative day in this sample, in leisure rather than tertiary
activities. Re-estimating the model with this alternative aggregation hardly changes the qualitative conclusions
implicit in the top panel of Table 1: An almost identical amount of the negative impact of WORK remains on
leisure.

7

groups: The 23-minute daily decrease in leisure in the entire sample that results from beginning market
work characterizes these subgroups fairly well.10
B. Tests for Robustness, and Extensions
As noted above, one might be concerned that the average worker differs unobservably from nonworkers, and that all we have shown is that they have different preferences for leisure and different
inherent productivity in market and household production. We cannot completely refute that possibility;
but we can obtain some insight into its validity by restricting the sample to a possibly less unobservably
heterogeneous group of people, namely those who work zero or relatively few hours in the market on a
given day. The upper panel of Table 2 restricts the sample respectively to individuals working in the
market fewer than 4 hours on the day that they kept a time diary, or fewer than 2 hours on that day. In
both cases we observe, as in Table 1, that there is a significant non-neutrality of beginning market work.
As in the results based on the unrestricted sample, and excluding the nearly 9000 people who are
observed working four hours or more on the diary day, we find that beginning market work generates a
large reduction in leisure activities, nearly one-half hour per day. Unlike in the entire sample, however, it
also generates a reduction in tertiary activities and leads to a huge increase in household production. The
results are qualitatively similar but not so extreme if we restrict the sample further to exclude the nearly
900 additional workers putting in between two and four hours of market work on the diary day.
The results disaggregated by gender and marital status, shown in the bottom two panels of Table
2, look remarkably like those presented for the aggregates in the upper panel. The impacts of starting
work on non-market activities are statistically unequal within each of the four groups and are even more
similar to each other across the four groups than they were in the unrestricted samples for which the
results were shown in Table 1.

As observed throughout, leisure activities are diminished, while

household production activities increase. The results suggest that the findings for the entire sample are

10

Freeman and Schettkat (2005) compare older U.S. and European time-budget data and claim that longer U.S. hours
of market work are fully offset by reductions in their home production. This does not seem to be true when one
compares the U.S. to individual European countries (Burda et al, 2007a); and the results here make it absolutely
clear that market and home production are complements at the margin of work at the individual level, with both
substitutes for leisure.

8

not an artifact of including workers who are far beyond the margin of choice about whether to work for
pay on a given day.11
Another possibility is that individuals with strong preferences for non-market activities may have
inherently different set-up costs from those whose distaste for market work may be less. Following the
suggestion of Friedberg and Webb (2006), we can take advantage of the over-sampling on weekends in
the ATUS and of its CPS information on weekly hours of market work to examine how the allocation of
time of those who did not work on a weekend day is affected by the total time they devoted to the market
during the rest of the week. To do so we use the CPS weekly hours measure along with an indicator of
positive weekly hours, substitute these two variables for the two variables that form the focus of Tables 1
and 2, and re-estimate the equations over the sample of weekend respondents who reported no market
work on the diary day.
Table 3 presents the results. Each triad of coefficients should nearly (because of the small
miscellaneous category) sum to zero, since there is no market work on the (weekend) diary day. The first
thing to notice is that the vector of coefficients on the indicator of positive market work during the week
is not significantly different from zero. There appear to be only small differences in set-up costs between
non-workers and others on days when no market work is performed. Additional hours of work during the
week are, however, not neutral with respect to the allocation of time on a non-working weekend day.12
They reduce leisure time on weekends and increase time devoted to household production among those
who do no market work on weekend days. Workers use their “free time” on weekends to catch up on the
household production that the rigidities of their market work prevented them from doing during the
workweek.

11

Nor is the central result that beginning market work produces a decline in leisure generated by the inclusion of
individuals who may usually work longer hours but who are observed on weekends. If the sample in the top panel
of Table 1 is restricted to individuals observed on weekdays, the estimated impacts of beginning market work on the
three aggregates of activities are 16.73, 12.09 and -27.94 minutes respectively, again significantly different from
each other and from 0. When the same restriction is applied to the sample in the left half of the upper panel of Table
2, the results are even more strikingly similar to those that include people whose diary-day covers a weekend day.
12

A test of the equality of the three estimated parameters to 0 yields χ2 = 26.98.

9

Having demonstrated the existence of non-neutral fixed costs of market work using the very
broadest aggregates of non-market activity, it is worth discovering along what disaggregated dimensions
of non-market activity these effects work themselves out. Of particular interest is television-watching,
which accounts for roughly half of all leisure in the United States. Table 4 disaggregates leisure into
television-watching and other leisure. Very clearly, the results demonstrate that the main effect on leisure
of beginning market work is on television-watching. This is not surprising, insofar as reducing televisionwatching may be the least-cost mechanism of accommodating a shift to market work.
Is the change in behavior imposed by these fixed costs overcome if the individual has sufficiently
high income to purchase market substitutes? We expand the specifications in Table 1 to include a
measure of household income and its interaction with the indicator for market work. Desiring to maintain
parsimony in these interactions, and because the data on household income in the main ATUS files are
categorical, we form the single indicator variable, income above $50,000 per annum (from the bracketed
CPS income measures). 51 percent of all the observations included in the estimates in the upper panel of
Table 1, and 58 percent of married couples in the sample have incomes above this threshold.
The results of re-estimating the equations describing non-market allocations of time are shown
for all individuals, and for married men and women separately, in Table 5. The interaction terms in each
case are of opposite sign from the main effect terms on WORK and are jointly significantly different from
zero in all three samples. The interaction terms do not, however, fully offset the main effects of WORK:
The χ2 statistics testing the equality in the three equations fail to reject equality only in the sub-sample of
married women. Nonetheless, higher incomes in the entire sample and the sub-sample of married men do
moderate the non-neutral effects of the fixed time costs of market work, allowing the individual to avoid a
large reduction in leisure time and a large increase in household production when s/he enters the labor
market. The results for married women, the majority of whose household income stems from their
husband’s earnings and from unearned income, are especially convincing of the impact of fixed time costs
and of the role of higher income in enabling the household to offset those costs.13

13

If we restrict the sample to married women observed on weekdays and working fewer than 240 minutes on those
days, which cuts the sample by 75 percent, we still observe the same general results—a moderation of the apparent
non-neutrality of fixed time costs as income increases.
10

We can use the estimates in Tables 1 and 5 to measure the impact of market work on the
allocation of time outside the market. For the entire sample used in those estimates, the average worker
cuts his/her household production time on a day when s/he works in the market by 36 percent, tertiary
time by 7 percent and leisure by 42 percent compared to an otherwise identical non-worker. Among
workers in households with incomes above $50,000, however, the corresponding decreases are 54
percent, 8 percent and 36 percent. Higher incomes enable families to purchase market substitutes for their
time spent in household production and to mitigate the reduction in leisure that occurs when they work in
the market.
C. Replication Using Other Countries’ Time-Diary Studies
A reasonable concern, especially when the concept being examined is so different and this kind of
data set has been examined by economists thus far so rarely, is that the results shown in this Section may
reflect the idiosyncrasies of the data and, perhaps even more problematic, of the American labor market.
To examine this potential difficulty we obtained recent time-diary data for Australia (1992), Germany
(2001/02) and the Netherlands (2000). Each survey used a different categorization of activities from the
others (and from the ATUS), thus making exact comparisons across the surveys impossible, but
increasing the probative value of these replications. We combined categories in each survey to create the
same four aggregates used for the U.S., with the particular aggregations chosen presented for each of the
three data sets in Appendix Table A.
For each of the three samples we estimated equations like those presented in Tables 1 and 2 using
the U.S. data. As in those estimates, a variety of demographic variables are included in the equations,
with the exact variables differing among the three countries depending on data availability. For Germany
we only use the former West Germany, since even by 2001/02 time allocations in the West and East still
differed substantially (see, e.g., Burda et al, 2007b). Because each of the surveys contains at least two
days of diaries for each respondent, the standard errors account for clustering.
The estimates for the three countries are shown in Table 6. They are listed exactly like those in
Tables 1 and 2, except here N is the number of different individuals (since each of these surveys has
multiple diary days for each respondent). While they vary across the samples and, indeed, even vary

11

somewhat when the set of respondents is restricted to individuals with fewer than four daily hours of
market work, they are remarkably supportive of the results shown for the United States in the previous
Parts of this Section. The hypothesis that the coefficients on WORK equal zero is generally rejected—the
mix of time outside the market is affected by labor-force entry. Moreover, exactly as in the United States,
the major effect of entering the labor force is to increase time spent in household production. In some of
the samples the reallocation toward household production is more from leisure than tertiary activities, in
others the opposite; but in all six samples, as in the U.S., the inference is that the fixed costs of labor-force
entry lead to reduced leisure and increased time in household production.
V. Measuring the Importance of the Fixed Time Costs
The estimates in Section IV do not prove the existence of non-neutral fixed time costs of market
work. In several ways, however, particularly the consistent pattern of a shift from leisure activities to
household production when market work hours are few but positive and the apparent diminution of that
shift as household incomes increase, they are consistent with this type of fixed cost. They suggest that
market work imposes some additional constraints on those who choose it. To estimate the importance of
these costs directly we specify a stochastic quadratic utility function:
(5)

U(c, s, ℓ) = αcc + [αs+ ε1 + ε2]s + [αℓ + ε1]ℓ - c[.5βccc + βcss + βcℓℓ] - s[βcsc + .5βsss + βsℓℓ]
- ℓ[βcℓc + βsℓs + .5βℓℓℓ], if c = I, m = [1-s-ℓ] = 0;
= αcc + [αs+ ε1 + ε2]μss + [αℓ+ ε1]μℓℓ - c[.5βccc + βcsμss + βcℓμℓℓ]
- μss[βcsc + .5βssμss + βsℓμℓℓ] - μlℓ[βcℓc + βsℓμss + .5βℓℓμℓℓ],
if c = I + wm, m>0.

The α’s and β’s are parameters of the utility function that are to be estimated; μs and μℓ are the efficiency
parameters in (1b) describing the impact of market work on household production/tertiary activities and
on leisure, and the ε are error terms. We normalize αc=1, and note that the error terms enter the utility
function in a way that is convenient for estimation. In the estimation we treat s and ℓ as the fractions of
the diary day devoted respectively to household production/tertiary activities and to leisure, with the share
1-s-ℓ = m ≥ 0 devoted to market work.

12

To estimate the parameters in (5) we solve the individual’s utility-maximization problem, derive
the corresponding likelihood function and use the method of maximum likelihood.

The Technical

Appendix derives the likelihood function defined over the αs, αℓ, the six β’s, the two μ’s, and σ11, σ12 and
σ22 (which are the parameters of the bivariate normal distribution that is assumed for the two error
terms).14 We estimate the parameters using the derivation of the likelihood function in the Technical
Appendix. We perform the estimation first assuming μs = μℓ = 1, which generates a model similar to a
censored selection model (see Wooldridge, 2002, Ch. 17), and then allow μs and μℓ to vary freely. In this
latter case the likelihood function requires integration over a set that now depends on two conditions, the
second of which accounts for the fixed time cost of market work.
Estimating these parameters requires additional data beyond those used in the previous sections.
In particular, we need a measure of the shadow price of each person’s time and of income other than the
person’s earnings that accrues to the household.

The ATUS presents weekly earnings and hours

information for those respondents who worked for pay during the survey week (whether or not they
worked on the diary day). We use these data to estimate a log-earnings equation, including the usual
explanatory vector of measures of experience, education and demographic variables such as marital status
and race/ethnicity. For women an auxiliary probit predicting labor-force participation that identifies the
wage by the presence of young children is also used. Using the parameter estimates from these earnings
equations, we obtain predicted hourly earnings for both those people on whom the regression was
estimated and those who did not work. Hourly earnings are then imputed for non-workers as the actual
hourly earnings of the sample member whose predicted hourly earnings are nearest theirs. This scorematching approach has the virtue of (asymptotically) maintaining the variance of the shadow price among
those respondents who did not work for pay equal to that of those respondents who did.
Information on both unearned income and the earnings of others in the household is not included
in the ATUS. For those ATUS respondents who were included in the March CPS, however, we have
detailed data on income sources for the previous year. We define other income as the household’s total
income (from the March CPS) less the earnings (in the ATUS) of the ATUS respondent. To account for
14

The issue here is a more complex version of the problem discussed by Blundell and MaCurdy (1999, Section 6.5).
13

the role of taxes in altering incentives, we obtain net (after-tax) income by subtracting reported federal
and state taxes paid and an estimate (based on earnings) of individuals’ OASDHI tax liabilities from
household income. To calculate the marginal net wage we multiply the actual (or imputed) hourly wage
by one minus the household’s federal marginal tax rate minus the household’s average state income tax
minus the marginal OASDHI tax rate facing the individual (0.0765 for most respondents).15 Using this
measure, we obtain other income, I, as the difference between net household income and net hourly
earnings (based on actual or imputed earnings) times actual weekly hours.
In order again to obviate problems of people being affected by pension incentives, and following
the example of the previous section, we restricted the sample to individuals ages 22-59. We were able to
match 8,854 ATUS 2003 and 2004 respondents to the March 2003 or 2004 CPS, of whom 5,825 had
information on actual usual weekly earnings and hours (with the remainder being either unemployed or
out of the labor force). Of the former (latter) 4,345 (2,828) were observed on weekdays. Small fractions
of the samples reported s=0 or ℓ=0 and were thus not usable in the estimation, so that the final four
samples (all days, and weekdays only) used to estimate the parameters in equation (5) have 8,572, 5,638,
4,163 and 2,705 observations.
The results of estimating the model are shown in Table 7 for each of the four samples. The first
column in each pair shows the estimates of the model with μs ≡ μℓ ≡ 1, and the second estimates all
thirteen parameters freely. (In interpreting the results, recall that observations underlying the second and
fourth pairs of columns all have information on actual earnings and thus cannot be affected by any issues
in our score-matched imputations of earnings.) The estimates generally make sense, implying that the
utility function in (5) has the desired properties of positive first and negative second derivatives.16 Except
for some of the terms βsℓ, the parameter estimates are generally highly significant statistically. The
estimated cross-partial derivatives between goods consumption and household production/tertiary time
15

While the March CPS provides the household’s federal marginal tax rate, it only gives information on the amount
of its state income tax liability.

16

At the means of the variables in (5) the utility function is, of course, at a maximum. As is common in formal
estimation of such specific functions, although not often mentioned, for some of the observations the parameters
yield estimated first partial derivatives with incorrect signs. This is true for 25 percent of the observations in the
first (complete) and second sub-samples, 15 percent of observations in the third sub-sample, and 5 percent in the
fourth sub-sample.
14

are positive in four cases, negative in four. That result is not unreasonable: It suggests that the two types
of activity, while they are obviously substitutes given the time constraint, are independent in terms of
their impact on utility. The estimated cross-partial derivatives of goods consumption and leisure are
generally negative.
The main outcomes of this exercise are the estimates of μs and μℓ. The estimates are, as the theory
predicts, all below unity, and in all four samples the parameter estimates are significantly less than one.
Moreover, in each case μs < μℓ, implying that the effect of choosing to work in the market initially
decreases one’s efficiency in household production and tertiary activities more than in one’s production of
commodities whose time inputs can be classified as leisure. That this occurs is not inconsistent with the
findings in Section IV: The net effect on time inputs depends on both these fixed costs and the shape of
the utility function as m becomes positive.
The purpose of estimating the quadratic utility function was to generate measures of the utility
equivalent of the fixed time costs of market work. Consider a non-worker who adds an infinitesimal
amount of market work, so that her earnings are infinitesimal but she now incurs the fixed time cost so
that her household production/tertiary time and leisure time become less productive.

How much

additional unearned income would be required to maintain her utility at the same level as it was before
she worked this infinitesimal amount? In other words, what value of ΔI solves:
(6)

U(I + ΔI, μss*, μℓℓ*) = U(I, s*, ℓ*) , ΔI > 0,

where the asterisks denote the actual values of s and ℓ?
The calculations of the utility costs are shown for each of the four samples in Table 8, with the
required changes in unearned income listed in percentages of income and in dollar amounts. Among nonworkers the incremental unearned income required to hold utility constant if they work an infinitesimal
amount in a day ranges from little more than zero to nearly 8 percent across the four samples. Given their
sizes, it is perhaps unsurprising that we observe discrete changes in labor-force behavior.
VI. The Timing of Activities
The demonstration of the likely impact of fixed costs and the estimates of the sizes of the cost
parameters have been based on the potential non-neutral effects of market work on the amounts of

15

household production and leisure undertaken. Yet as the epigraph suggests and some of the discussion
indicated, these fixed costs may work through their impacts on the temporal pattern of daily activities—
on when these activities are conducted. Conditional on the amount of an activity (household production,
tertiary activities or leisure) that is undertaken over the day, are the times when those non-market
activities are performed affected by the amount of market work and by the fixed time cost of entering the
labor market? In other words, is there an instantaneous non-neutrality of market work on household
activities analogous to the integrative impacts demonstrated in Sections IV and V?
To examine this possibility we estimate equations:
(7)

PAt = H(A; WORK; M; X), A = S, T, L; t=1,…,96,

where PAt is an indicator equaling one if activity A was performed during quarter-hour t, and X is a vector
of controls. These equations are analogous to those estimated in Section IV, except that here we hold
constant the total amount of time spent in activity A to concentrate on how its diurnal distribution is
affected by market work. The sum of the coefficients on the A across the t should equal zero, since the
total amount of time spent in activity A over the day equals 15ΣPAt. Thus conditional on A the coefficient
estimates of M show whether an additional minute of market work alters the temporal pattern of the
activity A. Similarly, again conditional on A, the estimated coefficients on WORK show whether the
discrete choice to begin market work alters the temporal pattern of the activity A. These estimates thus
provide tests of the impact of the fixed costs of market work on the timing of household activities.
The raw ATUS data are presented in sequence, with each activity having a particular starting time
(coded to the minute). For purposes of analysis, as is implicit in (7) we combine the data into periods of
96 quarter-hours, examining what each respondent was doing during each quarter-hour beginning at 4AM
and ending at 4AM the next day.17 Given the massive amount of information here, throughout the rest of
this Section we present it graphically.

17

Where more than one activity was in progress during a quarter-hour, we included the one that comprised the
majority (or plurality) of the 15 minutes. In the very few instances where more than two activities were in progress
for the same length of time we coded the first of them as representing the quarter-hour.

16

In Figure 1a we present the temporal patterns of the coefficients on the variable WORK from the
three sets of probits (7).18 Each point represents a regression coefficient at a particular quarter-hour of the
day, and around each is a 95-percent confidence interval. The very fact of being in the labor market, even
for only a few hours in a day, causes significant displacement in the timing of activities conditional on the
total amount of the activity that is undertaken. Particularly interesting are the displacement of leisure
away from prime working hours and the displacement of household production to late afternoon and early
evening. In addition to increasing the amount of household production and reducing leisure, as shown in
Section IV, engaging in labor-market activity also causes temporal displacements in their performance.
Figure 1b presents the same kind of information, but for the coefficients on M from the estimates
of equations (7). It shows that additional time devoted to market work, conditional on being in the labor
market, has especially large effects on the timing of tertiary activities. The marginal effect of another
minute of market work is biggest on sleeping, eating, etc. during normal waking hours. The effects on
leisure are also large and significant, and indicate that additional minutes of market work shift leisure
away from prime daytime working hours. The impacts of an additional minute of work time on the
timing of household production are smaller, with the biggest shift being toward evening hours.19
For each of the three major aggregates of non-market activities, Figures 2a-2c respectively show
the coefficients at each quarter-hour on the indicator WORK and an interaction of that indicator with the
indicator of family income above $50,000 per year that, along with a main-effect term, is added to the
18

All the data and coefficients presented in the Figures in this Section are based on statistics that have been weighted
to provide information on a representative day of the week.

19

For purposes of comparison to the direct utility calculations in the previous section, assume that the average
person’s instantaneous utility function is the iso-elastic:
]
U = ∑U(pLt) = ∑pLt[1-δ /[1-δ] , t= 1,…,96,
where pLt is the fraction of workers (non-workers) who enjoy leisure during the short time interval t. We are
implicitly ignoring the fixed costs of switching activities.
We wish to compare UN, the utility of the average non-worker, to UW of the average worker. In order to
abstract from differences due to the lower total leisure enjoyed by workers, we multiply each pLt for workers by the
inverse of the fraction of the day that workers are not working. The utility comparison assumes that non-workers,
whose allocation of time over the day is not disrupted by work, have chosen an optimal sequence of leisure, and it
assumes additive separability across the day. In percentage terms the average shortfall in utility of workers W over
the entire day is
∑{│pNLt[1-δ] - pWLt[1-δ]│}/∑pNLt[1-δ]
Assuming values of δ =1, 2, 3 and 5, the shortfalls in the utility from leisure due to scheduling are 30, 40, 57 and 75
percent respectively. This back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the utility cost of market work resulting
from the scheduling changes that it imposes far exceeds the utility cost it induces due to the reallocation of the
amount of household time.
17

probits (7). The question is whether the impact of labor-market participation on the timing of non-market
activities differs between otherwise identical workers who are in higher- or lower-income households.
A test of the role of income in mitigating the disruptions to scheduling that are produced by
market work is whether the confidence intervals around the dotted lines in Figures 2 include the zero line.
While they do in many cases, in many others they do not. More often than not, however, the coefficients
on the interaction term between higher income and WORK and the main-effect term in WORK are of
opposite signs, suggesting that additional family income does reduce the disruption to the timing of
household activities generated by labor-force participation. The correlation between the coefficients on
WORK and its interaction with family income in the probit estimates for household production is +0.19
(46 of 96 opposite signs), not significantly different from zero; the correlation of the two coefficients in
the probits for tertiary activities is -0.61 (57 opposite signs); that for leisure is -0.38 (58 opposite signs).
The correlations and numbers of opposite-signed coefficients in the equations describing tertiary activities
and leisure are significantly different from what is expected under the null hypothesis of randomness.
These results suggest that people in higher-income households are able to use their income to overcome
some of the set-up costs that market work imposes on the timing of non-market activities.
The final set of figures, 3a and 3b, is analogous to Figures 1a and 1b, except the sample is
restricted to individuals whose diaries describe weekend days when they did no market work, but who
may or may not report positive hours of market work during the week. Here, analogous to the integrative
analysis in Section IV that was reported in Table 3, the purpose is to examine whether it is market work
per se that alters schedules, or whether workers’ home schedules differ from others’ schedules for reasons
having nothing to do with time spent in the market on the particular day. Comparing these figures to
Figures 1a and 1b, there are only slight effects on the timing of a given amount of other activities on the
weekend of having worked in the market on weekdays. What matters for the determination of the timing
of non-market activities is the amount of work on the particular day. As was true for the implications of
fixed costs of market work for the amounts of non-market activities that we discussed in Section IV, there
is only weak evidence that small amounts of work on weekdays cause people to behave on the weekends
any differently from otherwise identical people who do not work during the week at all.

18

VII. Relevance for Retirement
The importance of making these distinctions among types of non-market activities seems
especially great for older people. One of the most important labor-market important problems facing the
United States and other industrialized countries over the next few decades will be the declining supply of
skilled/experienced workers. Retirement ages are only now beginning to increase, despite continuing
rapid increases in life expectancy among older Americans (a 3.0 year increase among males age 65
between 1980 and 2004, a 1.7 year increase among women). Indeed, the labor-force participation rate of
males 65+ fell from 33.1 percent in 1960 to 16.3 percent in 1990. Even in 2006 the rate was only 20.3
percent. With the baby-boom generation approaching retirement (and reaching it in the 2010s), the
problem will be substantially exacerbated.20
The evidence from studies of older workers’ labor supply suggests that it is fairly inelastic with
respect to wage increases. To encourage that supply, work opportunities may need to be re-structured to
make them consistent with older Americans’ desires to have their free time as unconstrained as possible,
both in terms of what is done and when it is accomplished. Interestingly, a web-search for “phased
retirement” shows that most of the “hits” are on universities’ programs: Academics are one of the few
groups whose employers’ allow them the flexibility that meets workers’ preferences and employers’
demand for skill; and a recent survey (Hutchens and Grace-Martin, 2006) indicates that phased retirement
is only rarely available among private firms.
Relating this concern to patterns of time use, consider Table 9, which presents the average time
allocations by age in the ATUS for 2003-04 in the four main aggregates and several sub-aggregates that
we have used here.

This non-behavioral accounting of time use mirrors what constitutes the

overwhelming amount of research on the allocation of time outside the market, including the only
available examinations of older workers (Gauthier and Smeeding, 2003; Sayer et al, 2001). Of course,

20

The issue is summarized perfectly in the leader in The Economist, February 18, 2006, p. 65, “Older workers want
to retire later; companies fear they will soon be short of skills. Why can’t the two get together?” A survey of 1000
American workers suggests that many more wish to phase retirement than believe that their employers will allow
them to do so (reported in Wall Street Journal, March 25, 2004, p. D3). Gustman and Steinmeier (2004) show that
in the Health and Retirement Survey relatively few older workers believe that they will be able to reduce hours to
the level that they wish as they age.

19

the biggest change with age is the decline in market activity. As is well known, and as the time diaries
show, the major declines begin at age 60. What is interesting is how the time that is freed up, roughly
170 minutes on a typical day among 65-69 year-olds compared to 55-59 year-olds, is used. Household
production increases by about 40 minutes, sleeping increases by 20 minutes, and time devoted to eating
and drinking increases by 10 minutes across this ten-year age range. There is essentially no change in the
time devoted to personal care. Of the extra nearly three hours that become available, the majority, over 11/2 hours, are devoted to additional leisure. Not only is this the largest absolute change generated by the
decline in the time devoted to market work in these aggregates, it is also by far the largest in percentage
terms. Leisure is the main activity that is crowded out by market work.21 This substitution and the switch
of many people from full-time work to retirement is consistent with our finding that the fixed costs of
market work shift the mix of non-market time away from leisure.
Since we showed how the fixed timing costs of market work alter the timing of non-market
activities, it is worth examining how they may create differences in the timing of activities between older
and other Americans. Figures 4a-4d show the daily patterns of market work, household production,
tertiary activities and leisure for people under 55 and those 55+. (The graphs present the mean fractions of
people in the group engaged in the activity at the particular quarter-hours.) Most of the differences
between the two age groups are the unsurprising result of the higher incidence of market work among
younger people. The diurnal patterns of market work are identical between the two age groups, with the
downward shift among the older group at each point being nearly directly proportional to their lower
market participation.22
The time patterns of tertiary activities differ little across these two groups; and even the timing of
leisure differs little once we account for differences in market work, a mainly daytime activity. The chief
difference is in the temporal pattern of household production. Younger people perform their household
production disproportionately during the late afternoon and evening when they are less likely to be
21

These inferences do not change qualitatively if we adjust for such controls as race, ethnicity and, marital status.
The central conclusion—that the main change as workers withdraw from the labor force is an increase in leisure
time—still holds.

22

This finding is consistent with the evidence in Hamermesh (1999) on self-reported work patterns by age in the
CPS.
20

working; older people, perhaps to avoid congestion costs at times when more younger people are at their
workplaces, perform them disproportionately during prime daytime hours.
Strikingly, a similar difference in the pattern of the timing of household production by age is
observed even among those whose time diaries showed no market work on the diary day and who
responded to the CPS question about usual hours of work by saying theirs were zero. Even non-working
younger people engage in household production disproportionately in the late afternoon and early
evening, at times when older Americans disproportionately engage in leisure activities. Since the main
difference in the kinds of leisure undertaken across age groups is that older people watch more television,
the differences reflect the greater attractions of prime-time television to older audiences. Differences in
the timing of tertiary activities by major age group are slight—those under or over 55 sleep, eat, etc. at
roughly the same times. The only significant differences are that older Americans are more likely to
engage in tertiary activities between 11PM and 4AM, and less likely to do so from 8AM to 11AM. Since
sleep accounts for most tertiary time use, these differences reflect older Americans going to bed and
waking up earlier than younger people.
VIII. Conclusions, Implications and Extensions
We have focused on how the discrete choice to work in the market alters allocations among
differing non-market uses of time. Using four countries’ time-diary surveys, we have examined the
empirical implications of a model in which working in the market alters the relative efficiency of home
time in different activities. A structural econometric model of this phenomenon was estimated using a
recently available data set of time diaries of Americans. Neither the discrete move to participation nor
marginal increases in hours of work are neutral with respect to the kinds of activities undertaken outside
the market, even when we confine the analysis to the three broad aggregates household production,
tertiary activities and leisure. Working in the market initially increases household production relative to
the amount of leisure consumed. Also, the diurnal distributions of given amounts of these three major
aggregates are altered on working days when a person enters the labor market and when s/he increases
hours of market work. That all of these impacts are mitigated by the ability to purchase market substitutes
suggests further that they arise from the presence of non-neutral fixed costs of market work.

21

Our findings may be useful in expanding the debate (Benhabib et al, 1991) over how total
work—market work plus household production—varies over business cycles. The extent of cyclical
declines in hours worked for pay and in labor-force participation in recessions differs. With non-neutral
fixed costs of participation in the market, as they differ the impacts on households’ time allocations,
including the amount of household production that may be substituted for market work, will differ. Our
results suggest that the greater the share of a cyclical decline in total work-hours arising from decreased
labor-force participation, the smaller will be the increase in household production, and thus the smaller
will be the extent to which it substitutes for market production.
The fixed timing costs whose existence is demonstrated here have implications for a variety of
public policies. As one example, requiring welfare recipients to take jobs (as in TANF of 1996) forces
them to incur the fixed costs that alter their allocation of time outside the market. This utility-decreasing
reallocation clearly adds to the economic welfare costs of imposing these requirements. Similarly, basing
food assistance on the assumption that people will spend substantial time preparing food from raw
materials imposes welfare costs if the recipients are forced to engage in market work.
Our finding that it is market work on a particular day that generates the fixed costs and alters the
allocation of time has important implications for policies that reduce the workweek (e.g., the French and
Quebec experiments with various shortened workweeks—c.f., Crépon and Kramarz, 2002; Skuterud,
2007). Even aside from its implications for the monetary costs of commuting, shortening the average
workweek by cutting days rather than hours worked per day have different implications for how workers
will spend their non-market time. Ignoring issues of which approach might lead to the smaller decline in
market output, the results here strongly suggest the desirability of relying on reductions in days worked
rather than on reduced daily hours.
Perhaps most important, while incentive effects of government and private pension programs
have been pointed to as rationalizing sharp reductions in market work after age 60, the approach here
offers an alternative explanation based on the nature of household production and its interaction with the
demand side of the labor market for older workers. Coupled with the implied relative change in the
efficiency of household activities if an individual engages in market work, firms’ inability or

22

unwillingness to increase the flexibility of work scheduling may be one reason for the existence of sharp
reductions in market work among older people. To the extent that this explanation makes sense, it offers
a much different prescription for inducing skilled older workers to remain in the labor force from the
usual ones.

Instead of concentrating on incentives in pension plans, offering firms incentives to

encourage increased flexibility of work timing so as to mesh better with the apparent desire of workers to
enjoy more leisure activities and to time them more flexibly might at least partly vitiate the disincentive
effects that market work produces on household activities.
The model we have proposed and estimated can be extended in a variety of potentially interesting
ways. Our assumption of fixed costs simplifies the basic empirical implications and the estimation of the
structural model, but it is restrictive: One could well imagine that there are also (quadratic) costs that
vary with the amount of market work. This extension would require a still more complex structural
model, but would be a useful step toward generality. Estimating the structural model, and thus inferring
the fixed-cost parameters, on other countries’ time-diary data would provide a useful comparison to the
U.S. results, especially given how unusual American work schedules and total work are among
industrialized economies. Finally, while it is not possible with the American data, many foreign timediary surveys, including those used here, would allow the estimation of a household model of the fixed
time costs of market work in which the costs might differentially alter the relative efficiencies of spouses’
time in household production and leisure.

23

REFERENCES
Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst, “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five Decades,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, (August 2007), forthcoming.
Gary Becker, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (September 1965): 493-517.
Jess Benhabib, Richard Rogerson and Randall Wright, “Homework in Macroeconomics: Household
Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (December 1991):
1166-87.
Jeff Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh, “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Political Economy,
98 (October 1990): 922-43.
Richard Blundell and Thomas MaCurdy, “”Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches,” in
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A.
Amsterdam: North-Holland Press, 1999.
Michael Burda, Daniel Hamermesh and Philippe Weil, “The Distribution of Total Work in the EU and
US,” in Tito Boeri, Michael Burda and Francis Kramarz, eds., Are Europeans Lazy or Americans
Crazy? Oxford University Press, 2007, a.
------------------, ----------------------- and ----------------, “Total Work, Gender and Social Norms,” National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 13000, March 2007, b.
John Cogan, “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 49 (July 1981): 945-963.
Bruno Crépon and Francis Kramarz, “Employed 40 Hours or Not Employed 39: Lessons from the 1982
Mandatory Reduction of the Workweek,” Journal of Political Economy, 110 (December 2002):
1355-89.
Richard Freeman and Ronald Schettkat, “Marketization of Household Production and the EU-US Gap in
Work,” Economic Policy, 41 (Jan. 2005): 5-39.
Leora Friedberg and Anthony Webb, “The Chore Wars: Household Bargaining and Leisure Time,”
Unpublished Paper, University of Virginia, 2006.
Anne Gauthier and Timothy Smeeding, “Time Use at Older Ages:
Research on Aging, 25 (May 2003): 247-274.

Cross-National Differences,”

Reuben Gronau, “Home Production: A Forgotten Industry,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 62
(August 1980): 408-16.
Alan Gustman and Thomas Steinmeier, “Minimum Hours Constraints, Job Requirements, and
Retirement,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 10876, November
2004.
Daniel Hamermesh, “The Timing of Work Time Over Time,” Economic Journal, 109 (1999): 37-66.
-----------------------, “Timing, Togetherness and Time Windfalls,” Journal of Population Economics, 15
(2002): 601-623.

24

-----------------------, “Routine,” European Economic Review, 49 (January 2005): 29-53.
---------------------, Harley Frazis and Jay Stewart, “Data Watch: The American Time Use Survey,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 19 (Winter 2005): 221-232.
James Heckman, “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selection and
Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models,” Annals of Economic and
Social Measurement, 5 (Fall 1976): 475-92
Michael Horrigan and Diane Herz, “A Study in the Process of Planning, Designing and Executing a
Survey Program: The BLS American Time-Use Survey,” in Daniel Hamermesh and Gerard Pfann,
eds., The Economics of Time Use. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2005.
Robert Hutchens and Karen Grace-Martin, “Employer Willingness to Permit Phased Retirement: Why
Are Some More Willing Than Others?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 59 (July 2006):
525-546.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Communiqué of Labour Ministers, 2003.
Margaret Reid, Economics of Household Production. New York: Wiley, 1934.
Liana C. Sayer, Suzanne M. Bianchi and John P. Robinson, “Time Use Patterns of Older Americans,”
Report to NIA, University of Maryland, June 30, 2001.
Pitirim Sorokin and Clarence Berger, Time Budgets of Human Behavior. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1939.
Mikal Skuterud, “Identifying the Potential of Work-Sharing as a Job-Creation Policy,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 25 (April 2007): 265-88.
Gordon Winston, The Timing of Economic Activities. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

25

Table 1. Impacts of Market Work on Daily Minutes of Other Activities, ATUS 2003 and 2004,
Individuals <60 (Minutes per Representative Day)
All Individuals
WORK

Minutes of Work

R2

Household
Production

22.54
(3.97)

-0.366
(0.007)

0.387

Tertiary
Activities

0.72
(3.40)

-0.209
(0.006)

0.173

Leisure

-23.05
(4.25)

-0.410
(0.008)

0.449

χ2(2); N =

37.56

23673
Married Men

WORK

Married Women

Minutes of Work R2

WORK

Minutes of Work

R2

Household
Production

14.36
(7.41)

-0.360
(0.011)

0.329

13.93
(7.93)

-0.481
(0.015)

0.417

Tertiary
Activities

10.98
(5.67)

-0.217
(0.009)

0.226

0.80
(5.95)

-0.186
(0.011)

0.149

-26.81
(7.58)

-0.389
(0.011)

0.436

-15.00
(7.33)

-0.317
(0.014)

0.270

Leisure
χ2(2); N =

12.68

6001

4.14

Single Men
WORK

7044

Single Women

Minutes of Work R2

WORK

Minutes of Work

R2

Household
Production

39.05
(8.29)

-0.257
(0.015)

0.151

42.17
(7.96)

-0.357
(0.015)

0.296

Tertiary
Activities

6.44
(8.82)

-0.252
(0.016)

0.156

-17.06
(7.47)

-0.194
(0.014)

0.145

Leisure

-44.59
(10.62)

-0.481
(0.019)

0.474

-22.28
(9.11)

-0.440
(0.018)

0.433

χ2(2); N =

25.50

4617

27.65

6011

*Standard errors in parentheses below the parameter estimates here and in Tables 2-7. All the estimating equations
here and in Tables 2-5 include a quadratic in age, and indicators for African-American and Hispanic and the
presence of children in various age categories. Those for all workers also include indicators for marital status and
gender; they and the equations for married individuals in Tables 2 and 5 also include a measure of spouse’s usual
hours of market work during the work.

Table 2. Impacts of Market Work on Daily Minutes of Other Activities, ATUS 2003 and 2004,
Individuals <60 Working Short or Zero Hours (Minutes per Representative Day)
All Individuals with <4 Daily Hours
of Market Work
Minutes of Work R2

WORK
Household
Production

All Individuals with <2 Daily Hours
WORK

Minutes of Work

R2

57.50
(7.87)

-0.597
(0.063)

0.301

46.48
(11.07)

-0.347
(0.182)

0.300

Tertiary
Activities

-27.37
(6.51)

-0.077
(0.052)

0.027

-11.04
(9.16)

-0.445
(0.151)

0.025

Leisure

-28.86
(8.46)

-0.324
(0.067)

0.228

-33.03
(11.91)

-0.230
(0.196)

0.223

χ2(2); N =

56.85

14951

14093

Married with <4 Daily Hours
of Market Work
Women

Men
WORK

17.12

Minutes of Wor k R2

WORK

Minutes of Work

R2

Household
Production

61.87
(15.73)

-0.716
(0.135)

0.061

45.83
(15.11)

-0.696
(0.121)

0.121

Tertiary
Activities

-30.56
(10.53)

-0.016
(0.091)

0.018

-11.23
(10.87)

-0.144
(0.087)

0.038

Leisure

-29.52
(16.10)

-0.322
(0.138)

0.050

-36.87
(13.81)

-0.118
(0.110)

0.083

χ2(2); N =

18.75

3110

9.89

4954

Single with <4 Daily Hours
of Market Work
Women

Men
WORK

Minutes of Work R2

Household
Production

76.77
(16.95)

-0.487
(0.132)

0.110

62.72
(15.26)

-0.546
(0.114)

0.262

Tertiary
Activities

-27.49
(17.40)

-0.089
(0.136)

0.017

-47.44
(14.04)

-0.051
(0.105)

0.026

Leisure

-43.41
(21.54)

-0.466
(0.168)

0.107

-13.85
(17.52)

-0.386
(0.131)

0.178

χ2(2); N =

19.99

2942

WORK

22.07

Minutes of Work

3945

R2

Table 3. Impacts of Market Work on Daily Minutes of Other Activities on Weekends, ATUS 2003
and 2004, Individuals <60 with No Weekend Work
WORK
During Week

Weekly Work
Hours

R2

Household
Production

-5.92
(9.41)

0.961
(0.223)

0.207

Tertiary
Activities

2.58
(7.41)

0.251
(0.175)

0.043

Leisure

-0.51
(10.02)

-1.149
(0.237)

0.139

χ2(2); N =

0.39

8,874

Table 4. Impacts of Market Work on Daily Minutes of Other Activities, ATUS 2003 and 2004,
Individuals <60 (Minutes per Representative Day)
All Individuals*
WORK

Minutes of Work R2

-19.82
(3.43)

-0.144
(0.006)

0.135

Non TV Leisure -3.23
(4.31)

-0.266
(0.008)

0.305

TV Watching

χ2(3); N =

52.96

23,673

*This model also includes estimates of equations describing household production and tertiary activities, which are
identical to those presented in Table 1.

Table 5. Impacts of Market Work on Daily Minutes of Other Activities, ATUS 2003 and 2004,
Individuals <60, with Income Interactions (Minutes per Representative Day)
All Individuals
WORK

WORK x Income>50K

Minutes of Work

R2

Household
Production

33.16
(4.48)

-21.94
(4.18)

-0.366
(0.007)

0.388

Tertiary
Activities

-5.17
(3.84)

12.05
(3.58)

-0.209
(0.006)

0.173

Leisure

-29.59
(4.80)

13.74
(4.48)

-0.410
(0.008)

0.450

Minutes of Work

R2

χ2(3); N =

16.22

23673

Married Men
WORK

WORK x Income>50K

Household
Production

27.52
(8.96)

-23.43
(8.60)

-0.361
(0.011)

0.333

Tertiary
Activities

8.89
(6.87)

4.06
(6.59)

-0.216
(0.009)

0.227

Leisure

-37.36
(9.18)

18.56
(8.81)

-0.403
(0.012)

0.437

χ2(3); N =

7.33

6001

Married Women
WORK

WORK x Income>50K

Minutes of Work

R2

Household
Production

24.70
(9.53)

-18.93
(8.43)

-0.482
(0.015)

0.419

Tertiary
Activities

1.92
(7.17)

-1.75
(6.34)

-0.186
(0.011)

0.149

Leisure

-27.57
(8.80)

22.09
(7.78)

-0.316
(0.014)

0.274

χ2(3); N =

0.62

7044

Table 6. Estimates of Basic Equations, 3 Countries, Total Sample, and Those with Work < 4 Hours
per Day*
All Individuals
WORK

Individuals with
<4 Daily Hours

Minutes of Work

WORK

Minutes of Work

AUSTRALIA, 1992
Household
Production

9.51
(5.43)

-0.318
(0.009)

28.08
(8.42)

-0.416
(0.069)

Tertiary
Activities

0.42
(4.62)

-0.179
(0.008)

-17.47
(6.69)

-0.125
(0.054)

Leisure

-9.92
(6.17)

-0.503
(0.064)

-10.61
(9.59)

-0.458
(0.077)

χ2(2); N =

3.90

5302

10.61

3550

WEST GERMANY, 2001/02
Household
Production

24.32
(4.68)

-0.343
(0.008)

34.10
(9.89)

-0.380
(0.066)

Tertiary
Activities

-20.53
(3.59)

-0.277
(0.007)

-30.34
(6.88)

-0.156
(0.049)

Leisure

-3.78
(4.38)

-0.380
(0.008)

-3.77
(9.09)

-0.463
(0.063)

χ2(2); N =

43.87

6264

18.50

5834

THE NETHERLANDS, 2000
Household
Production

23.04
(7.11)

-0.298
(0.013)

22.32
(14.57)

-0.251
(0.100)

Tertiary
Activities

-6.91
(6.09)

-0.235
(0.011)

-21.39
(11.06)

-0.123
(0.071)

Leisure

-16.12
(7.97)

-0.294
(0.064)

-0.93
(15.90)

-0.625
(0.108)

χ2(2); N =

14.08

1318

4.39

1306

*Standard errors which account for clustering of observations are in parentheses. Australian observations are for two
days, German two or three days, Dutch seven days. The estimates for Germany are weighted to account for uneven
reporting of different days of the week. The German and Dutch estimates include quadratics in age and spouse’s
age, indicators of gender and marital status, spouse’s work hours and the presence of children of different ages. The
Australian estimates include all of these except spouse’s age and work hours, but do include spouse’s labor-force
status.

Table 7. Estimates of the Parameters in (5)
All Matched
Observations

αs
αℓ
βcc
βcs
βcℓ
βss
βsℓ
βℓℓ
σ11
σ12
σ22

With Actual Wage

With Actual Wage,
Weekdays Only

μs ≡μℓ ≡1

μs, μℓ ≠ 1

μs ≡μℓ ≡1

μs, μℓ ≠ 1

μs ≡μℓ ≡1

μs, μℓ ≠ 1

μs ≡μℓ ≡1

μs, μℓ ≠ 1

0.829
(0.001)
0.208
(0.0014)
0.061
(1.094*
10-5)
0.0036
(0.0003)
0.0008
(0.0002)
0.356
(0.0128)
0.0019
(0.0067)
0.3876
(0.0061)
0.2434
(0.019)
0.0013
(0.0021)
1.337
(0.0003)

0.334
( 0.0002)]
0.215
(0.0005)
0.096
(4.45*
10-6)
0.0033
(0.0001)
0.0006
(0.0001)
0.449
(0.0021)
0.0023
(4.87*10-5)
0.176
(3.87*10-9)
0.231
(0.0021)
0.0004
(0.0002)
1.994
(0.0002)
0.856
(0.0001)
0.913
(0.0002)

1.145
[0.017)
0.356
(0.0007)
0.059
(1.58*
10-5)
-0.0002
(0.0003)
-0.0053
(0.0004)
0.702
(0.0247)
-0.0018
(0.0078)
0.271
(0.0118)
0.231
(0.0261)
0.0041
(0.0048)
1.165
(0.0010)

0.575
(0.0023)
0.346
(0.0103
0.087
(7.25*
10-5)
-0.0001
(0.0007)
-0.0055
(0.0004)
0.573
(0.0078)
-0.0011
(0.0100)
0.248
(0.0188)
0.168
(0.0140)
0.0023
(0.0065)
1.600
(0.0093)
0.791
(0.0010)
0.875
(0.0006)

0.369
(0.0057)
0.242
(0.007)
0.071
(2.60*
10-5)
0.0035
(0.0005)
0.0032
(0.00046)
0.410
(0.0057)
0.0280
(0.0057)
0.511
(0.0073)
0.0096
(0.0005)
0.0007
(0.0006)
3.026
(0.0036)

0.242
(0.0046)
0.211
( 0.001)
0.084
(1.40*
10-9)
0.0024
(1.56*10-5)
0.0023
(3.82*10-5)
0.301
(2.20*10-8)
0.0006
(0.001)
0.354
(0.01)
0.132
(0.0066)
0.0003
(0.0021)
2.767
(0.0025)
0.945
(0.0004)
0.974
(0.0005)

0.746
(0.0207)
0.337
(0.008)
0.066
(2.60*
10-8)
-0.0097
(0.0004)
-0.0002
(0.0005)
1.241
(0.0332)]
-0.0007
(0.0012)
1.059
(0.0179)
0.0491
(0.0013)
0.0037
(0.0015)
1.760
(0.0010)

0.993
(0.1177)
0.014
(0.1303)
0.044
[2.2*
10-5)
-0.0016
(0.0002)
0.0002
(0.0005)
0.506
(0.0814)
0.0008
(0.0697)
0.368
(0.0843)
0.0491
(0.0089)
0.0030
(0.0040)
4.178
(0.1342)
0.756
(0.0122)
0.821
(0.0208)

-157,990
8572

-139,660
8572

-81,349
4163

-94,697
4163

-67,391
5638

-71,680
5638

-43,461
2705

-38,991
2705

μs
μℓ
ln
L
N

All Matched
Observations,
Weekdays Only

Table 8. Change in Unearned Income Required to Equalize Utilities (Based on Estimates of (5))
Sample
1

2

3

4

Non-workers if market work
Percent

1.8

4.7

0.2

7.6

Dollar
amount

$854

$2,226

$96

$3964

N=

4590

1350

2530

448

effect of working status on activity type
-.1
-.05
0
.05
.1

Figure 1a. The Effect of Work Status on Activity Type
(by Type and Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
secondary (blue)
leisure (green)

12:00a

3:45a

tertiary (red)

-.001

effect of work time on activity type
-.0005
0
.0005

Figure 1b. The Effect of Work Time on Activity Type
(by Type and Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
secondary (blue)
leisure (green)

12:00a

tertiary (red)

3:45a

-.1

effect on secondary acts.
-.05
0
.05
.1

.15

Figure 2a. The Effect of Work Status and Family Income on Household Production
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval

working status (blue)

12:00a

3:45a

wk. st. x faminc>50k (red)

-.1

effect on tertiary acts.
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure 2b. The Effect of Work Status and Family Income on Tertiary Activities
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval

working status (blue)

12:00a

3:45a

wk. st. x faminc>50k (red)

-.1

effect on leisure acts.
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure 2c. The Effect of Work Status and Family Income on Leisure
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)l

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval

working status (blue)

12:00a

3:45a

wk. st. x faminc>50k (red)

-.1

effect of +wkly. hrs. on activity type
-.05
0
.05

.1

Figure 3a. The Effect of Working During the Week on Activity Type on Weekends
(by Type and Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
secondary (blue)
leisure (green)

12:00a

3:45a

tertiary (red)

-.002

effect of wkly. hrs. on activity type
-.001
0
.001
.002

Figure 3b. The Effect of Weekly Workhours on Activity Type on Weekends
(by Type and Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
secondary (blue)
leisure (green)

12:00a

tertiary (red)

3:45a

Table 9. Mean Time Use by Age, ATUS 2003 and 2004 (Minutes per Representative Day)*
Age
<55

55-59

60-64

65-69

70-74

75+

86.72
(4.63)

50.64 14.28
(3.96) (1.52)

Activity
Market work:

256.73 257.87 178.32
(1.83) (5.46) (5.75)

Household production:

212.80 227.43 246.89 267.58 263.79 235.61
(1.32) (3.98) (4.48) (4.75) (5.13) (3.47)

Household care

145.83 187.72 197.55 221.10 225.58 203.34
(1.01) (3.51) (3.87) (4.23) (4.84) (3.17)

Tertiary:

627.23 621.09 637.71 650.94 667.54 684.58
(0.98) (2.72) (3.07) (3.35) (3.65) (2.90)

Sleep

512.91 492.13 505.36 514.92 528.34 542.67
(0.90) (2.33) (2.63) (2.67) (3.05) (2.31)

Eating and drinking

68.39
(0.39)

79.50 84.01
(1.18) (1.38)

88.19
(1.58)

93.73
(1.67)

92.72
(1.31)

333.50 322.56 364.41 419.39
(1.51) (4.12) (4.80) (5.16)

443.21 486.28
(5.59) (3.97)

141.56 164.91 189.16 217.61
(0.95) (3.19) (3.98) (4.42)

229.99
(4.88)

250.01
(3.97)

Other:

9.74
(0.27)

11.04 12.66
(0.82) (1.19)

15.36
(1.09)

14.82
(1.22)

19.24
(1.16)

N=

23958

2698

1812

1469

2655

Leisure :
TV Watching

*Standard errors of the means in parentheses.

2101

0

frac. doing market work
.1
.2
.3

.4

Figure 4a. Fraction of the Population Engaged in Market Work
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
under 55 (blue)

12:00a

3:45a

55 and over (red)

0

frac. doing secondary activities
.1
.2
.3

.4

Figure 4b. Fraction of the Population Engaged in Household Production
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
under 55 (blue)

12:00a

55 and over (red)

3:45a

0

frac. doing tertiary activities
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 4c. Fraction of the Population Engaged in Tertiary Activities
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
under 55 (blue)

12:00a

3:45a

55 and over (red)

0

frac. doing leisure activities
.2
.4
.6

.8

Figure 4d. Fraction of the Population Engaged in Leisure Activities
(by Quarter-hour—coefficient and 95-percent confidence interval)

4:00a

8:00a

12:00p
4:00p
8:00p
15-minute interval
under 55 (blue)

12:00a

55 and over (red)

3:45a

APPENDIX Table A. Assignment of Activity Categories in Time Use Surveys

MAJOR CATEGORY

COUNTRY AND CODES
United States, 2003-04

Market Work
Household Production
Tertiary activities
Leisure

0501-0599, 1705
0201-0299, 0301-0499, 0701-1099, 1501-1599, 1603-1608,
1702-1704, 1707-1710, 1715
0101-0199, 1101-1199, 1701, 1711
0601-0699, 1201-1499, 1601-1602, 1706, 1712-1714

Australia, 1992
Market Work
Household Production
Tertiary activities
Leisure

000-099
100-399 except 163, 611
400-499
163; 500-998 except 611

West Germany, 2001-02
Market Work
Household Production
Tertiary activities
Leisure

211-299
011-199, 811-899, 970
511-599
310-499, 600-799, 910, 981-999

Netherlands, 2000
Market Work
Household Production
Tertiary activities
Leisure

000-099
100-399, 420
400-499 except 420
500-999

