                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




PRECAUTIONARY DEMAND FOR FOREIGN ASSETS IN SUDDEN STOP ECONOMIES:
            AN ASSESSMENT OF THE NEW MERCHANTILISM

                                        Ceyhun Bora Durdu
                                        Enrique G. Mendoza
                                         Marco E. Terrones

                                        Working Paper 13123
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13123


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




This paper was prepared for the Conference on New Perspectives on Financial Globalization held
at the IMF, April 26-27, 2007. We thank the discussant, Dave Backus, for his thoughtful comments,
Philip Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti for sharing their data on cross-country foreign assets with
us, and Laura Alfaro, Woon Gyu Choi, Olivier Jeanne, Jaewoo Lee, Marcus Miller, Romain Ranciere,
and Vincenzo Quadrini for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Congressional Budget Office or the International Monetary
Fund or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ceyhun Bora Durdu, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Precautionary Demand for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of
the New Merchantilism
Ceyhun Bora Durdu, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones
NBER Working Paper No. 13123
May 2007
JEL No. D52,E44,F32,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

Financial globalization was off to a rocky start in emerging economies hit by Sudden Stops since the
mid 1990s. Foreign reserves grew very rapidly during this period, and hence it is often argued that
we live in the era of a New Merchantilism in which large stocks of reserves are a war-chest for defense
against Sudden Stops. We conduct a quantitative assessment of this argument using a stochastic intertemporal
equilibrium framework with incomplete asset markets in which precautionary saving affects foreign
assets via three mechanisms: business cycle volatility, financial globalization, and Sudden Stop risk.
In this framework, Sudden Stops are an equilibrium outcome produced by an endogenous credit constraint
that triggers Irving Fisher's debt-deflation mechanism. Our results show that financial globalization
and Sudden Stop risk are plausible explanations of the observed surge in reserves but business cycle
volatility is not. In fact, business cycle volatility has declined in the post-globalization period. These
results hold whether we use the formulation of intertemporal preferences of the Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget
class of precautionary savings models or the Uzawa-Epstein setup with endogenous time preference.

Ceyhun Bora Durdu                                    Marco E. Terrones
Congressional Budget Office                          Research Department
1859 N. Uhle St.                                     International Monetary Fund
Arlington VA 22201                                   700 19th Street, N.W.
bora.durdu@cbo.gov                                   Washington DC 20431
                                                     mterrones@imf.org
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu
      “An absurdity does not cease to be an absurdity when we have discovered
      what were the appearances which made it plausible; and the Merchantile
      Theory could not fail to be seen in its true character when man began to
      explore into the foundations of things, and seek their premises from
      elementary facts, and not from the form and phrases of common
      discourse” (J. S. Mill (1848), Principles of Political Economy, p.5)

1.     Introduction

      The early stages of financial globalization in emerging economies were characterized by
a series of financial debacles and economic crises known as Sudden Stops. The indexes of
capital account liberalization constructed by Edwards (2005) and Chinn and Ito (2005) show
that financial globalization started in emerging economies in the late 1980s (see Figure 1).
The waves of Sudden Stops that followed began with the Mexican crisis of 1994-95. Table 1
lists 18 Sudden Stop episodes that occurred between 1994 and 2002. In addition, the period
since the early 1990s witnessed a surge in foreign reserves in most Sudden Stop countries. As
Table 1 shows, the median increase in reserves in these countries was 7.7 percent of GDP
(measured as the cross-country median of the differences between each country’s average
reserves-to-GDP ratio from the year of the country’s Sudden Stop to 2004 and the average
from 1985 to the year of the Sudden Stop).1 The increase was particularly sharp in the Asian
Sudden Stop countries, where the median increase in reserves exceeded 13 percent of GDP!2

     A popular view in policy institutions and academic circles is that this large buildup of
reserves represents a form of self-insurance that emerging economies have taken against the
risk of future Sudden Stops. The argument is that Sudden Stop countries, having realized
that the sudden loss of access to capital markets is a shortcoming of financial globalization,
and aware of the limited financial mechanisms available to cope with Sudden Stops, opted
for a New Merchantilism in which large holdings of reserves are a war-chest for defense
against Sudden Stops. The studies by Aizenman and Lee (2007), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2006),
Caballero and Panageas (2005), Choi, Sharma and Stromqvist (2007), Jeanne and Ranciere
(2006) and Jeanne (2007) examine key theoretical and empirical features of this New
Merchantilism, and the potential to develop better insurance mechanisms.

     This paper conducts a quantitative assessment of the New Merchantilism. We use a
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium framework of optimal precautionary demand for
foreign assets in a small open economy with incomplete asset markets. We quantify the
effects of three key factors that drive precautionary savings in this framework: (1) changes in
the business cycle volatility of output, (2) financial globalization (i.e., the reduction of

1
  In most Sudden Stop countries the change in reserves has been much larger than the change in net
foreign assets indicating large portfolio shifts that are beyond the scope of this paper. Our focus is on
how much of the increase in assets can be explained by precautionary motives. Still, portfolio
considerations can be important for studying the surge in reserves (Alfaro and Kanczuk, 2006; Jeanne
2007) and the dynamics of Sudden Stops (Durdu and Mendoza, 2006).
2
  Setting the breakpoint in the year of the Sudden Stop is not critical. Similar qualitative results
showing a surge in reserves are obtained comparing average reserves of Sudden Stop countries for the
1986-2004 period with those for the 1970-1985 period. Since 1985 is often viewed as the starting year
of the globalization process, we can also say that reserves surged along with financial globalization.




                                                  -1-
distortions affecting international asset trading), and (3) self-insurance against the risk of
Sudden Stops.

     The analysis proceeds in two stages. The first stage uses a canonical one-sector model of
an endowment economy that faces non-insurable shocks in domestic income. These shocks
are non-insurable because asset markets are incomplete, but the economy still has access to
a frictionless credit market in which it can borrow or lend at the world’s risk-free interest
rate. The model is calibrated to match the variability and persistence of output in Sudden
Stop economies, and then used to compute the optimal short- and long-run dynamics of
foreign assets triggered by changes in output volatility and financial globalization.

     The second stage of the analysis studies a two-sector production economy with liability
dollarization and endogenous Sudden Stops. The economy has a tradable-goods sector and a
non-tradable goods sector, and nontradables are produced with imported intermediate goods
(which are priced in world markets). Liability dollarization is present because non-state-
contingent debt is denominated in units of tradables. Here, we reexamine the adjustments in
foreign assets driven by financial globalization and business cycle volatility under the
assumption of a frictionless credit market. The main goal, however, is to quantify the
increase in foreign assets that is justified by optimal self-insurance due to the risk of
endogenous Sudden Stops. To this end, we introduce a collateral constraint that limits debt
not to exceed a fraction of the value of total income in units of tradable goods. As Mendoza
(2006a) explains, this credit-market imperfection causes endogenous Sudden Stops because of
the strong amplification mechanism that results from combining liability dollarization with a
Fisherian deflation of the relative price of nontradables. In this setup, the precautionary
demand for foreign assets takes into account how foreign asset holdings alter the probability
and the magnitude of Sudden Stops, both of which are equilibrium outcomes of the model.

     The paper’s quantitative analysis yields three main findings: First, financial
globalization, even without Sudden Stops, can trigger significant increases in mean foreign
asset holdings. Second, the risk of Sudden Stops can also produce significant increases in
foreign assets, even when the long-run variability of output is unaffected by Sudden Stops.
Third, changes in output volatility cannot explain the observed surge in foreign reserves.
The models predict large increases in foreign assets in response to higher variability of
income. In the data, however, there is no evidence of systematic increases in the standard
deviation of cyclical output for Sudden Stop economies in the era of financial globalization
(see Table 2 and Figures 2 and 3). In some of these countries volatility increased, but in
many others it fell and this is also the case for the mean and median of the group. Looking
at sectoral GDP volatility, we do find that the tradables GDP of Sudden Stop countries
became more volatile (see Table 3), but not by the magnitudes that the model would require
to explain the observed surge in reserves.

    Our model also yields an important result in terms of the dynamics associated with the
surge in reserves: The large buildup of foreign assets in response to financial globalization or
Sudden Stop risk is a slow, gradual process characterized by current account surpluses and
undervalued real exchange rates. These dynamics do not require central bank intervention to
target the real exchange rate in efforts to promote exports. Hence, our results can resolve
the dichotomy dividing self-insurance-based explanations of the surge in reserves (Aizenman




                                              -2-
and Lee, 2007) from those based on external surpluses and undervalued exchange rates
(Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2003).

     Our framework yields predictions for precautionary savings under two specifications of
intertemporal preferences that have not been compared before: the Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget,
BAH, approach (which for a small open economy requires a constant, exogenous rate of time
preference higher than the world interest rate) and the Uzawa-Epstein, UE, approach (which
features an endogenous rate of time preference). The BAH approach is widely used in the
precautionary savings literature, while the UE approach is often used in RBC models of
small open economies with incomplete markets. Both approaches feature precautionary
savings because agents build a buffer stock of savings to facilitate consumption smoothing.
In particular, they assume that the marginal utility of consumption goes to infinity as
consumption approaches zero, so agents are extremely averse to hold asset positions that
leave them exposed to the risk of “very low” consumption at any point in time. However,
the elasticity of mean foreign assets with respect to the interest rate differs sharply in the
two approaches, and hence their quantitative implications for precautionary savings need to
be studied separately.

     The BAH approach requires a constant rate of time preference higher than the interest
rate because, if the two rates are equal, optimal precautionary savings would imply
accumulating an infinite amount of foreign assets: Agents desire a non-stochastic
consumption stream, but they need an infinitely large buffer stock of assets to support it
because income is stochastic and capital markets do not offer enough insurance instruments
to diversify income risk fully. Mean foreign assets under this approach increase as the gap
between the interest rate and the rate of time preference narrows, with mean foreign assets
(and their elasticity) going to infinity as the rate of interest converges to the rate of time
preference from below. Thus, at interest rates close to the rate of time preference, the BAH
setup predicts that small variations in the interest rate trigger large adjustments in average
foreign assets. By contrast, the UE approach models the rate of time preference as an
increasing function of past consumption, but imposing conditions that limit the magnitude
of this “impatience effect.” This approach yields a long-run rate of time preference that
converges to the world interest rate in a non-degenerate equilibrium, and a well-behaved
stochastic stationary state in which mean asset holdings are less sensitive to changes in the
world real interest rate. In fact, in our quantitative experiments, the elasticity of mean
foreign assets in the UE setup is approximately constant at high or low interest rates.

     A contribution of our analysis is that the effects of business cycle volatility, financial
globalization and Sudden Stop risk on foreign assets are examined within a common
framework and under alternative preference specifications. The existing literature has
produced interesting results by examining these factors separately. Fogli and Perri (2006)
study a two-country model in which the Great Moderation (the decline in relative output
volatility of the United States vis-à-vis the rest of the world) leads to a build up of foreign
assets in U.S. trading partners. The surge in foreign assets, however, is small relative to the
magnitudes shown in Table 1. The Great Moderation has also resulted in higher output
volatility of Sudden Stop economies relative to the United States, but driven largely by the
moderation of U.S. business cycles—not by higher volatility in Sudden Stop economies (see
Tables 2 and 4 and Figures 2 and 3). In our framework, this pattern of changes in relative
volatility is akin to a permanent increase in the risk-free interest rate faced by Sudden Stop




                                              -3-
economies, which causes them to increase assets holdings due to similar effects as those that
result from financial globalization. Thus, the surge in reserves in this scenario is not the
direct result of self-insurance against higher business cycle volatility inside Sudden Stop
countries, but the indirect result of lower U.S. volatility on the world interest rate.

     Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2007) study how financial globalization affects
foreign asset positions and their portfolio structure in a world composed of countries with
varying degrees of financial development (i.e., asset market incompleteness) and inhabited
by heterogenous agents that face non-insurable idiosyncratic risk. They find that financial
integration leads to a large, gradual buildup of assets against the country with the highest
degree of financial development. We focus instead on the implications of aggregate risk in a
representative-agent small open economy, but our results are consistent with theirs in
showing that financial globalization can lead to large increases in foreign asset holdings.

     Mendoza (2002) and Durdu (2006) examine Sudden Stop models similar to the one
studied here. Mendoza shows that when the model is calibrated to Mexican data, the shift
from perfect credit markets to a world with Sudden Stops increases the average foreign
assets-GDP ratio by 13.8 percentage points. Durdu examines how hedging and self-insurance
options change with financial innovation in the form of GDP-indexed credit contracts.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the one-sector model
and examines its quantitative implications. Section 3 presents the two-sector model with
liability dollarization and endogenous Sudden Stops. Section 4 concludes.

2.   One-Sector Endowment Economy

2.1 Structure of the Model

   Consider a small open economy inhabited by a representative agent, who consumes a
composite good c. The agent’s preferences are given by:
                                 ⎡ ∞ ⎪⎧       ⎛ t −1      ⎞⎫⎪ c1− γ ⎤
                             E 0 ⎢ ∑ ⎪⎨ exp ⎜⎜⎜ −∑ v(cτ ) ⎟⎟⎟ ⎪⎬ t      ⎥,
                                 ⎢                        ⎠⎟ ⎪⎭⎪ 1 − γ ⎦⎥
                                 ⎣ t = 0 ⎩⎪⎪  ⎝⎜ τ = 0
                                                                                          (1)
                                         UE                                  BAH
                             v(c ) = ρ        ln(1 + c) or ln(1 + ρ                )

Period utility has constant-relative-risk-aversion (CRRA) form, with γ as the relative risk
aversion coefficient. The time preference function v(c) takes one of two forms: (a) with the
UE formulation, the rate of time preference is endogenous and given by v(c ) = ρUE ln(1 + c ) ,
where ρUE >0 measures the elasticity of the rate of time preference with respect to 1+c; (b)
with the BAH formulation, the rate of time preference is given by the standard constant
fraction 0< ρBAH <1 (i.e., the typical exogenous discount factor is β ≡ 1/(1 + ρBAH ) ).

    The economy chooses consumption and foreign assets as to maximize (1) subject to the
standard resource constraint:

                                  ct = εt y − bt +1 + bt (1 + r ) + A                     (2)




                                                      -4-
The economy’s mean or trend income, y, is subject to random shocks, εt, which follow a first-
order, irreducible Markov chain. Foreign assets, b, are one-period bonds traded in a
frictionless global credit market. These bonds pay a net risk-free real interest rate equal to r
(so the gross interest rate is given by R≡1+r). Given that in the data absorption includes
investment and government expenditures, and not just private consumption, we introduce a
constant lump-sum level of exogenous absorption A that will allow us to calibrate the model
to match output shares of c and b consistent with actual data.

2.2 Equilibrium

      The optimization problem of this small open economy is analogous to the optimization
problem of a single individual in the heterogenous-agents models of precautionary savings
(e.g., Aiyagari, 1994 or Hugget, 1993). As in those models, CRRA utility implies that the
marginal utility of consumption goes to infinity as consumption goes to zero from above,
making the economy “extremely averse” to consumption and savings plans that would leave
it exposed to the risk of “very low” consumption at any date and state of nature. To rule
out these plans, agents in this economy impose on themselves Aiyagari’s Natural Debt Limit,
by which they never borrow more than the annuity value of the worst realization of income:
bt +1 ≥ − min(εt y + A)/ r . In addition, following Aiyagari (1994), we can impose an ad-hoc
debt limit φ such that bt +1 ≥ φ ≥ − min(εty + A)/ r .

     The optimality condition of the economy’s maximization problem is:

                               Uc (t ) = exp(−v(ct ))Et [U c (t + 1)][ 1 + r ]                      (3)

Note that U c (t ) denotes the lifetime marginal utility of date-t consumption. In the BAH
setup, U c (t ) is just the standard period marginal utility of ct. In the UE setup, however,
U c (t ) includes both the period marginal utility of ct and the impatience effects by which
changes in ct affect the subjective discounting of all future utility flows after date t.

        A competitive equilibrium for this small open economy is defined by stochastic
sequences [ ct , bt +1 ]t∞= 0 that satisfy the Euler equation (3) and the resource constraint (2) for all
t. The structure of asset markets has important implications for this equilibrium. If the
economy has access to complete insurance markets to fully diversify away all the risk of
domestic income fluctuations, the equilibrium would feature a constant consumption stream
and the economy’s wealth position vis-à-vis the rest of the world would be time and state
invariant. If the asset market is limited to non-state-contingent bonds, however, the wealth
position changes over time and across states of nature, and consumption cannot attain a
perfectly smooth path. With BAH preferences, the economy attains a well-defined long-run
distribution of foreign assets (i.e., a well-defined stochastic stationary equilibrium), only
if β [ 1 + r ] < 1 .3 With UE preferences, a well-defined long-run distribution of assets exists if

3
  In this case, the marginal benefit of an extra unit of foreign assets follows a non-negative
supermartingale that converges almost surely to a nonnegative random variable (see Ch. 17 in
Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2004). Thus, convergence is attained with the marginal benefit of savings
remaining finite and moving randomly in the long run, and hence the long-run averages of assets and
consumption also remain finite. In contrast, with β(1 + r ) ≥ 1 , assets diverge to infinity in the long
run because marginal utility converges to zero almost surely, and with CRRA preferences this implies
that consumption, and hence assets, diverge to infinity.



                                                     -5-
ρUE ≤ γ (see Epstein, 1983). That is, UE preferences limit the size of impatience effects by
requiring the elasticity of the rate of time preference with respect to consumption not to
exceed the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.4

     The competitive equilibrium of the economy can be characterized in recursive form in
terms of a decision rule for bonds at date t+1, b′(b,ε), as a deterministic function of date-t
assets b and the date-t realization of income ε, that solves the following Bellman equation:
                                          ⎧ c1−γ
                                          ⎪                                    ⎫
                                                                               ⎪
                           V (b, ε) = max ⎨       + exp(−v(c ))E [V (b ′, ε ′)]⎬
                                       b′ ⎪
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎩ 1 − γ                              ⎪
                                                                               ⎪
                                                                               ⎭
                                                                                                    (4)
                            s.t .     c = εy − b ′ + bR + A

In the quantitative analysis that follows, we solve this Bellman equation using value
function iteration. Foreign assets take values defined over a discrete grid with n nodes:
(b, b ′) ∈ B = {b1 < b2 < ... < bn } . We set n=1000 to reduce numerical approximation error in
the decision rule. The Markov process of income is defined by a vector of j realizations,
ε ∈ Ε = { ε1 < ε2 < ... < εj } and an jxj transition probability matrix, π(εt +1 | εt ) . We use
Tauchen and Hussey’s (1991) quadrature algorithm (THQA) to transform time-series
processes of income derived from actual data into Markov processes for model simulations.

2.3 Calibration

     The baseline calibration of the model is designed so that the deterministic stationary
equilibrium using UE preferences matches a set of statistics from the Mexican economy,
including the ratio of net foreign assets to GDP. The calibration to Mexico is not critical for
our key findings. As we discuss later, the results of sensitivity analysis show that our
findings are robust to changes in parameters and in the variability and persistence of output
in the range of those observed in the countries listed in Table 1.

    The BAH setup does not have a well-defined deterministic stationary equilibrium, since
without uncertainty βR < 1 implies that consumption falls at a gross rate of ( βR )1/ γ until
the economy hits the debt limit φ. Hence, to complete the calibration of the BAH setup we
keep all the parameters as in the UE setup and set φ and β to values such that the model
with BAH preferences matches the long-run average of foreign assets and the cyclical
standard deviation of consumption in the data.

     The baseline calibration parameters are listed in Table 5. The coefficient of relative risk
aversion is set to γ=2, which is the standard value in quantitative dynamic general
equilibrium models. The mean of income is normalized to y=1 without loss of generality.
Hence, the steady-state allocations can be interpreted as ratios relative to average GDP. The
steady-state ratio of net foreign assets to GDP is set to -44 percent (b=-.44), which is the
average of Mexico’s net foreign assets-GDP ratio over the period 1985-2004 in the database
constructed by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). The consumption-GDP ratio is set to 69.2

4
  Foreign assets converge to a well-defined long-run distribution because the rate of time preference
increases (decreases) relative to the interest rate if consumption and assets rise (fall) too much in the
long run, and this changes incentives for savings in favor of reducing (increasing) asset holdings.



                                                     -6-
percent (c=0.692), in line with the average consumption-output ratio in Mexican data. The
real interest rate is set to 5.9 percent (R=1.059), which is the average of Uribe and Yue’s
(2006) real interest rate including the EMBI spread for Mexico. The model does not take
into account default risk, but since the real interest rate is constant, it seems more
reasonable to set it at a constant representative of the effective financing cost of Mexico’s
foreign debt than to set it equal to the real interest rate on U.S. T-Bills. Given the values of
y, c, b and R, the resource constraint implies that A=y+b(R-1)-c=0.282.

      In the UE setup, the value of the time preference elasticity follows from the steady-state
condition that sets the rate of time preference equal to R: ρUE = ln(R)/ ln(1 + c ) = 0.109 . This
implies a subjective discount factor of (1 + c )−0.109 = 0.944 . In the BAH setup, we match
Mexico’s average net foreign assets of -44 percent and the standard deviation of consumption
over the business cycle (3.28 percent) by setting φ =-0.51 and β=0.94, which implies
 ρ BAH = 0.064 . Notice that in theory, for any given φ <-0.44, there is a value of β high
enough so that the model with BAH preferences yields an average of assets of -44 percent.
However, we found that for φ <-1, the values of β that can yield this mean of assets result in
stochastic steady states that assign non-trivial probabilities to very high debt ratios larger
than 100 percent of GDP, and the variability of consumption exceeds the actual measure by
large margins. The Lane-Milesi Ferretti database shows that emerging economies (defined as
middle income developing countries) very rarely reach net foreign asset positions larger than
GDP. On the other hand, with tight ad-hoc debt limits of 50 percent of GDP or less, the
long-run distribution of assets predicts that the economy spends most of the time at the
debt limit (i.e., the long-run probability of observing b=φ is “too high”).

      The Markov process of income shocks is set to match the standard deviation and first-
order autocorrelation of the Hodrick-Prescott-filtered cyclical component of GDP in annual
Mexican data for the 1965-2005 period ( σy = 3.301% and ρy = 0.597 respectively). The HP
filter ensures that cyclical GDP follows a stationary process, and the AR(1) specification
( yt = ρyyt −1 + et ) cannot be rejected. Thus, the underlying standard deviation of output
innovations is σe = σy2 (1 − ρy2 ) = 2.648 percent. Using 5 nodes in the vector of realizations,
THQA produces a Markov process for ε that yields 3.285 percent standard deviation in
output with 0.550 autocorrelation and 2.64 percent standard deviation in output
innovations. Hence, the Markov process is an accurate approximation to the actual time-
series process of Mexico’s cyclical GDP.

     Before reviewing the quantitative findings, it is important to explain how precautionary
savings are measured. Precautionary savings are defined as the savings that agents
accumulate due to the presence of non-insurable idiosyncratic risk. Hence, precautionary
savings are usually measured as the difference between the long-run average of assets
predicted by a model and the level of assets that the same model would predict in the long
run in the absence of uncertainty. In the BAH setup, this is the excess of the average assets
in the stochastic steady state relative to the debt limit φ, because without uncertainty the
BAH economy reduces its asset position until it hits φ. In contrast, precautionary savings in
the UE setup is the excess of the long-run average of assets relative to a well-defined
deterministic steady state obtained by equating the endogenous rate of time preference with
the world interest rate. Because of this difference in the deterministic steady state of assets
in the BAH and UE setups, it can also be informative to study changes in precautionary
asset holdings by simply comparing long-run averages of foreign assets.



                                               -7-
2.4 Baseline Results

     Table 6 lists the statistical moments that characterize the stochastic steady state of the
model under the baseline calibration for UE and BAH preferences. The table also shows
results for alternative calibrations with higher output autocorrelation (ρy=0.7), higher and
lower variability in output innovations (σe=4 percent and σe =2 percent, which yield σy=5
percent and σy =2.5 percent respectively) and higher risk aversion (γ =5).

     The business cycle moments listed in the Baseline column of Table 6 are standard
findings in intertemporal models of small open, endowment economies with incomplete asset
markets. Consumption behavior is consistent with typical business cycle features:
consumption is slightly less volatile than output, it displays positive correlation with GDP
and positive serial autocorrelation. On the other hand, since precautionary asset demand
with the aim of smoothing consumption is the main driving force of foreign asset dynamics
in the model, the cyclical behavior of net exports and the current account is counterfactual.
In particular, both external accounts are strongly positively correlated with output, while
actual business cycles display countercyclical external accounts. We show in Section 3 that
this result is reversed in the two-sector model with production.

     The main result in Table 6 relates to the stock of precautionary savings. The Baseline
results show that under UE preferences precautionary savings measure nearly 2.5 percent of
GDP. Under BAH preferences, however, precautionary savings are nearly 5 times larger at
9.6 percent of GDP. The Baseline business cycle moments under both preferences
specifications show important differences as a result. In particular, foreign assets fluctuate
significantly more, are less correlated with output, and display higher serial autocorrelation
in the UE setup than in the BAH setup. This is because the BAH setup matches Mexico’s
average net foreign assets-GDP ratio in the data by imposing an ad-hoc debt limit of 51
percent of GDP, and the probability of hitting it in the long run is 10.2 percent. Notice also
that these significant differences in the characteristics of the stochastic steady states of the
two setups are obtained with small differences in the behavior of the subjective discount
factors. On average, the discount factors of the BAH and UE setup are virtually identical,
and in the UE setup the standard deviation of the endogenous discount factor is very small,
at about 4 percent of the variability of output. However, the endogenous discount factor is
negatively correlated with GDP (since consumption is procyclical) and its fluctuations are
highly persistent.

     Table 6 shows that changes in the variability and persistence of output and in the
degree of risk aversion preserve the qualitative features of the comparison across the BAH
and UE Baseline results with small quantitative changes. Increases in ρy, σe and γ produce
significant increases in precautionary savings, but the BAH setup always produces a larger
stock of precautionary savings than the UE specification. With the autocorrelation of output
at 0.7 or the standard deviation of output at 5 percent, precautionary savings in the BAH
setup are about 4 times larger than in the UE setup, but the factor is just a little above 2
with the coefficient of relative risk aversion set at 5. The high-risk-aversion case is also the
one that yields the largest precautionary savings in both setups (10.4 and 23.8 percent of
GDP in the UE and BAH specifications respectively). Note also that both the UE and the
BAH setups can generate outcomes in which consumption variability exceeds income
variability (by about 8 percent in the simulations with ρy =0.7 and up to 25 percent in the



                                              -8-
UE scenario with γ=5). Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003) identified consumption variability
in excess of income variability as a puzzling feature of the data of emerging economies (see
also Table 2). Our results suggest that self-insurance under incomplete asset markets may
help explain this puzzle.

     The high serial autocorrelation coefficients of foreign assets reported in Table 6 (0.99 in
the UE baseline, 0.959 in the BAH baseline) indicate that the adjustment of foreign assets to
its long-run average in the stochastic steady state is a slow, gradual process under both
preference specifications. Figures 4-5 illustrate further this slow convergence. Figure 4 shows
the transitional dynamics of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of foreign assets in
the BAH and UE Baseline simulations, starting from the lowest asset position with
nontrivial probability in the stochastic steady state. The intuition is that as the economy’s
business cycle evolves, this is the lowest asset position that can be reached with positive
probability in the long run. Once the economy hits this lowest asset position, the plots show
the evolution of the CDFs of foreign assets as the economy returns to the stochastic steady
state. The plots show CDFs after 2, 5, 10, and 15 years and also the long-run CDFs. Clearly,
even after 15 years the CDFs are still distant from the long-run distributions.

     Figure 5 shows the transitional dynamics of the foreign assets-GDP ratio in the Baseline
simulations, plotted in percent relative to long-run averages. The transitional dynamics are
computed as the forecast functions of the equilibrium Markov process of the foreign assets-
GDP ratio conditional on initial conditions for which: (a) foreign assets take the lowest
value with positive long-run probability; and (b) the income shock is neutral (i.e., ε=1). The
plots show that convergence to the long-run average of assets takes about 40 years in the
BAH setup and more than 80 years in the UE setup. Note, however, that while the initial
condition for the BAH plot is a foreign assets-GDP ratio nearly 10 percentage points below
the long-run average, with a long-run probability of 10.2 percent (which corresponds to the
debt limit, φ), the initial condition for the UE plot is a ratio nearly 48 percentage points
below the long-run average and with a long-run probability of only 0.1 percent. The two
initial conditions defined by the criterion of having the “lowest positive long-run
probability” are therefore different in the UE and BAH setups. Hence, Figures 4-5 show that
convergence is slow in both models, but comparisons across the BAH and UE plots need to
keep in mind this caveat.

2.5 Self-Insurance and Business Cycle Volatility

    How much do changes in the cyclical variability of output affect foreign asset positions
in the long run via self-insurance motives? Figure 6a shows the increase in precautionary
savings as σe rises so that the standard deviation of GDP rises from 1 to 8 percent (keeping
the serial autocorrelation of GDP constant). Figure 6b is a similar plot but for increases in
the autocorrelation of GDP from 0 to 0.8. In this case we keep σe constant but the standard
deviation of GDP still increases as its autocorrelation rises (since σy2 = σε2 /(1 − ρy2 ) ).

    Figures 6a shows that increases in output variability produce large increases in
precautionary demand for foreign assets regardless of the preferences specification (although
the BAH setup always yields higher precautionary savings than the UE setup). Figure 6b
shows similar qualitative results when the autocorrelation of GDP rises, but quantitatively
the effects on precautionary savings are weaker. If we examine the long-run averages of



                                              -9-
foreign asset-GDP ratios instead of precautionary savings, the UE setup produces larger
(smaller) mean asset positions than the BAH setup at lower (higher) levels of output
variability, but the elasticity of the average assets-GDP ratio to changes in the variability
and persistence of output is higher with BAH preferences than with UE preferences.

     Unfortunately, the data cast serious doubt on the hypothesis that foreign reserves have
increased sharply in Sudden Stop countries because of increased output variability (see
Table 2 and Figures 2 and 3). Figure 2 shows that output volatility is lower in the post-
globalization period in more than half of the Sudden Stop countries. Figure 3 shows that the
mean and median standard deviation of output in 20-year rolling windows have changed
slightly in the 3 to 4.5 percent range, and in fact they have been in a steady decline since
the late 1990s. Table 2 shows that the median standard deviation of GDP in Sudden Stop
countries for the full 1965-2005 period is about 3.5 percent, and this volatility measure fell
from 3.5 percent before the Globalization period (1965-1985) to 3.1 percent in the
Globalization period (1986-2005). Hence, in several countries volatility fell rather than
increased, and in this case the model predicts a reduction in foreign assets. Even for the
subset of countries where volatility rose, only in the extreme cases of Peru and Thailand
(which show the largest increases in volatility of about 3.5 percentage points before and after
Globalization) we find evidence of volatility increases of the magnitude that can account for
the observed increases in reserves reported in Table 1. Figure 6b indicates that the model
with UE (BAH) preferences needs an increase in output volatility of more than 4 (1.5)
percentage points to account for the observed surge in reserves as a result of self insurance.

    We conclude from this analysis that while increases in the cyclical volatility of output
can produce large increases in foreign asset positions, the evidence in the data does not show
that output variability has increased sharply and systematically across Sudden Stop
countries. Hence, higher long-run business cycle volatility does not seem a plausible
explanation of the surge in reserves in these countries.

2.6 Financial Globalization Effects on Foreign Assets

     We study next the effects of financial globalization on foreign asset holdings and
precautionary savings. To this end, we introduce into the model a time-invariant
distortionary tax on foreign asset returns at rate τ that is intended to represent the
combined effect of all forms of controls on capital account transactions and global asset
trading costs proportional to asset returns. The revenue or outlays generated by this
“effective tax” (depending on whether b is positive or negative) are rebated to agents as a
lump sum transfer Tt = btrτ, but agents take Tt as given. Thus, the agents’ budget
constraint is now ct = εt y − bt +1 + bt [ 1 + r (1 − τ ) ] + Tt + A . The resource constraint of the
economy remains as in eq. (2).

     For the economy with BAH preferences, we can still write the recursive competitive
equilibrium as the solution of a single Bellman equation by taking advantage of the fact that
the equilibrium of the economy distorted by τ is equivalent to that of an economy without
distortions but with a lower discount factor. In particular, if we define τR as the tax on R
equivalent to the corresponding tax on r (i.e., the value of τR that satisfies
R(1 − τ R ) = 1 + r (1 − τ ) , which is τ R = r τ / R ), the competitive equilibrium is given by the
same Bellman equation as in (4) but with the discount factor set as exp(−v(c ))(1 − τ R ) . This



                                                -10-
equivalence does not hold for the UE setup because of the endogenous discount factor. In
this case, however, we approximate the recursive competitive equilibrium by solving eq. (4)
subject to the following budget constraint: c = εy − b ′ + b [ 1 + r (1 − τ ) ] + r τb + A . This
formulation uses a time-invariant lump sum transfer set at r τb , where b is the long-run
average of foreign assets. This guarantees that at the average of the stochastic steady state
the solution of the Bellman equation for the model with UE preferences satisfies the
optimality conditions of the competitive equilibrium, and for values of b other than b it
reduces the size of the wealth effects that would be introduced by ignoring the lump-sum
rebate and simply using the resource constraint as in (2). We checked the accuracy of this
approximation by applying it to the model with BAH preferences and then comparing the
results with the exact competitive equilibrium solutions obtained using the tax-adjusted
discount factor. For values of τ ≤ 0.84 the two algorithms yield average asset-GDP ratios
that are at most 1/10 of a percent apart.

     We consider tax rates that range from 0 to 27 percent, and we adjust the calibration so
that at a zero tax rate the BAH setup approaches the complete-markets equilibrium (i.e., we
set β=1/R, so that the domestic rate of time preference matches the world interest rate).
Hence, in this case the lack of financial integration (which implies nonzero values of τ)
represents also the “severity” of market incompleteness, as reflected in the gap between the
tax-adjusted rate of time preference and the world real interest rate.

      Figure 7a and 7b plot the long-run averages of foreign assets and precautionary savings
against the tax on capital flows under both BAH and UE preferences. For the BAH setup,
we show curves for three values of φ: the natural debt limit, φ = -2, and φ = -1 (which
imply limits of -200 and -100 percent of average GDP respectively). As the tax approaches
zero, b and precautionary savings go to infinity because we approach βR(1-τk)=1 and agents
desire an infinity amount of self-insurance. Conversely, at high tax rates the relationship
between taxes and mean asset holdings vanishes as the economy spends most of the time at
the debt limit. This occurs at tax rates in excess of 10 percent for all three scenarios of φ. In
contrast, at tax rates between 0.5 and 10 percent, the BAH setup predicts that the long-run
average b/y ratio increases sharply as the tax falls even by small amounts. Thus, this setup
predicts that in the early stages of financial globalization foreign assets may respond little to
the opening of the capital account, while later on, further financial integration efforts that
may imply small changes in effective distortions on asset trading (small changes in τ)
produce large changes in the long-run average of b/y. These effects are the strongest if the
only limit on debt is the natural debt limit. In this case, a cut in τ from 8 percent to 0.5
percent increases the mean b/y ratio from -10 times GDP to about -154 percent of GDP,
and precautionary savings rise from 81 percent to about 9.4 times GDP. But the effects are
still large with much tighter debt limits. With φ=-1, the same tax cut increases average b/y
from -90 percent to a positive position of about 20 percent of GDP, and precautionary
savings rise from 10 to 120 percent of GDP.

     The effects of financial globalization using UE preferences also show large increases in
the long-run average of the ratio of foreign assets to GDP. In this case, cutting τ from 8 to
0.5 percent increases the long-run average of foreign assets from -156 percent of GDP to
almost -45 percent of GDP. On the other hand, precautionary savings are approximately
unchanged. This result highlights a key difference between the BAH and UE preference
specifications: When τ changes, the UE setup separates the savings effect resulting from the



                                              -11-
increase in the post-tax return on assets even without uncertainty (i.e., the deterministic
steady state of b rises as τ falls because the return to savings rises and the rate of time
preference adjusts accordingly), from the effect due solely to precautionary savings (i.e., the
effect on the excess of mean foreign asset holding in the stochastic model relative to the
deterministic steady state). In the BAH setup the two effects cannot be separated because
the deterministic steady state is invariant to the tax (since without uncertainty assets fall
until they hit φ for any τ>0). Thus, while the model predicts large increases in foreign assets
as a result of financial globalization under both BAH and UE preferences, the results of the
UE setup suggest that the fraction that can be attributed to precautionary savings per se
could be small.

     Two important additional observations should be noted about these results. First,
whether financial globalization is a good explanation of the observed surge in reserves in
Sudden Stop economies depends on the timing and magnitude of the removal of barriers to
international asset trading (i.e., how high was τ when globalization started and how much
has it fallen). Certainly, the results in Figures 7a-b indicate that if Sudden Stop economies
have moved closer to a regime of unrestricted global asset trading (as the indicators in
Figure 1 suggest), the expected increases in foreign assets can be easily as large as those
observed in the data. Second, the results also depend on the degree of completeness of the
global capital markets that can be accessed with financial globalization. The exercise in this
Section assumes that in the BAH setting, τ=0 implies that those global capital markets
provide perfect insurance. In contrast, the results under the UE specification maintain
market incompleteness even when τ=0. The fact that both specifications predict large
increases in foreign assets as financial globalization strengthens suggests that the strong
assumption of market completeness at τ=0 is the BAH setup is not critical for the result.
The large differences in precautionary savings across the BAH and UE setups, however, do
hinge on this assumption.

     The large increase in the long-run average of foreign assets as a result of financial
integration, and the slow transitional dynamics of foreign assets documented earlier, echo
the results of Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2007). However, the results are driven by
different mechanisms in the two studies. Mendoza et al. obtain their results because of the
adjustments in the within-country and cross-country distributions of wealth of two countries
with different degrees of market incompleteness. As the countries move from financial
autarky to financial globalization, the risk-free interest rate rises relative to autarky for the
less-financially-developed country, and this rise alters precautionary savings behavior across
individuals within the country leading to an increase in aggregate net foreign assets.
Wealthy agents that save reap the gains of this increase, while poor agents that borrow are
made significantly worse off. There is no aggregate risk but their model is calibrated to the
observed variability of household earnings and firm profits, which is substantially higher
than overall GDP variability. In contrast, our results focus only on aggregate uncertainty
and the savings response of a single representative agent.

     In summary, we find that financial globalization can be an important force driving the
sharp increase in foreign reserves in Sudden Stop economies (and in emerging economies in
general). The role of “pure” precautionary savings, however, is not as clear because we can
get results in the setup with UE preferences where the large increase in foreign assets is due
to the increased incentives for saving in foreign assets even in the absence of uncertainty.



                                              -12-
3.     Two-Sector Production Economy

3.1 Structure of the Model

     The two-sector model differs from the one-sector model in four key respects:

(I) Consumption includes tradable goods (cT) and nontradable goods (cN) with aggregate
consumption defined by a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) function:
                                                                                         1
                                                −μ                            −μ −
                   c(cTt , ctN ) = ⎡⎣ a ( cTt   )     + (1 − a )( ctN        )       ⎤
                                                                                     ⎦
                                                                                         μ   ,   a > 0, μ ≥ −1.   (5)

The elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables is given by 1/(1+μ), and
the CES weighting factor is given by a.

(II) Nontradable goods are produced by a representative firm using imported intermediate
goods (m) as the single variable input of a neoclassical production technology:

                                          ytN = zt Zmtα ,                   0 ≤ α ≤ 1.                            (6)

Z represents the trend level of total factor productivity (TFP) and it also includes the effects
of any fixed factors, zt is a stochastic TFP shock, and α is the share of imported inputs in
gross output. The domestic market of nontradable goods and the world market of
intermediate goods are competitive, and thus the profit-maximizing demand for imported
inputs is given by a standard marginal productivity rule:

                                                     ptN αzt Zmtα −1 = pm                                         (7)

In this expression, pm represents the world-determined price of imported inputs relative to
tradable consumer goods, which is kept constant for simplicity, and ptN denotes the price of
nontradables relative to tradables, which is determined inside the small open economy. At
equilibrium, this price must also match the household’s marginal rate of substitution
between tradables and nontradables:
                                                                                    ⎞⎟1+ μ
                                                    ptN =   (   1−a
                                                                 a    )   ⎛ cTt
                                                                          ⎜⎜
                                                                           ⎜⎝ ctN    ⎟
                                                                                    ⎠⎟
                                                                                                                  (8)

(III) The economy has new budget and resource constraints. The budget constraint of
households in the competitive equilibrium is:

                        cTt + ptN ctN = εTt yT + AT + πtN + ptN AN − bt +1 + bt R                                 (9)

where πtN = ptN ytN − pm mt represents profits from firms in the nontradables sector. The
technology in (6) has decreasing returns, and profits are positive and equal to 1-α of the
value of nontradables output. These profits are also equal to the value of nontradables GDP
in units of tradables (i.e., gross output minus the cost of intermediate goods). The
endowment of tradables is stochastic, so the economy now faces two Markov shocks, one
hitting tradables output and one hitting TFP in nontradables. Given the firm’s optimality
condition (7), the definition of profits, and market clearing in the nontradables sector, it
follows that the sectoral resource constraints are:



                                                                 -13-
                             cTt = εTt yT − bt +1 + bt ( 1 + r ) + AT − pmmt                       (10)


                                            ctN = ytN + AN                                         (11)

Constraint (10) assumes that foreign assets are denominated in units of tradables, so this
economy displays liability dollarization (when it borrows, its debt is in units of tradables).

(IV) We consider the possibility that agents face a collateral constraint in asset markets. In
particular, lenders limit credit to a fraction κ of the market value of the total income of
domestic agents in units of tradables, and up to a maximum Ω:5

                                     bt +1 ≥ −κ ⎡⎣ εTt yT + πtN ⎤⎦ ≥ Ω                             (12)

The value of income in the right-hand-side of (12) is equal at equilibrium to the economy’s
total GDP valued at tradables goods prices, so (12) can be viewed as a constraint on the
economy’s debt-GDP ratio. The constraint is endogenous, however, because the bond
position and the price and production of nontradables are endogenous, and there is feedback
between borrowing decisions and the value of nontradables GDP (as explained below).

    It is critical to note that agents take as given the price of nontradables. Hence, they do
not internalize the effect of their consumption and bond decisions on the equilibrium price,
and therefore the effects of changes in the equilibrium price and production of nontradables
on the ability to borrow are also not internalized. As a result, the model features a credit-
market externality by which individual choices affect the economy’s ability to borrow (see
Uribe, 2006 and Korinek, 2007).

3.2 Equilibrium and Amplification with Debt-Deflation

     The characteristics of the equilibrium of the one-sector economy described in 2.2 extend
to the two-sector economy. In particular, the CES aggregator preserves the Inada condition
that makes period marginal utility go to infinity as cT or cN go to zero from above. Hence,
agents will self-insure to rule out stochastic intertemporal sequences that could expose them
to the risk of “very low” consumption of tradables. The natural debt limit that guarantees
this outcome is bt +1 ≥ − min(εTt yT + AT − pmmt )/ r .6 Since tradables income is only a fraction
of total income, this natural debt limit is tighter than the one in the one-sector economy.
The agents may also face a higher degree of market incompleteness inasmuch as there is no
vehicle to self-insure directly against the risk of fluctuations in nontradables income.
Endogenous changes in the price and output of nontradables can, however, provide implicit
insurance depending on how substitutable are tradables and nontradables in consumption


5
  This rules out equilibria in which the constraint could be satisfied at very high debt levels that prop
up cT and pN. For example, Ω could be set at the debt that would be contracted without credit
constraints (i.e., creditors do not lend more than what they would have without the constraint).
6
  Note that agents take profits and the price of nontradables as given, so their individual natural debt
limit is bt +1 ≥ − min(εTt yT + AT + πtN + ptN AN )/ r , but with this debt limit there could still be
equilibrium sequences where tradables consumption is nonpositive. The resource constraint (10)
implies that at equilibrium the natural debt limit must be bt +1 ≥ − min(εTt yT + AT − pmmt )/ r .



                                                    -14-
(i.e., on the value of μ) and on the equilibrium correlation between nontradables and
tradables income (both valued at tradables goods prices).

    The collateral constraint (12) introduces a borrowing limit that is “occasionally
binding.” As explained in Mendoza (2005) and (2006a), in the states in which this constraint
binds, the Euler equation for tradables consumption includes an endogenous Lagrange
multiplier ηt that represents the shadow value of the credit limit:

                             U cT (t ) = exp[−v(C (cTt , ctN ))]Et [U cT (t + 1)R ] + ηt                  (13)

If we define the effective interest rate as Rt +1 ≡ U cT (t )/ ( exp[−v(C (cTt , ctN ))]Et [U cT (t + 1)] ) , it
follows that the binding credit constraint adds an interest rate premium equal to
Et [Rt +1 − R ] = ηt / ( exp[−v(C (cTt , ctN ))]Et [U cT (t + 1)] ) . This premium can be interpreted as the
premium that lenders would charge borrowers in order to ensure that the credit constraint is
not violated. In turn, the justification for the constraint could be limited contract
enforcement by which lenders can confiscate only κ of a defaulting borrower’s total income.

     Suppose that the economy has just enough debt so that an adverse shock of standard
magnitude triggers the credit constraint. Tradables consumption falls because agents cannot
borrow as much as they wanted. In turn, at the “initial” level of nontradables output, the
decline in tradables consumption makes the price of nontradables fall. But as this price falls
so does the value of the marginal product of imported inputs, and hence demand for these
inputs and the output of nontradables fall. Up to this point, the credit transmission
mechanism is similar to the one widely studied in Sudden Stop models with balance sheet
effects (e.g., Calvo, 1998). If the price and output of nontradables fall, however, the value of
the total income in units of tradables falls, tightening the constraint further and setting in
motion Irving Fisher’s (1933) classic debt-deflation amplification mechanism.7

     The possibility of endogenous Sudden Stops strengthens precautionary savings
incentives.8 Sudden Stops and the probability of Sudden Stops are endogenous, so agents
make optimal self-insurance plans taking into account the endogenous link between choices
of foreign asset holdings and the magnitude and likelihood of Sudden Stops. As a result, the
economy builds a buffer stock of savings so as to minimize the risk of landing in states of
nature in which debt is high enough for a Sudden Stop to trigger massive consumption
collapses. Hence, we should expect the economy with Sudden Stops to converge to a higher
average of foreign assets than without Sudden Stops. In the quantitative analysis that
follows we explore the differences between these two environments.

     The equilibrium of the two-sector economy in recursive form is characterized by a
decision rule for t+1 foreign assets, b′(b, εT, z), as a deterministic function of date-t assets
and the date-t realization of shocks, that solves this Bellman equation:


7
  Mendoza (2005) provides an illustrative deterministic example of this mechanism. He shows that the
Fisherian deflation converges to a unique equilibrium that amplifies balance sheet effects, resulting in
much larger adjustments in debt, consumption and the nontradables price than a setup with balance
sheet effects but no Fisherian deflation.
8
  Aizenman and Lee (2007) derive an analytical result with similar features in a Diamond-Dybvig-
style model. They showed that a discrete liquidity shock increases the need for precautionary savings.



                                                         -15-
                           ⎪⎧⎪ ⎡                                        1 1−γ                                                    ⎪⎫⎪
                                              −μ                  −μ − ⎤
                             ⎪⎪ ⎢ ⎡⎣ a ( cTt ) + (1 − a )( ctN ) ⎤⎦ μ ⎥                                                            ⎪⎪
                              ⎪⎪ ⎢⎣                                        ⎥⎦                                                       ⎪⎪
           T             ⎪                                                       +                                              ⎪
    V (b, ε , z ) = max ⎨                          1−γ                                                                          ⎬
                    b′,m ⎪                                                                                                      ⎪⎪
                         ⎪⎪                                    ⎛     ⎛                                 1 ⎞⎞                      ⎪
                          ⎪⎪                             exp   ⎜⎜ −v ⎜⎜ ⎡ a ( ct ) + (1 − a)( ct ) ⎤ μ ⎟⎟ E[V (b ′, ε ′, z ′ )]⎪⎪
                                                                               T  −μ           N  −μ  − ⎟⎟           T
                               ⎪⎪                               ⎜⎝ ⎜⎝ ⎣                              ⎦ ⎠⎠⎟⎟
                                                                                                         ⎟⎟                          ⎪⎪
                                ⎩                                                                                                     ⎭

     s.t.        cT = εT yT − b ′ + bR + AT − pmm                                                                                         (14)
                 c N = zZm α + AN
                 b ′ ≥ −κ ⎡⎣ εT yT + (1 − α)pN zZm α ⎤⎦

As in the case of the one-sector model, we solve this Bellman equation for both the BAH
and UE discount factors using value function iteration.9 The grid of bond values B has 1000
evenly-spaced nodes. The Markov process of shocks includes shocks to tradables GDP, which
are in the set εT ∈ { εT1 < εT2 < ... < εTj } with j realizations, and shocks to nontradables TFP,
which are in the set z ∈ { z1 < z 2 < ... < zh } with h realizations. Thus, the transition
probability matrix of these shocks, π ( (εTt +1, zt +1 ) | (εTt , zt ) ) , has dimensions (jxh)x(jxh).

    When the model is solved assuming a frictionless credit market (i.e., without the credit
constraint), the equilibrium relative price of nontradables is determined after the Bellman
equation has been solved. In particular, the policy function b′(b,εT,z) and the resource
constraints can be used to determine the equilibrium consumption allocations of tradables
and nontradables, and the equilibrium price of nontradables follows from eq. (8).

     The case with the credit constraint is more complicated because the equilibrium price of
nontradables needs to be solved for together with the Bellman equation. The algorithm we
use evaluates each candidate choice b ′ ∈ B for each triple in (b,εT,z) in the state space. A
first pass assumes that the constraint does not bind, takes a particular set of values
(b′,b,εT,z) and computes the corresponding cT, cN, m, and pN that satisfy jointly the resource
constraints and conditions (7)-(8). If the credit constraint does not bind, these solutions are
passed on to the Bellman equation’s maximization step, which searches for the value-
maximizing choice of b′ in B. If the constraint binds, we take the corresponding “current”
state triple (b,εT,z) and solve for b′, cT, cN, m and pN that satisfy jointly the resource
constraints, conditions (7)-(8) and the credit constraint with equality. Note that this
nonlinear simultaneous equation system yields, for a given triple (b,εT,z) and all b ′ ∈ B for
which the collateral constraint is violated in the first pass, the same constrained value of b′ .

3.3 Calibration

   The baseline calibration parameters for the two-sector economy are listed in Table 5.
Mendoza (2002) calibrated a model with tradables and nontradables for Mexico using

9
  It is straightforward, but lengthy, to show that the solution to the Bellman equation (14)
corresponds to the competitive equilibrium. In particular, the solution satisfies the Euler equation
(13), the resource constraints (10) and (11), the optimality conditions for demand of imported inputs
(eq. (7)) and sectoral consumption allocations (eq. (8)). Note also that, when the credit constraint
binds, the algorithm uses a pricing function for nontradables that does not depend on b′ .



                                                                   -16-
sectoral data, and our calibration follows closely his. We keep the values γ=2, b=-0.44 and
R=1.059 from the calibration of the one-sector model. The steady-state relative price of
nontradables, the world price of intermediate goods and total GDP in units of tradables are
normalized to pN=1, pm=1 and yT +pNyN-pmm =1. Hence, the steady-state allocations can be
interpreted as ratios relative to total GDP in units of tradables. We use the same elasticity-
of-substitution parameter as Mendoza’s, μ=0.316, which corresponds to an estimate for
Mexico obtained by Ostry and Reinhart (1992). We also set several steady-state sectoral
consumption and production ratios to match Mendoza’s averages obtained from Mexican
data at current prices. The ratio of nontradables-to-tradables GDP is (pNyN-pmm)/yT=1.543,
which given pN=1, pm=1 and yT +pNyN=1 implies that yT=1/(1+1.543)=0.393 and (pNyN-
pmm)=1.543/(1+1.543)=0.607.

     The share of imported input costs to gross output of nontradables is α=0.2. In the
deterministic steady state, this factor share yields a ratio of imported inputs to total GDP of
13 percent, which matches the ratio for Mexico reported in Mendoza (2006b). With α=0.2
and the GDP of nontradables calculated above, gross output of nontradables (i.e.,
nontradables GDP plus imported inputs) is equal to 0.71/(1-α)=0.758. It follows then that
the trend level of TFP in nontradables is equal to Z=0.7581-α/αα=1.106 and then condition
(7) implies that the steady-state level of imported inputs is m=(αZ)1/(1-α)=0.152.

     Mendoza’s (2002) estimates of the sectoral consumption-GDP ratios in Mexican data
are cT/yT=0.665 and pNcN /(pNyN-pmm)=0.71. Given these ratios and the values of tradables
and nontradables GDP, it follows that cT=0.261 and cN=0.431. The value of the coefficient a
in the CES aggregator is set so that pN=1 given the values of μ, cT, and cN. This requires
a=0.341. As in the one-sector model, we introduce constant lump-sum levels of exogenous
absorption AT and AN to make the model consistent with the observed expenditure shares of
investment and government expenditures. In addition, these transfers redistribute income
across sectors so that the private sectoral consumption shares match those in the data.
Hence, AT is set so that the calibrated values of yT, cT, m, b and R are consistent with the
steady-state resource constraint for tradables: AT=yT+br-m-cT=-0.046. Similarly, AN is set so
that yN and cN are consistent with the nontradables resource constraint: AN=yN-cN=0.328.

     The time preference elasticity in the UE setup is ρUE = ln(R)/ ln(1 + C (cT , c N )) = 0.1867 .
This implies the same steady-state subjective discount factor as in the one-sector model
(0.944). In the BAH setup, we set φ =-0.7 and β=0.94395 (or ρBAH = 0.0594 ) so as to match
Mexico’s mean of net foreign assets and variability of aggregate consumption.

     The data necessary to construct a reliable estimate of TFP shocks in the nontradables
sector are not available. Hence we followed Mendoza (2006b) in using a two-stage
“identification-by-simulation” strategy: In the first stage, we proxy TFP shocks in
nontradables with nontradables GDP, and use THQA to construct a Markov process for εT
and z to approximate a VAR(1) estimated with the HP-filtered cyclical components of
tradables and nontradables GDP from Mexican data for the 1965-2005 period. The
nontradables sector is defined as services plus industry minus manufacturing. The VAR
model is yt = ρ ⋅ yt −1 + et where yt′=[ytT ytN ], ρ is a 2x2 matrix of autocorrelation coefficients,
and et′=[etT etN ] is a vector of error terms with variance-covariance matrix cova(e). The
estimates of ρ and cova(e) are:




                                                -17-
                           ⎡ 1.088 * 0.564 * ⎤                  ⎡ 0.000601 0.000472 ⎤
                     ρ = ⎢⎢                  ⎥ , cova(e ) =
                                             ⎥
                                                                ⎢                   ⎥
                                                                ⎢ 0.000472 0.000572 ⎥            (15)
                             −0.655 * 0.154                     ⎣⎢                  ⎥⎦
                          ⎣⎢                 ⎥⎦

An asterisk denotes coefficients that are statistically significant at the 99 percent confidence
level. Interestingly, the VAR results indicate that most of the persistence in the fluctuations
of nontradables GDP follows from spillovers from tradables GDP (since the autocorrelation
term for nontradables GDP is not significantly different from zero).

      The unconditional standard deviations of tradables and nontradables output in the data
are σyT = 0.0336 and σyN = 0.0327 , the first-order autocorrelations are ρyT = 0.575 and
 ρy N = 0.603 , and the correlation between the two is ρyT ,y N = 0.772 . Thus cyclical fluctuations
in the output of the two sectors have similar magnitude and persistence, and they are
positively correlated with each other. Passing the estimates in (15) to the TQHA program
and using three realizations for εT and z (which imply 9 (εT,z) pairs) we obtain a Markov
process that, after solving the model, produces standard deviations of 0.0301 and 0.0246 for
GDP of tradables and nontradables respectively, with serial autocorrelations of 0.539 for
tradables and 0.577 for nontradables, and correlation between the two equal to 0.791. Thus,
using nontradables GDP as a proxy for nontradables TFP we obtained a Markov process
that approximates well the actual cyclical behavior of each sector’s GDP, except that the
variability of nontradables GDP (which is endogenous in the model) is underestimated—the
model yields 2.46 percent instead of 3.27 percent in the data.

     The second stage of the identification process adjusts the elements of ρ and cova(e) that
involve nontradables TFP so as to produce a baseline simulation of the model that yields a
closer approximation to the unconditional moments of tradables and nontradables GDP in
the data (particularly the standard deviation of the latter). We leave unchanged the
elements of ρ that were statistically significant in the results reported in (15). The closest
approximation to the moments in the data produced the following unconditional moments:
σˆyT = 0.0334 , σˆy N = 0.0305 , ρˆyT = 0.587 , ρˆy N = 0.483 , and ρˆyT ,y N = 0.516 . The identifying
restrictions that produced these results imply the following VAR structure for tradables
GDP and nontradables TFP:
                            ⎡ 1.088 0.564 ⎤                    ⎡ 0.000601 0.00055 ⎤
                        ρ = ⎢⎢                ⎥ , cova(e ) =   ⎢                  ⎥              (16)
                                −0.655 0.300 ⎥⎥                ⎢ 0.00055 0.0012 ⎥
                             ⎣⎢               ⎦                ⎣                  ⎦

3.4 Baseline Results

     Table 7 reports the business cycle moments that characterize the stochastic steady state
of the two-sector model with production under BAH and UE preferences. The table shows
moments for foreign assets, the current account-output ratio, the price of nontradadables,
imports of intermediate goods, and sectoral and aggregate consumption and output.
Consumption of tradables is less volatile than tradables output, and consumption of
nontradables, for which there is no storage technology that can be used to smooth
consumption, is more volatile than nontradables output. Aggregate consumption in units of
tradables is less volatile than output (also in units of tradables) with UE preferences, but
more volatile than output with BAH preferences. Both consumption and output in units of
tradables are more volatile with BAH preferences than with UE preferences.




                                                   -18-
      In terms of matching key characteristics of actual business cycles, the two sector model
improves upon the one-sector model in two important respects: First, it produces
countercyclical fluctuations in the current account and net exports. The correlations of the
current account-output ratio with output in units of tradables are -0.14 and -0.48 with UE
and BAH preferences, respectively. Hence, agents in this model economy build up debt in
the expansion phase of the business cycle, which is an important feature of the dynamics of
debt observed in emerging economies. Second, the model is also in line with the data in
predicting large, procyclical and persistent fluctuations in the relative price of nontradables
(i.e., the real exchange rate). The coefficients of variation of the price of nontradables are 6.7
and 8.1 percent with UE and BAH preferences respectively, more than twice the variability
of output in units of tradables, and the correlations with output in units of tradables are
0.75 and 0.88 respectively. The first-order autocorrelation of the price of nontradables is
almost 0.5 with both preferences specifications.

     The two-sector model is consistent with the one-sector model in predicting that
precautionary savings are larger in the BAH setup than in the UE setup (25.3 percent of the
long-run average of GDP in the former v. 1.6 percent in the latter). Moreover, comparing
across the one-sector and two-sector models, the UE setup shows that precautionary savings
are lower in the two-sector economy (2.5 percent in the one-sector model v. 1.6 percent in
the two-sector model). Precautionary savings in the BAH one-sector and two-sector baseline
economies are not easily comparable because they were calibrated with different values of φ.
We show below, however, that when the comparison is made for common debt limits, the
BAH setup also predicts that precautionary savings are generally smaller in the two-sector
model than in the one-sector model. We will also show that this result is related to an
implicit hedge provided by the equilibrium co-movement between the incomes from
tradables and nontradables.

3.5 Revisiting the Effects of Volatility and Financial Globalization on Foreign Assets

     The conclusions derived from the one-sector model regarding the effects of business
cycle volatility and financial globalization on foreign assets extend to the two-sector
production economy. Increases in the volatility of tradables output and/or nontradables
TFP can lead to large increases in the long-run average of foreign assets. However, the data
do not show evidence of systematic volatility changes in this direction in Sudden Stop
countries (in light of this and to save space we do not add tables and charts showing the
results of our numerical analysis for the effects of volatility changes in the two-sector
model). Table 3 shows that the volatility of tradables GDP increased in about half of the
Sudden Stop countries, but only in five of them are the increases of the size that the model
with either BAH or UE preferences would need to predict large changes in reserves.
Volatility in the nontradables sector has increased only in a few of the Sudden Stop
countries, with the median showing virtually no change. Hence, we conclude again that,
while the model predicts that increases in output volatility could explain large increases in
foreign asset positions, there is no systematic evidence in the data showing that output
volatility has increased nearly as much the model would require, and in several countries it
has fallen or remained about the same (particularly in the nontradables sector).

     Figure 8 shows the effects of financial globalization on the long-run average of foreign
assets and precautionary savings in the two-sector model with BAH and UE preferences. We




                                               -19-
also include plots for the one-sector model for comparison. The two main results from the
one-sector model are preserved: (1) financial globalization produces large increases in the
foreign asset position, which increase at a linear rate with UE preferences, and at a sharply
increasing rate in the BAH setup; (2) precautionary savings also rise at a fast increasing rate
in the BAH setup while they are nearly invariant to the degree of financial globalization in
the UE setup.

     Comparing across one- and two-sector models we find that with BAH preferences both
the long-run average of foreign assets and precautionary savings are uniformly smaller in the
two-sector economy. With UE preferences, however, mean foreign assets are smaller in the
one-sector model at levels of barriers to capital mobility equivalent to taxes of 10 percent or
more. At lower taxes the one- and two-sector models with UE preferences predict about the
same long-run averages of foreign assets. By contrast, precautionary savings are uniformly
smaller in the two-sector UE setup. Despite these differences, the effects of financial
globalization on mean foreign assets and precautionary saving remain large, particularly as
financial globalization approaches the full removal of barriers to international asset trading.

     The smaller precautionary savings effects in the two-sector model reflect the fact that
the equilibrium correlation between tradables income and nontradables income valued at
tradables goods prices is negative (at about -0.4 in both UE and BAH setups). Hence, when
the economy suffers a negative shock to tradables GDP, the value of nontradables income
rises providing an implicit hedge that reduces the need for precautionary savings. Since yT
and yN are positively correlated, the negative correlation between yT and pNyN is driven by
the negative correlations between the price of nontradables and the output of each sector. In
turn, these price correlations depend on the elasticity of substitution between tradadables
and nontradables in consumption and on the response of the supply of nontradable goods,
which depends on technology parameters and the price of imported inputs.

     In conclusion, in our two-sector model, financial globalization remains an important
factor that could account for large increases in the foreign asset positions observed in
Sudden Stop economies. In this case, however, the increases are less pronounced than in the
one-sector model because the endogenous fluctuations in the price and output of notradables
provide an implicit hedge that reduces the need for precautionary savings.

3.6 Self-Insurance against Sudden Stops: How large should the war-chest be?

     We move now to quantify the changes in precautionary demand for foreign assets
induced by the introduction of Sudden Stop risk. We consider a baseline scenario in which
the collateral constraint limits debt not to exceed 50 percent of GDP valued in units of
tradables (κ=0.5). Table 7 shows the business cycle moments of the stochastic steady states
under BAH and UE preferences. A standard finding from the debt-deflation models of
Sudden Stops is that long-run business cycle statistics are not altered significantly by credit-
market imperfections. A comparison of the moments with and without credit constraints in
Table 7 shows that this is the case here as well. Hence, the model’s endogenous Sudden
Stops are infrequent (but positive probability) events nested within “normal” business
cycles, and these business cycles are approximately the same as those that would be
observed in the absence of credit constraints.




                                              -20-
     In terms of the long-run average of foreign assets and precautionary savings, the long-
run average of assets in the BAH (UE) setup increases from -44.7 (-42.4) percent without
Sudden Stop risk to -24.3 (-37.8) percent when Sudden Stops are possible. Since in the UE
setup the deterministic stationary state of foreign assets is the same with or without credit
constraints, precautionary savings with UE preferences increase by the same amount as the
long-run average of foreign assets: -37.8-(-42.4)=4.6 percent. Thus, with UE preferences the
risk of Sudden Stops leads to an increase in precautionary asset holdings of about 4.6
percent of long-run GDP.

     Quantifying the change in precautionary savings with BAH preferences is less obvious
because the debt limit (which is also the debt to which the economy converges in the long
run in the absence of uncertainty) changes from -0.7 without Sudden Stop risk to -0.5 with
Sudden Stop risk. The long-run average of foreign assets rises 20.4 percentage points of GDP
from one scenario to the other, but since the credit limit itself rises by 20 percentage points,
the overall change in precautionary savings is only about ½ of a percentage point. Hence,
relative to the corresponding credit limits, precautionary savings are about the same with or
without Sudden Stop risk in the BAH setup. However, if we consider the build up of
precautionary asset holdings from the perspective of an economy where Sudden Stop risk has
just been introduced, the model predicts that agents would need to build up their war-chest
of foreign assets by 20.4 percentage points of GDP in the long-run. This “transitional”
measure of the extra precautionary savings that need to be accumulated as a result of the
structural change implied by the introduction of Sudden Stop risk is perhaps a better
measure of the effect that Sudden Stops have on self-insurance in the BAH setup.

     Figure 9 illustrates Sudden Stop dynamics under the two preference specifications. The
plots illustrate the amplification and persistence of the response of the model’s endogenous
variables to shocks of standard magnitude when the credit constraint binds. To be precise,
the plots show the differences in percent deviations from long-run averages in the economy
with credit constraints relative to the economy with perfect credit markets in response to
initial negative shocks to tradables output and nontradables TFP, and conditional on an
initial debt ratio at which the credit constraint binds. The shocks are the pair (εT,z) in the
Markov chain that yields the closest approximation to one-standard-deviation shocks.10 The
initial foreign asset position is -48.7 percent of long-run GDP. The probability of reaching
this debt ratio in the long run is 0.9 (1.1) percent in the BAH (UE) setup.

    The foreign assets plot illustrates the dynamics of precautionary savings. Initially, both
BAH and UE setups show negative values because the initial foreign assets (-0.487) are
smaller than the corresponding long-run averages by a larger gap when credit constraints are
present than when they are absent. In the UE setup the gap is about -4 percentage points of
GDP initially, while in the BAH setup the gap is nearly five times larger in absolute value.
This result reflects the smaller change in mean foreign assets relative to perfect credit
markets in the UE setup. In terms of persistence, foreign assets take a long time to converge.
In the BAH setup, a gap of about -4 percentage points of GDP still remains after 50 years.
In contrast, the negative gap closes in about 5 years in the UE setup, but after that the gap


10
  Since the discrete Markov chain is not a perfect approximation, the shocks are equivalent to 1.25
and 1.05 times the standard deviation of tradables output and nontradables TFP respectively.



                                               -21-
climbs to 1.5 percent and returns to zero very slowly. This moderate “overshooting” of the
asset position is an implication of the endogenous rate of time preference.

     The plots for the current account-output ratio, nontradables consumption, the price of
nontradables, aggregate consumption and total output in units of tradables illustrate the
ability of the debt-deflation mechanism to produce endogenous Sudden Stops in response to
one-standard-deviation shocks. Qualitatively, the features of the Sudden Stops are identical
in the BAH and UE setups: a current account reversal, a collapse in the price of
nontradables, and declines in sectoral and aggregate consumption and output, all of which
represent amplified responses to the shocks induced by the Fisherian debt deflation.
Quantitatively, the BAH setup produces larger Sudden Stops than the UE setup. In the
BAH (UE) setup, the current account reversal reaches 3.5 (2.5) percentage points of GDP,
the fall in nontradables output is about 2.5 (1.5) percent, the real depreciation is 9 (6)
percent, the decline in aggregate consumption is 5 (3) percent and the drop in output is 7
(5) percent.

    The transitional dynamics in Figure 9 show that Sudden Stop economies can go through
prolonged periods in which they build up foreign assets, display persistent current account
surpluses, and maintain undervalued real exchange rates, and these “imbalances” grow
smaller gradually over time. The qualitative features of this adjustment are consistent with
the recent experience of several Sudden Stop countries, particularly in Asia. Moreover, the
current account surplus and undervalued real exchange rate are by-products of the build up
of precautionary savings in the aftermath of Sudden Stops, or following financial
globalization. They do not require intentional exchange rate management by central banks.

     The plots in Figure 9 illustrate Sudden Stops from a particular initial condition of
foreign assets (i.e. -48.7 percent of long-run GDP). There are many other debt positions,
however, that also trigger Sudden Stops. Figure 10 shows the current account reversals and
price collapses that occur on impact when negative one-standard-deviation εT and z shocks
hit the economy at different initial conditions of foreign assets. For values of b ≥ -0.482, the
credit constraint does not bind and hence there is zero amplification and no Sudden Stops.
For -0.578<b <-0.482, the constraint binds and there are Sudden Stops. This Sudden Stop
region can be split into two parts. One part includes Sudden Stops that are so large (with
current account reversals of up to 100 percentage points of GDP) that precautionary savings
rules them out in the long run. In Figure 10, this part of the Sudden Stop region is defined
by foreign asset positions to the left of the long-run probability borders of the UE and BAH
setups (which are located at about the 50 percent debt ratio in both cases). The second part
of the Sudden Stop region is on the right side of these borders. This is the “long-run Sudden
Stop region,” where there are Sudden Stops with positive long-run probability. This region
includes the case illustrated in Figure 9 as well as other Sudden Stop episodes that produce
effects more than twice as large.11 The cumulative probability of all long-run Sudden Stop
states is 3.88 (7.85) percent in the BAH (UE) setup.



11
  The initial condition b/y=-0.487 used in Fig. 9 is almost at the border of the long-run Sudden Stop
region with the region where the credit constraint does not bind, so it produces a relatively moderate
Sudden Stop (which is also closer to the magnitudes observed in the data).



                                                -22-
      Once the economy hits a debt position at which standard shocks trigger a Sudden Stop,
how long does it take for precautionary accumulation of foreign assets to provide enough
self-insurance to minimize the probability of returning to that debt position? The answer to
this question is illustrated in Figure 11. This figure plots the transitional CDFs of foreign
assets for the BAH and UE setups starting from the initial asset position that generated the
Sudden Stop shown in Figure 9 (-48.7 percent of GDP). The probability of reaching this
debt ratio is minimized when the economy reaches the stochastic steady state (as noted
before, the long-run probabilities of b=-0.487 are 1.1 and 0.9 percent in the UE and BAH
setups respectively). The CDF plots for the BAH and UE setups show that this process
takes more than 15 years. After two years, the probability of hitting again the -48.7 percent
debt ratio is 21 percent in the UE setup and 40 percent in the BAH setup. After 15 years,
the probability is 3.4 percent in the UE setup and 4.7 percent in the BAH setup. Thus, the
model predicts that, while precautionary savings provide substantial self-insurance to reduce
the probability of Sudden Stops sharply in the long run, the process of building this war-
chest of assets is long and gradual.

4.     Conclusions

     This paper examines the recent surge in foreign reserves in Sudden Stop countries from
the perspective of a dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium framework of optimal
precautionary demand for foreign assets in a small open economy. The framework allows for
two formulations of preferences with different implications for self-insurance behavior (the
Bewley-Aiygari-Hugget setup and the Uzawa-Epstein setup). We use this framework to
study a one-sector endowment economy and a two-sector production economy with “liability
dollarization” (i.e., debt denominated in units of tradables but leveraged partly on the
income from the nontradables sector). The two-sector model features a credit constraint that
produces endogenous Sudden Stops driven by Irving Fisher’s debt-deflation mechanism. The
constraint limits debt not to exceed a fraction of total income in units of tradables. When
the constraint binds, the price and income of the nontradables sector collapse and this
reduces further the agents’ ability to borrow. As a result, the responses of macroeconomic
variables to shocks of standard magnitude show significant amplification and persistence.

     The self-insurance framework studied in this paper features three key mechanisms that
drive precautionary demand for foreign assets: increases in the cyclical volatility of output,
international financial integration, and Sudden Stop risk. Our quantitative analysis shows
that all three mechanisms can produce large changes in foreign asset holdings. Output
volatility cannot explain the observed surge in reserves, however, because output volatility
has not increased in Sudden Stop countries. By contrast, financial integration and Sudden
Stop risk produce large increases in foreign asset holdings that are comparable to observed
surges in reserves, and the data do show that the process of far-reaching financial
globalization and the emergence of Sudden Stop risk coincided with the build up of reserves.

     We also found that the adjustments in foreign assets and key macroeconomic aggregates
triggered by financial globalization and Sudden Stop risk follow a protracted and gradual
process. This process features persistent current account surpluses and undervalued real
exchange rates that are reverted slowly. The probability of Sudden Stops declines slowly, as
it takes over 50 years to attain its minimum level in the long run. Financial globalization
also progresses in nonlinear fashion in the economy with BAH preferences. In its early



                                             -23-
stages, large changes in barriers to global asset trading produce small changes in foreign
asset positions, but as a regime of perfect capital mobility is approached, small changes in
restrictions affecting global asset markets produce large changes in asset positions.

     The two-sector production economy has interesting implications for business cycle co-
movements and precautionary savings. The model yields countercyclical fluctuations in the
current account and net exports, and large, persistent fluctuations in the real exchange rate.
In addition, the model features an implicit hedging mechanism because tradables income and
nontradables income in units of tradables are negatively correlated at equilibrium. Hence,
when an adverse, non-diversifiable shock hits tradables income, the value of nontradables
income rises, and the higher consumption of nontradables offsets some of the adverse effect
of the fall in tradables income. As a result, the buffer stocks of assets implied by
precautionary savings are smaller in the two-sector model than in the one-sector model.
This outcome, however, depends on the elasticity of substitution between tradables and
nontradables in consumption, and on features of preferences and technology that drive the
equilibrium of the market of nontradables.

     One caveat of our analysis of financial globalization is that we abstract from efficiency
gains. If an emerging economy that opens the capital account has relatively little capital, its
marginal return will be high and this would trigger an investment boom that gives an
incentive to borrow instead of saving. The investment boom, however, should not be directly
attributed to financial integration but to the removal of distortions on capital accumulation.
Mendoza and Tesar (1998) and Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) showed that the efficiency
and welfare gains of removing these distortions, even when the economy is in financial
autarky, are much larger than the extra gains that result from the shift from financial
autarky to financial globalization. A second caveat is that we did not consider the possibility
of sovereign default. Alfaro and Kanczuk (2006) showed, however, that given the choice of a
portfolio of “defaultable debt” and reserve assets, the optimal choice is to hold zero reserves.
Hence, default considerations do not seem useful for explaining the surge in reserves.

     Precautionary demand for foreign assets arises from distortions on financial markets
(incomplete insurance markets, credit constraints, etc.), and hence it is suboptimal from a
normative standpoint. This raises two important normative questions that we did not
address in this paper: What are the welfare costs that result from these distortions? And,
are there policy strategies that can yield outcomes sufficiently superior, relative to
precautionary savings under the status quo, to outweigh their implementation costs?

      Results in the literature shed some light on these questions. On one hand, the classic
Lucas result showing that the welfare cost of consumption volatility in representative-agent
models with CRRA utility is negligible, regardless of the asset market structure and as long
as growth and business cycles are unrelated, suggests that the overall welfare cost of
precautionary savings should be small. Indeed, international Real-Business-Cycle models
predict that the cost of moving from perfect world capital markets to financial autarky is
negligible on average over the long run. On the other hand, Durdu and Mendoza (2006)
showed that welfare costs conditional on a Sudden Stop state are high. They also found,
however, that attempting to prevent these Sudden Stops with a credit facility that aims to
defuse the debt-deflation process can result in distortions with even larger costs, unless the
facility functions with a complex state-contingent policy. Caballero and Panageas (2006)




                                              -24-
showed that precautionary savings can be highly undesirable for emerging economies that
hope to attain higher long-run growth rates, and in this case arrangements that can provide
financing when Sudden Stops hit are welfare-improving.

     If we move away from the representative-agent paradigm, the costs of precautionary
savings and financial globalization for countries with underdeveloped financial systems can
be large, and distributed regressively across the population (see Mendoza et al. (2007)). The
best policy response is to promote the development of domestic financial systems in
emerging economies. Beyond this obvious response, the class of policy recommendations that
are effective for dealing with the adverse distributional implications of financial globalization
without financial development are yet to be identified.

     In the final analysis, we conclude that the argument behind the New Merchantilism is
only partially correct. On one hand, our findings do show that the aim to minimize Sudden
Stop risk can lead to a surge in foreign asset holdings. On the other hand, the New
Merchantilism cannot be defended by arguing that business cycle volatility has increased,
because this is not observed in the data. The New Mechantilism also fails inasmuch as
frameworks like ours, or the one developed by Mendoza et al (2007), predict that financial
globalization can be a strong driving force of the rise in reserves. Self-insurance behavior is
part of the mechanism by which globalization affects foreign asset holdings in these models,
but this is unrelated to a desire to build a war-chest for defense against Sudden Stops.
Instead, it is a consequence of the removal of barriers to global asset trading given the
underdevelopment of the financial markets that agents in Sudden Stop economies can access.




                                              -25-
                                       References

Aiyagari, S. Rao, (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, v. 109, No. 3, pp. 17-31.
Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee, (2007), “International Reserves: Precautionary Versus
    Mercantilist Views, Theory and Evidence,” Open Economies Review, forthcoming.
Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk (2006), “Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign
    Debt,” mimeo, Harvard Business School.
Caballero, Ricardo and Stavros Panageas, (2006), “Hedging Sudden Stops and
    Precautionary Contractions,” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Calvo, Guillermo A., (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
    Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, v.1, pp 35-54.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis Mejia, (2004), “On the Empirics of
    Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Papers 10520,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge: MA.
Cavallo, Eduardo and Jeffrey Frankel, (2004), “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries
    More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,”
    Mimeo. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. Cambridge: MA.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito, (2005), “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
    Controls, Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics,
    forthcoming.
Choi, Woon Gyu and David Cook (2003), “Liability Dollarization and the Bank Balance
    Sheet Channel,” Journal of International Economics, vol. 64(2), pp. 247-275.
Choi, Woon Gyu, Sunil Sharma, and Maria Stromqvist (2007), “Capital Flows, Financial
    Integration, and International Reserve Holdings: The Recent Experience of Emerging
    Markets and Advanced Economies,” IMF Working Paper.
Dooley Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, (2003), “An essay on the revived
    Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working paper No. 9971.
Durdu, C. Bora, (2006), “Quantitative Implications of Indexed Bonds in Small Open
    Economies,” working paper 2006-12, Congressional Budget Office, Washington D.C.
Durdu, C. Bora and Enrique G. Mendoza, (2006), “Are Asset Price Guarantees Useful for
    Preventing Sudden Stops?: The Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard Tradeoff of Asset
    Price Guarantees,” Journal of International Economics, v. 69, pp. 84-119.
Edwards, Sebastian (2005), “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account
    Reversals,”NBER Working Paper 11170.
Epstein, Larry G., (1983), “Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under
    Uncertainity,” Journal of Economic Theory, v. 31, pp. 133-152.
Fisher, Irving (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 1,
    337-57.
Fogli, Allessandra and Fabrizio Perri, (2006), “The Great Moderation and the US External
    Imbalances,” NBER Working Papers 12708, National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge: MA.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, (2006), “The Elusive Gains from
    International Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 73(3), pp. 715-
    740.
Hugget, Mark, (1993), “The Risk Free Rate in Heterogenous-Agent, Incomplete-Insurance
    Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, v. 17(5-6), pp. 953-969.




                                           -26-
Jeanne, Olivier, (2007), “International Reserves in Emerging Markets Countries: Too Much
    of a Good Thing?,” forthcoming, Brookings Papers in Economic Activity.
Jeanne, Olivier and Romain Rancière, (2006), “The Optimal Level of International Reserves
    for Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications,” IMF Working Paper
    06/229, Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Korinek, Anton, (2007), “Excessive Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets: Balance Sheet
    Effects and Macroeconomic Externalities,” draft, Columbia University.
Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad and Marco Terrones, (2003), “Financial Integration and
    Macroeconomic Volatility,” IMF Staff Papers, v. 50, Special Issue, pp. 119-142.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, (2006), “The External Wealth of Nations
    Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004”.
    IMF Working Paper 06/69.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, (2004), Recursive Macroeconomic Theory,
   Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mendoza, Enrique G., (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden
    Stop.” In Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, Jeffrey and
    Sebastian Edwards eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mendoza, Enrique G., (2005), “Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the Price of Nontradables
    in Sudden-Stop Prone Economies,” Economia, fall, pp. 103-148.
Mendoza, Enrique G., (2006a), “Lessons from the Debt-Deflation Theory of Sudden Stops,”
    NBER Working Papers 11966, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge: MA.
Mendoza, Enrique G., (2006b), “Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with
    Collateral Constraints: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s Q,” NBER Working Papers
    12564, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge: MA.
Mendoza Enrique G. and Linda Tesar, (1998), “The International Ramifications of Tax
    Reforms; Supply-Side Economics in a Global Economy,” American Economic Review, v.
    88, pp. 226-245.
Mendoza, Enrique G,. Vincenzo Quadrini and Jose Victor Rios-Rull (2007), “Financial
    Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” NBER Working Papers 12909,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge: MA.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin (2000), “Current Account Reversals and
    Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities.” In Currency Crises, Paul Krugram ed.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ostry, Jonathan D. and Carmen M. Reinhart (1992), “Private Saving and Terms of Trade
    Shocks,” IMF Staff Papers, 39, 495-517.
Rothemberg, Alexander and Francis E. Warnock, (2006), “Sudden Flight and True Sudden
    Stops,” NBER Working Paper 12726, National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge: MA.
Tauchen, George, Robert Hussey, (1991), “Quadrature-based Methods for Obtaining
    Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, v. 59, no. 2,
    371-396.
Uribe, Martin, (2006), “Individual Versus Aggregate Collateral Constraints and the
    Overborrowing Syndrome,” NBER working papers 12260 Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge: MA.
Uribe, Martin and Zhanwei Vivian Yue, (2006), “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries:
    Who Drives Whom?,” Journal of International Economics, v. 69, 6-36.




                                           -27-
     Table 1. International Reserve Position in Sudden Stop Economies 1/
                                         (Percent of GDP)



Country                 Year of Sudden         Before 3/          After 4/   Difference
                                    2/
                             Stop

Argentina I                   1994              3.20               8.62         5.42
Argentina II                  2001               5.04              11.54       6.51
Brazil                        1998              4.36               7.65         3.30
Chile                         1998              16.93              20.49        3.57
Colombia                      1998              9.24               12.21        2.97
Ecuador                       1999               7.35               3.89       -3.46
Hong Kong                     1998              34.16              68.85       34.69
Indonesia                     1997               6.53              18.69       12.17
Korea                         1997               5.03              21.26       16.23
Mexico                        1994              4.64               7.29         2.65
Malaysia                      1997              25.18              39.54       14.36
Pakistan                      1998              1.90               8.51        6.61
Peru                          1998              9.25               16.66       7.41
Philippines                   1997               6.05              16.69       10.65
Russia                        1998              3.05               12.46        9.41
Thailand                      1997              14.84              28.01       13.17
Turkey                        2001               5.67              13.57       7.90
Uruguay                       2002               7.18              20.06       12.87

Median                                           6.29              15.12       7.66
Median Asian Countries                           6.53              21.26       13.17

Source: Authors' calculations
1/
 Refers to the emerging market economies that experienced a sudden stop during the
past two-decades.
2/
  We include Sudden Stop episodes that are included in various empirical studies of
Sudden Stops, such as Calvo, et. al. (2004), Cavallo and Frankel (2004), and Rothenberg
and Warnock (2006).
3/
     Covers the period since 1985 to the year before the sudden stop.
4/
     Covers the period since the year after the sudden stop till 2004.
                                           Table 2. Business Cycles and Financial Globalization

                                                             Output                               Consumption relative to Output
                                                      Pre-                                                  Pre-
                                                  Globalization Globalization                           Globalization Globalization
                                        Full          (1)           (2)       Ratio (1)/(2)   Full          (1)           (2)       Ratio (1)/(2)


Industrial Countries

 United States                         1.90           2.38            1.57        1.52        0.89          0.83           0.98         0.85
 United Kingdom                        1.90           2.01            2.00        1.01        1.21          1.15           1.28         0.90
 France                                1.22           1.13            1.49        0.76        0.97          0.94           0.95         0.99
 Germany                               1.68           2.02            1.51        1.34        0.94          1.02           0.77         1.32
 Japan                                 2.62           3.29            1.98        1.66        0.70          0.68           0.72         0.95

Mean Industrial Countries              2.14           2.33            2.10        1.11        1.03          1.08           1.00         1.08
Median Industrial Countries            1.90           2.01            1.90        1.06        0.99          1.11           0.96         1.15

EME

                          1/
Sudden Stop Countries

 Argentina                             5.48           3.46            7.20        0.48        1.68          3.44           1.00         3.45
 Brazil                                4.14           5.28            2.70        1.95        1.34          0.99           2.30         0.43
 Chile                                 4.88           6.79            2.98        2.28        1.98          1.95           1.46         1.34
 Colombia                              2.26           2.33            2.47        0.94        1.23          1.00           1.34         0.74
 Ecuador                               3.15           3.93            2.62        1.50        0.89          0.89           0.87         1.03
 Mexico                                3.27           3.67            3.06        1.20        1.14          0.99           1.38         0.72
 Peru                                  5.19           3.51            7.13        0.49        1.03          0.77           1.00         0.77
 Uruguay                               5.45           6.48            5.25        1.24        1.29          1.17           1.41         0.84
 Hong Kong                             3.50           3.78            3.12        1.21        1.09          1.20           1.08         1.11
 Indonesia                             4.11           2.81            5.32        0.53        1.51          2.51           1.12         2.25
 Korea                                 3.19           3.36            2.90        1.16        1.24          1.10           1.53         0.72
 Malaysia                              3.54           2.64            4.66        0.57        1.61          1.75           1.54         1.13
 Pakistan                              2.18           2.63            1.72        1.53        2.25          2.39           1.76         1.36
 Philippines                           3.33           4.16            2.88        1.44        0.54          0.52           0.58         0.89
 Thailand                              4.23           2.44            5.97        0.41        1.03          1.09           1.02         1.07
 Turkey                                3.52           3.40            4.06        0.84        1.43          1.13           1.60         0.71

 Mean SSC                              3.84           3.79            4.00        1.11        1.33          1.43           1.31         1.16
 Median SSC                            3.53           3.48            3.09        1.18        1.26          1.12           1.36         0.96

Mean EME's                             3.77           3.75            3.64        1.03        1.30          1.42          1.26          1.12
Median EME's                           3.53           3.57            3.09        1.15        1.27          1.18          1.19          0.99

 Source: Authors' calculations. Pre-Globalization and Globalization refer to the 1966-1985 and 1986-2005 periods, respectively.
 1/
      See Table 1 for a definition of sudden stop countries.
                                          Table 3. Sectoral Volatility and Financial Globalization

                                                     Tradable Output                                    Non-tradable Output
                                                      Pre-                                                  Pre-
                                                  Globalization Globalization                           Globalization Globalization
                                        Full          (1)           (2)       Ratio (1)/(2)   Full          (1)           (2)       Ratio (1)/(2)


Industrial Countries

 United States                         3.93           4.52          3.50          1.29        1.47          1.30           1.62         0.81
 United Kingdom                        4.91           6.43          3.54          1.81        2.07          2.37           1.81         1.30
 France                                4.19           4.97          3.62          1.37        1.24          0.88           1.48         0.60
 Germany                               2.82           2.54          3.07          0.83        1.44          1.57           1.38         1.14
 Japan                                 3.68           4.06          3.75          1.08        2.51          3.23           1.68         1.92

Mean Industrial Countries              3.39           3.68          3.25          1.13        1.03          1.08           1.00         1.08
Median Industrial Countries            3.34           3.84          3.25          1.18        0.99          1.11           0.96         1.15

EME

                          1/
Sudden Stop Countries

 Argentina                             5.48           3.93          6.92          0.57        5.24          3.81           6.54         0.58
 Brazil                                4.44           4.50          4.39          1.02        4.03          4.85           3.12         1.55
 Chile                                 5.99             .           5.99            .         3.74            .            3.74           .
 Colombia                              4.82           2.83          6.34          0.45        3.15          2.21           3.99         0.55
 Ecuador                               6.80           4.74          8.60          0.55        5.45          5.80           5.07         1.14
 Mexico                                3.36           3.07          3.70          0.83        3.27          3.53           3.00         1.18
 Peru                                  5.74           4.72          7.38          0.64        5.05          3.32           6.94         0.48
 Uruguay                               5.98           6.41          6.46          0.99        5.80          6.88           5.59         1.23
 Hong Kong                             5.33             .           5.33            .         2.06            .            2.06           .
 Indonesia                             3.02           2.55          3.56          0.72        5.30          3.91           6.74         0.58
 Korea                                 4.59           5.11          4.17          1.22        2.79          2.74           2.84         0.97
 Malaysia                              4.17           3.33          4.81          0.69        4.58          3.23           5.28         0.61
 Pakistan                              2.62           3.27          2.22          1.47        2.49          3.02           1.47         2.06
 Philippines                           3.08           3.78          2.74          1.38        3.98          5.06           3.25         1.56
 Thailand                              4.03           2.88          5.42          0.53        4.76          2.96           6.59         0.45
 Turkey                                3.44           3.12          3.75          0.83        3.72          4.06           3.50         1.16

 Mean SSC                              4.56           3.87          5.11          0.85        4.09          3.95           4.36         1.01
 Median SSC                            4.52           3.56          5.07          0.77        4.00          3.67           3.87         1.06

Mean EME's                             4.51           4.04          4.82          0.84        4.22          4.37          3.67          1.19
Median EME's                           4.43           3.78          4.28          0.88        3.93          3.91          3.38          1.16

 Source: Authors' calculations. Pre-Globalization and Globalization refer to the 1966-1985 and 1986-2005 periods, respectively.
 1/
      See Table 1 for a definition of sudden stop countries.
                                       Table 4. Volatility--Relative to the US

                                                    Output                             Consumption
                                                      Pre-                                   Pre-
                                                  Globalization Globalization            Globalization Globalization
                                        Full          (1)           (2)         Full         (1)           (2)


Industrial Countries

 United States                         1.00           1.00          1.00        1.00         1.00          1.00
 United Kingdom                        1.00           0.85          1.27        1.36         1.18          1.66
 France                                0.64           0.47          0.95        0.69         0.54          0.92
 Germany                               0.88           0.85          0.96        0.93         1.05          0.76
 Japan                                 1.38           1.38          1.26        1.07         1.14          0.93

Mean Industrial Countries              1.13           0.98          1.34        1.03         1.08          1.00
Median Industrial Countries            1.00           0.85          1.21        0.99         1.11          0.96

EME

                           1/
Sudden Stop Countries

 Argentina                             2.88           1.45          4.59        5.42         6.04          4.68
 Brazil                                2.18           2.22          1.72        3.25         2.65          4.04
 Chile                                 2.56           2.86          1.90        5.67         6.71          2.83
 Colombia                              1.19           0.98          1.57        1.63         1.18          2.16
 Ecuador                               1.66           1.65          1.67        1.65         1.77          1.48
 Mexico                                1.72           1.54          1.95        2.18         1.85          2.74
 Peru                                  2.73           1.48          4.54        3.13         1.37          4.63
 Uruguay                               2.86           2.73          3.35        4.12         3.86          4.80
 Hong Kong                             1.84           1.59          1.99        2.25         2.30          2.20
 Indonesia                             2.16           1.18          3.39        3.65         3.58          3.86
 Korea                                 1.68           1.41          1.85        2.32         1.88          2.89
 Malaysia                              1.86           1.11          2.97        3.35         2.35          4.68
 Pakistan                              1.14           1.11          1.10        2.88         3.20          1.97
 Philippines                           1.75           1.75          1.84        1.05         1.09          1.08
 Thailand                              2.23           1.03          3.81        2.57         1.35          3.97
 Turkey                                1.85           1.43          2.59        2.96         1.96          4.24

 Mean SSC                              2.02           1.59          2.55        3.00         2.70          3.27
 Median SSC                            1.86           1.47          1.97        2.92         2.13          3.37

Mean EME's                             1.98           1.58          2.32        2.93         2.68          2.90
Median EME's                           1.86           1.50          1.97        2.80         2.25          2.78

 Source: Authors' calculations. Pre-Globalization and Globalization refer to the 1966-1985 and 1986-2005 periods,
 respectively.
 1/
      See Table 1 for a definition of sudden stop countries.
                                  Table 5. Calibration of the one- and
                                           two-sector models.


        Notation                                   Parameter/Variable                     Value


1. One-sector model

                 BAH
             ρ                       Rate of time preference in the BAH setup             0.064
                     UE
                 ρ                   Rate of time preference elasticity in the UE setup   0.109
                 γ                   Coefficient of relative risk aversion                2.000
                 ϖ                   Ad-hoc debt limit                                    -0.510
                 R                   Gross world interest rate                             1.059
                 y                   Mean output                                           1.000
                 c                   Consumption-output ratio                              0.692
                 b                   Net foreign assets-output ratio                      -0.440
                 σe                  Standard deviation of output innovations             0.026
                 θy                  Autocorrelation of output                             0.597
                 A                   Lump-sum absorption                                   0.282

2. Two-sector model

                 BAH
             ρ                       Rate of time preference in the BAH setup             0.059
                     UE
                 ρ                   Rate of time preference elasticity in the UE setup   0.187
                 γ                   Coefficient of relative risk aversion                2.000
                 µ                   Elasticity of substitution                            0.316
                 a                   CES weight of tradable consumption                    0.341
                 ϖ                   Ad-hoc debt limit                                    -0.700
                 α                   Share of imported inputs                              0.200
                 R                   Gross world interest rate                             1.059
                 b                   Net foreign assets-output ratio                      -0.440
                 pN                  Relative price of nontradables                       1.000
                     m
                 p                   Price of imported input                              1.000
         T               N    N
       y +p y                        Output in units of tradables                         1.000
                 T        T
             c /y                    Tradable consumption-output ratio                    0.665
                 N        N
             c /y                    Nontradable consumption-output ratio                 0.710
             N       N        T
         p y /y                      Nontradable-tradable output ratio                    1.543
                     T
                 A                   Lump-sum absorption of tradables                     0.106
                     N
                 A                   Lump-sum absorption of nontradables                  0.176

Note: BAH refers to Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget, UE refers to Uzawa-Epstein. CES refers to constant-
elasticity of substitution.
                                Table 6. Statistiscal Moments of the Stochastic Stationary State
                                                   of the One-Sector Economy

                                         Baseline            Auto Corr 0.7    Std Dev. 5%    Std Dev. 2.5%   Risk Aver. 5.0
                                       UE       BAH          UE      BAH      UE       BAH   UE       BAH    UE       BAH

                           1/
Precautionary savings                  0.02      0.10       0.04      0.12   0.05     0.22   0.01    0.05    0.10     0.24

Means
Output                                1.00       1.00        1.00     1.00    1.00    1.00    1.00    1.00    1.00     1.00
Consumption                           0.69       0.69       0.69     0.70     0.70    0.70    0.69    0.69    0.70    0.70
Foreign assets                        -0.42      -0.42      -0.41    -0.39   -0.39   -0.30   -0.43   -0.46   -0.34    -0.28
Trade balance 2/                       0.02      0.02       0.02      0.02   0.02     0.02   0.02    0.03    0.02     0.02
Discount factor                        0.94      0.94       0.94      0.94   0.94     0.94   0.94    0.94    0.94     0.94

Coefficients of variation (in
percent)
Output                                3.28       3.28      3.63       3.63    4.97    4.97    2.49   2.49     3.28    3.28
Consumption                           3.13       3.26      3.92      3.92    4.72     4.66    2.38   2.59     4.11   3.11
Foreign assets                        24.41      10.11     29.73     13.39   36.97   20.28   18.52   6.33    40.92   20.10
Current account 2/                     2.68      2.02       2.77      2.08   4.08     3.42   2.03    1.40    2.81     2.48
Trade balance 2/                       3.04      2.11       3.27      2.23   4.62     3.66   2.30    1.44    3.72     2.78
Discount factor                        0.14      0.00       0.18      0.00   0.21     0.00   0.11    0.00    0.18     0.00

Normalized coefficients of
variation (relative to output)
Consumption                            0.95      0.99       1.08      1.08   0.95     0.94   0.96    1.04    1.25     0.95
Foreign assets                         7.43      3.08       8.19      3.69   7.43     4.08   7.44    2.55    12.46    6.12
Current account 2/                     0.82      0.62       0.76      0.57   0.82     0.69   0.82    0.56    0.86     0.75
Trade balance 2/                       0.92      0.64       0.90      0.61   0.93     0.74   0.93    0.58    1.13     0.85
Discount factor                        0.04      0.00       0.05      0.00   0.04     0.00   0.04    0.00    0.06     0.00

Output correlations
Consumption                            0.42      0.75       0.48      0.78   0.42     0.67   0.42    0.81    0.26     0.54
Foreign assets                         0.32      0.56       0.34      0.53   0.32     0.44   0.32    0.62    0.19     0.33
Current account 2/                     0.97      0.85       0.97      0.83   0.97     0.89   0.97    0.81    0.99     0.93
Trade balance 2/                       0.76      0.70        0.68     0.63    0.76    0.73    0.76   0.67     0.66    0.74
Discount factor                       -0.42      0.00       -0.48     0.00   -0.42    0.00   -0.42   0.00    -0.26    0.00

Autocorrelations
Output                                 0.59      0.59       0.69      0.69   0.59     0.59   0.59    0.59    0.59     0.59
Consumption                            0.97      0.84       0.97      0.88   0.97     0.88   0.97    0.81    0.99     0.93
Foreign assets                         0.99      0.96       0.99      0.98   0.99     0.98   0.99    0.94    1.00     0.99
Current account 2/                     0.57      0.51       0.67      0.62   0.57     0.54   0.57    0.49    0.59     0.56
Trade balance 2/                       0.67      0.55       0.76      0.67   0.67     0.59   0.67    0.52    0.76     0.64
Discount factor                        0.98      0.00       0.98      0.00   0.98     0.00   0.97    0.00    0.99     0.00

Source: Authors' calculations.
1/
     Precautionary savings are measured as defined in the text.
2/
     Current account and trade balance are measured in percent of output.
                    Table 7. Statistical Moments of the Stochastic Stationary State
                                      of the Two-Sector Economy

                                                                              Baseline
                                                         UE                                            BAH
                                    Econ w/ perfect            Econ w/ binding       Econ w/ perfect      Econ w/ binding
                                    credit markets            credit constraints     credit markets      credit constraints

Precautionary savings 1/                   0.02                      0.06                 0.25                  0.26

Means
Consumption of tradables                  0.262                     0.264                0.261                  0.269
Consumption of nontradables               0.431                     0.432                0.430                  0.435
Consumption                               0.360                     0.362                0.359                  0.366
Price of nontradables                      1.005                     1.011                1.003                  1.027
Net foreign assets                        -0.424                    -0.378               -0.447                 -0.243
Current Account-GDP ratio                 0.000                     0.000                0.000                   0.000
Tradables GDP                             0.393                     0.393                0.393                   0.393
GDP in units of tradables                 1.002                     1.006                1.000                  1.019
Nontradables GDP                          0.607                     0.608                0.606                  0.610
Imported input                            0.152                     0.153                0.152                  0.156
Coefficients of variation (in
percent)
Consumption of tradables                  1.643                     1.523                3.139                 2.993
Consumption of nontradables                5.369                    5.379                4.926                  4.896
Consumption                               3.626                     3.634                3.169                  3.109
Price of nontradables                      6.622                     6.550                8.099                 8.053
Net foreign assets                        19.824                    16.436               42.960                76.574
Current Account-GDP ratio                  1.453                     1.416                1.950                 1.939
Tradables GDP                             3.345                     3.345                3.345                  3.345
GDP in units of tradables                 2.213                     2.184                3.292                  3.271
Nontradables GDP                          3.050                     3.059                2.797                 2.793
Imported input                            3.805                     3.688                5.846                 5.754
Correlation with GDP
Consumption of tradables                   0.374                    0.341                0.804                  0.803
Consumption of nontradables               -0.579                    -0.579               -0.562                 -0.591
Consumption                               -0.471                    -0.482               -0.247                 -0.293
Price of nontradables                      0.749                     0.740                0.867                  0.873
Net foreign assets                         0.266                     0.151                0.437                  0.408
Current Account-GDP ratio                 -0.141                    -0.142               -0.474                 -0.497
Nontradables GDP                          -0.579                    -0.579               -0.562                 -0.591
Imported input                             0.833                     0.826                0.929                 0.931
First-order autocorrelation
Consumption of tradables                   0.961                    0.920                 0.908                 0.897
Consumption of nontradables                0.483                    0.484                 0.505                 0.502
Consumption                                0.528                    0.525                 0.663                 0.650
Price of nontradables                      0.460                    0.451                 0.489                 0.485
Net foreign assets                         0.985                    0.974                 0.995                 0.994
Current Account-GDP ratio                  0.489                    0.477                 0.456                 0.455
Tradables GDP                              0.587                    0.587                 0.587                 0.587
GDP in units of tradables                  0.674                    0.653                 0.673                 0.660
Nontradables GDP                           0.483                    0.484                 0.505                 0.502
Imported input                             0.514                    0.484                 0.577                 0.565
Source: Authors' calculations.
1/
 Precautionary savings are measured as defined in the text.
            Figure 1. Emerging Market Economies: Financial Integration


2.0                                                                                      80
          Emerging Market Economies
          Mean

                                                                    Edwards              70
                                                                    Right Axis
1.0



                                                                                         60



0.0         Chinn-Ito

                                                                                         50




-1.0                                                                                     40
   1970          1975          1980          1985           1990          1995    2000


2.0                                                                                      80
                                       1/
          Sudden Stop Countries
          Mean
                                                                     Edwards
                                                                     Right Axis          70

1.0



                                                                                         60

                Chinn-Ito
0.0

                                                                                         50




-1.0                                                                                     40
      1970         1975          1980          1985          1990        1995     2000
   Source: Authors' calculations.
   1/
      See Table 1 for a definition of sudden stop countries.
                        Figure 2. Output and Consumption Volatiliy: Sample of Countries
                                                            (Percent)

                8                                                                   8
                    Industrial Countries:                                                   SSC: Output ARG
                                                                                            Volatility     PER
                      Output Volatility
                                                                                                      THA
                6                                                                   6
                                                                                                          IDN                  URY

                                                                                                          MYS
Globalization




                                                                    Globalization
                                        FIN                                                                  TUR
                4                                                                   4
                                  IRL
                                                                                                                   HKG
                                                                                                                  PHL              CHL
                                                  PRT                                                             MEX
                                                                                                                KOR    BRA
                                                                                                                 ECU
                                                                                                      COL
                              SWE
                                CAN      NZL
                               NOR                                                                        PAK
                2                GBRESPJPN
                                     CHE                                            2
                               NLD
                                AUS    GRC
                            FRA DNK
                                  USA
                                 DEU
                                BEL
                              AUT
                               ITA



                0                                                                   0
                    0         2               4         6      8                        0             2            4           6         8
                                  Pre-Globalization                                                        Pre-Globalization



                4                                                                   4
                     Industrial Countries: Consumption                                      SSC: Consumption Volatility
                    Volatility relative to Output Volatility                                 relative to Ouput Volatility

                3                                                                   3


                                                                                                    BRA
Globalization




                                                                    Globalization




                2                                                                   2                                  PAK
                                                                                                     TUR MYS
                                                                                                      KOR
                                                                                                     URY  CHL
                                  ITA                                                               COL
                                                                                                      MEX
                              GRC DNK
                                   GBR                                                                                  IDN
                                    NOR
                                  ESP                                                                 THAHKG                       ARG
                                     NLD
                                     SWE                                                            ECU
                                                                                                      PER
                1              USA
                                NZL
                                 FIN
                                FRA
                                AUT                                                 1
                                  BEL PRT IRL                                                 PHL
                             JPN DEU
                             CHE
                            AUS     CAN




                0                                                                   0
                    0         1               2         3      4                        0             1            2           3         4
                                  Pre-Globalization                                                        Pre-Globalization

   Source: Authors' calculations
   Pre-Globalization and globalization refer to the 1966-1985 and 1986-2005 periods, respectively. See
   Table 1 for a definition of sudden stop countries.
                 Figure 3. Sudden Stop Countries: Rolling Standard Deviation of Output Volatility 1/
                                                                           (Percent)

8                                                    8                                                               8
        Mean and Median Volatility                             Median Volatility By Regions
                                                                                                                            Mean Volatility By Regions

7                                                    7                                                               7




6                                                    6                                                               6


                                                                      Latin
                                                                     American                                                Latin
5                                                    5               Countries                                       5      American
                                                                                                                            Countries
                                                                                                                                                  SS
                         Mean                                                      SS                                                          countries
                                                                                countries
4                                                    4                                                               4

                                                                                                                                                            Asian
                                    Median                                                                                                                 Countries
                                                                                  Asian
3                                                    3                                                               3
                                                                                 Countries



2                                                    2                                                               2




1                                                    1                                                               1




0                                                    0                                                               0
   80       85      90         95      00       05        80         85         90          95        00        05     80       85        90          95     00          05
19       19      19         19      20       20      19         19         19          19        20        20        19       19        19          19     20          20

    Source: Authors' calculations.
    1/
       Twenty-year rolling standard deviation. See Table 1 for a definition of sudden stop countries.
Figure 4. One-Sector Model: Transitional Cumulative Distributions Functions


                                                     A. Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget Preferences

                    1.00


                    0.80
   Probability




                    0.60


                    0.40


                    0.20


                    0.00
                                -0.51    -0.47      -0.44     -0.40     -0.36      -0.32    -0.29       -0.25     -0.21    -0.17
                                                            Net Foreign Assets (as percent of mean GDP)


                                                            B. Uzawa-Epstein Preferences
                                                 (Starting from lowest 1% probability NFA position)
                                1


                               0.8


                               0.6
                 Probability




                               0.4


                               0.2


                                0
                                 -1.27   -1.14     -1.02     -0.89    -0.77     -0.64   -0.52   -0.39     -0.27    -0.14   -0.02   0.11
                                                            Net Foreign Assets (as a percent of mean GDP)


                                         2 years           5 years       10 years          15 years         Long-run distribution


Source: Authors' calculations.
                            Figure 5. One-Sector Model: Transitional Dynamics of Foreign Assets
                                   (As percent of GDP. Forecast functions conditional on lowest positive
                                          probability asset position and neutral shocks at date 1).




                      10




                       0
                            1       10         19         28         37        46         55         64       73   82



                      -10
     Percent of GDP




                      -20




                      -30




                      -40




                      -50




                                                               Uzawa-Epstein         Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget




Source: Authors' calculations
                                                                 Figure 6. Effects of Variability & Persistence of Output on
                                                                          Precautionary Demand of Foreign Assets

                                                      50%
                                                                           A. Variability
    Foreign assets in Percent of GDP




                                                      40%



                                                      30%


                                                      20%



                                                      10%


                                                                 0%
                                                                       1             2           3         4         5           6         7         8
                                                                                                 Standard deviation of output (%)


                                                                 50%
                                                                              B. Persistence
                              Foreign Assets in Percent of GDP




                                                                 40%



                                                                 30%



                                                                 20%



                                                                 10%



                                                                  0%
                                                                        0           0.1        0.2    0.3       0.4      0.5         0.6       0.7   0.8
                                                                                                     Autocorrelation of output

                                                                                         Uzawa-Epstein         Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget



Source: Authors' calculations
    Figure 7. One-Sector Model: Financial Globalization, Foreign Assets,
                         and Precautionary Savings

                                            200%
                                                                      A. Foreign Assets
                                                                    (Long-Run Average)
                                             0%

                                    -200%
          Percent of GDP




                                    -400%

                                    -600%

                                    -800%

                             -1000%

                             -1200%
                                                   0       5          10         15         20           25     30
                                                                   Tax on capital flows (Percent)


                                            1200%                                                                    10%
                                                                   B. Precautionary Savings
                                            1000%
                                                                                                                     8%

                                             800%
                           Percent of GDP




                                                                                                                           Percent of GDP
                                                                                                                     6%
                                             600%

                                                                                                 Right Axis          4%
                                             400%

                                                                                                                     2%
                                             200%


                                               0%                                                                    0%
                                                       0       5       10         15         20           25    30
                                                                   Tax on capital flows (in percent)

                                              Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget: NDL               Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget: ADL=-2
                                              Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget:ADL=-1.0           Uzawa-Epstein

Source: Authors' calculations.
Figure 8. One- and Two-Sector Models: Financial Globalization, Foreign Assets
                        and Precautionary Savings.


                                   1
                                                   A. Foreign Asset (Long-Run Average)

                                   0


                                   -1
                  Percent of GDP




                                   -2


                                   -3


                                   -4


                                   -5
                                        0    5               10         15           20          25    30
                                                         Tax on capital flows (in percent)


                  140%                                                                                      14%
                                                         B. Precautionary Savings
                  120%                                                                                      12%

                  100%                                                                                      10%
 Percent of GDP




                     80%                                                                                    8%    Percent of GDP

                     60%                                                                                    6%
                                                                             Right
                     40%                                                     Axis                           4%

                     20%                                                                                    2%

                             0%                                                                             0%
                                        0    5               10        15            20         25     30
                                                        Tax on capital flows (in percent)
                                            BAH two sectors:ADL=-1.0           BAH one sector:ADL=-1
                                            UE two sectors                     UE one sector


 Source: Authors' calculations.
                     Figure 9. Sudden Stops under Alternative Preference Specifications
                         (excess deviations from long run average relative to frictionless economy)
                         Foreign Assets                                               Current Account-Output Ratio
  4                                                                     4

  0
                                                                        3
 -4

 -8                                                                     2

-12                                                                     1
-16
                                                                        0
-20

-24                                                                    -1
          5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                      5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

                     Output of Nontradables                                              Price of Nontradables
0.5                                                                     2

0.0                                                                     0

-0.5                                                                   -2

-1.0                                                                   -4

-1.5                                                                   -6

-2.0                                                                   -8

-2.5                                                                  -10
          5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                      5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

                        CES Consumption                                              Total Output in Units of Tradables
  1                                                                     1
  0                                                                     0

 -1                                                                    -1
                                                                       -2
 -2
                                                                       -3
 -3
                                                                       -4
 -4
                                                                       -5
 -5                                                                    -6
 -6                                                                    -7
 -7                                                                    -8
          5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                      5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                            Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget Preferences                Uzawa-Epstein Preferences
       Note: The plots show forecast functions of equilibrium Markov processes in response to initial negative shocks to tradables
       output and TFP in nontradables, and an initial ratio of foreign assets to long-run GDP of -48.7 percent. The data are
       plotted as differences in percent deviations from long-run averages in the economies with credit constraints relative to those
       in the economies with perfect credit markets. Foreign assets are in percent of the long-run average of GDP.
                          Figure 10. Amplication Effects on Impact in the Sudden Stop Region
                  (Differences in deviations from mean with and without credit constrainst in response to one s.d. shocks)

          100
                                                BAH long run prob. border

           75                                                                                  UE long run prob. border

           50

                                                                                           long-run Sudden Stop region
           25


            0




Percent
           -25


           -50


           -75


          -100
             -0.578    -0.566      -0.554     -0.542 -0.530 -0.518 -0.506 -0.494                          -0.482      -0.470
                                             Foreign assets as a percent of long-run GDP

                                        Price of Nontradables: UE setup                 Current account-GDP ratio: UE setup
                                        Price of Nontradables: BAH setup                Current account-GDP ratio: BAH setup
                Figure 11. Transitional Cumulative Distributions in the Binding Economy


                1.00


                0.80


                0.60
Probability




                0.40


                0.20

                                                                       A. Uzawa-Epstein Preferences
                0.00
                   -0.70 -0.59 -0.48 -0.37 -0.26 -0.14 -0.03 0.08     0.19     0.30    0.41     0.52    0.63    0.74
                                           Net foreign assets as a share of mean GDP


                1.00



                0.80



                0.60
  Probability




                0.40



                0.20


                                                                B. Bewley-Aiyagari-Hugget Preferences
                0.00
                   -0.70 -0.59 -0.48 -0.37 -0.26 -0.14 -0.03 0.08      0.19     0.30     0.41    0.52    0.63    0.74
                                            Net foreign assets as a share of mean GDP

                             2 years     5 years     10 years       15 years          Long-run distribution

  Source: Authors' calculations.
