                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE PROSPECTS FOR SUSTAINED GROWTH IN AFRICA:
                         BENCHMARKING THE CONSTRAINTS

                                            Simon Johnson
                                           Jonathan D. Ostry
                                          Arvind Subramanian

                                         Working Paper 13120
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13120


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2007




Simon Johnson is the Ronald A. Kurtz Professor of Entrepreneurship at the Sloan School of Management,
MIT. Jonathan D. Ostry is Deputy Director of the Research Department at the IMF. Arvind Subramanian
is a Senior Fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. Work on this paper was undertaken
while Johnson was a visiting scholar in the IMF's Research Department, and Subramanian was Assistant
Director of the Macroeconomic Studies Division of the Research Department at the IMF. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF
or IMF policy. This paper is a revision of a background paper prepared for the NBER's Africa meeting
in April 2006 and was also presented at the Peterson Institute of International Economics. We thank
participants, and particularly Fred Bergsten, Martin Feldstein, and Ben Jones, as well as colleagues
at the IMF for helpful comments. We are grateful to Manzoor Gill and Murad Omoev for superb assistance
with the data. The views expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Simon Johnson, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Prospects for Sustained Growth in Africa: Benchmarking the Constraints
Simon Johnson, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian
NBER Working Paper No. 13120
May 2007
JEL No. O10,O11,O43,O55

                                             ABSTRACT

A dozen countries had weak institutions in 1960 and yet sustained high rates of growth subsequently.
We use data on their characteristics early in the growth process to create benchmarks with which to
evaluate potential constraints on sustained growth for sub-Saharan Africa. This analysis suggests that
what are usually regarded as first-order problems -- broad institutions, macroeconomic stability, trade
openness, education, and inequality -- may not nowbe binding constraints in Africa, although the extent
of ill-health, internal conflict, and societal fractionalization do stand out as problems in contemporary
Africa. A key question is to what extent Africa can rely on manufactured exports as a mode of "escape
from underdevelopment," a strategy successfully deployed by almost all the benchmark countries.
The benchmarking comparison specifically raises two key concerns as far as a development strategy
based on expanding exports of manufactures is concerned: micro-level institutions that affect the costs
of exporting, and the level of the real exchange rate -- especially the need to avoid overvaluation.

Simon Johnson                                       Arvind Subramanian
4901 46th Street NW                                 International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20016                                700 19th Street, N.W.
and NBER                                            Washington, DC 20431
sjohnson@imf.org                                    asubramanian@imf.org

Jonathan D. Ostry
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
jostry@imf.org
I. INTRODUCTION

        Conventional wisdom has long been negative on African growth. Sub-Saharan Africa

is commonly regarded as destined to remain poor either because of its geography (including

its unique disease burden) or its ethnolinguistic fractionalization (leading to repeated

conflicts) or its deep-rooted corruption. The precise mechanisms vary, but a standard

argument has been that Africa’s economic prospects are not bright because its long-standing

problems are hard to fix.

        In contrast, some more optimistic recent views hold that Africa either is improving by

itself and/or could improve dramatically if more foreign aid were provided.2 Again, the

precise mechanism varies, but these views are unified by much more positive assessments of

Africa’s growth potential (although they disagree on how much additional funding through

aid is desirable.)

        There is no doubt that Africa has done badly, on average and for the most part, not

just over the past 20-40 years, but in fact since the beginning of modern economic growth in

the nineteenth century. It is also indisputable that much of Africa is currently doing quite

well—for the region south of the Sahara, growth in total GDP will likely have exceeded 5

percent in 2006 for the third straight year and per capita growth is running in the range of

3.5-4 percent in recent years.3 The controversy rather lies with how to think about the last



2
  The Commission on Africa (often referred to as the Blair Commission) articulated the first view; see
also Collier and O’Connell (2006). The U.N. Millennium Project, headed by Jeffrey Sachs, has taken
the second position.
3
  The IMF growth forecasts for 2007 are 6.3 percent for GDP and 4.4 percent for GDP per capita,
though it should be acknowledged that there is a well-established optimistic bias in these forecasts:
see Timmermann (2006). These estimates are based on treating sub-Saharan Africa as one country,
                                                                                      (continued…)


                                                  1
decade or so, as well as the current situation and immediate future. In particular, are there

indications that parts of Africa can sustain growth at rates that are consistent with lifting

entire countries out of poverty—as East Asia did in the decades after 1960?

       The key word here is “sustain.” Is today’s growth likely to be sustained for 10 or 15

or more years? We know that what is associated with growth accelerations is not necessarily

what keeps growth going—for example, an increase in commodity prices sparked growth in

much of Africa during the 1960s, but this growth proved hard to sustain as political conflicts

developed.

       There is not yet a unified theory of sustained growth. As a consequence, there is also

not an accepted equation into which we can plug values to obtain the likely duration of a

rapid growth spell. However, there are at least three plausible views regarding what is

associated with crises and derails growth, i.e., what tends to cause decelerations.

       First, while weak economic and political institutions do not appear to prevent growth

episodes, they are very much associated with severe crises and the derailment of growth

(Acemoglu et. al., 2003, Satyanath and Subramanian, 2007). It is hard to escape bad

institutions. Good leaders can make a difference for a while, but when they leave office,

countries with weak institutions (i.e., autocracies) will often suffer a relapse (Jones and

Olken, 2005a).

       Weak institutions are associated with and arguably manifest in high degrees of

inequality (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2005a). Inequality can curtail expansions

both because societies with unequal distributions handle the distributional consequences of

adverse external shocks poorly (Rodrik, 1999). Berg, Ostry, and Zettelmeyer (2006), looking


i.e., they are averages across countries weighted by GDP. Table 1a and Appendix Table 9 provide
                                                                                    (continued…)


                                                2
at a broad panel of post-1945 accelerations, find that the duration of such episodes is

negatively related to initial income inequality. Moreover, the effects seem to be very large,

with each percentage point of the Gini coefficient raising the annual risk that a growth spell

will end by between 7 percent and 15 percent, relative to the baseline.

        Second, a greater propensity to experience conflict or civil strife might also prove to

be a key factor curtailing growth accelerations. This might be part of weak institutions or, in

some cases, it may be that formal institutions are strong while society remains deeply

divided—and these divisions are sometimes manifest in damaging conflict.

        Third, bad macroeconomic policies (particularly inflation), protectionism and/or

overvalued exchange rates may choke off growth in the tradable goods sector.4 This may

make it harder to find profitable opportunities in the economy as a whole, or it may draw

resources into imports in a way that proves unsustainable. Across a variety of methodologies,

for example, overvaluation is robustly correlated with crises, even when controlling for

deeper determinants of problems, such as inequality and institutions: see, for example,

Acemoglu et. al., 2003, “Growth and Institutions” in IMF (2003) and “Building Institutions”

in IMF (2005).

        In addition, there are at least two other possible explanations for poor longer-term

growth performance that are particularly relevant for Africa: inadequate education and poor




alternative calculations for aggregate growth.
4
  In principle, growth could be sustained without growth in the tradable goods sector. In practice, this
does not seem to happen in developing countries as they converge toward standards of living in the
rich countries. Either tradable goods are particularly important in productivity growth directly,
through some form of spillover, or this sector has important indirect effects (through its demands for
better institutions.)



                                                   3
health.5 Both are symptoms of insufficient physical capital (i.e., not enough schools and

clinics) and initial levels of human capital that are “too low” to allow accumulation of further

human capital (i.e., not enough teachers and doctors to develop skills in healthy young

people). Both of these factors could conceivably limit the returns on productive private

investments—for example, some minimum amount of skill or a basic road network may be

necessary to support a modern manufacturing sector. Perhaps there are temporary booms,

based on commodity prices, and then collapses when prices fall because skills have not

developed further.

        What is the threshold level at which any of these indicators signal a potential problem

with sustained growth? This is hard to know in the abstract and presumably depends on the

context, including the interaction between various indicators. One plausible benchmark,

however, is the recent (post-1945) experience of countries that started with weak institutions

(and relatively low income levels) but nevertheless were able to sustain rapid growth. (There

is, of course, not one definition of “rapid” growth; we look at various alternatives below.)

        Relatively few (we count no more than 12–see below) initially poor countries have

managed to sustain rapid growth (and improve their institutions) to an extent described below

in the past 50 years. Almost all of these countries experienced a rapid growth in exports; in

most cases the rapid increase in exports was of manufactures.6 In this paper, we examine

whether any African countries show new signs of breaking away from the poverty path

(through exports of any kind, or in some other way).



5
  Taken literally, these views would tend to suggest there should never be growth, rather than a
problem with sustaining growth.
6
  To be clear, we are not claiming any causal effect from exports to growth. We are merely pointing
out the association and suggesting that this warrants serious attention.



                                                  4
        The data that would allow such a comparison (from the right time period—early in

sustained accelerations) are not readily available; one contribution here is a dataset that

others can use (and criticize and, hopefully, improve).7 We therefore present our data in

considerable detail, documenting the years covered by available sources and discussing the

weaknesses.

        The good news from this comparison is that, in terms of the standard concerns, the

prospects for sustained African growth are not unfavorable. Broadly defined, institutions

have improved. In some cases they have improved dramatically—this reflects the end of civil

war (which often has destabilizing effects on entire regions) and, in some places, the

strengthening of democracy. There is also widespread macroeconomic stability and there

has been a great deal of trade liberalization (in the sense of opening to imports).8

        However, the benchmarking suggests three important caveats to this positive

assessment. First, in terms of specific economic institutions, as measured for example by the

World Bank’s Doing Business project, there remains a wide gap between Africa and most

other developing countries. In particular, the regulatory costs of exporting are high in much

of Africa. These numbers have to be used with care because (a) we do not (and will likely

never) know what these indicators were when East Asia took off, and (b) there are no data




7
  We use standard international sources. There is a great that could be done, however, by digging into
national statistical records. Hopefully, what we present here will serve as a preliminary guide to such
investigations.
8
  Recent debt reductions have helped: see “Review of Low-Income Country Debt Sustainability
Framework and Implications of the MDRI [Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative],” (IMF and World
Bank, 2005b).



                                                   5
over time, so perhaps these measures have also improved in Africa. Still, this is a key issue

for the future.9

        Second, some African countries seem to have experienced significant real exchange

rate overvaluation; there are also pressures for further appreciation (e.g., due to higher

commodity prices or aid inflows). In contrast, almost all the East Asian (and other) success

stories avoided any episode of significant overvaluation during the entire period of sustained

growth.10 There is a definite warning here for Africa, especially since there may be a need for

these countries to diversify out of commodity dependence and to increase manufacturing

exports as the East Asian countries did so successfully.

        Third, health indicators in Africa are much less robust today than they were in most

of the benchmark countries were when they started to grow. In part this is due to weaker

public health systems, but in part it may also be due to the disease environment in Africa—

for example, malaria has long been a particularly intense problem. Improving health is a first

order issue for its own sake; the impact on growth, however, remains unclear (see Acemoglu

and Johnson, 2006).

        Section II briefly reviews what we know about the key constraints on sustained

growth and explains our choice of benchmark countries. Section III compares recent African

growth with experience in our benchmark countries. Section IV focuses on comparing

9
  We do not know why measures of broad and specific institutions paint such a different picture.
Leading data sources suggest that economic institutions have improved almost everywhere in the
world since they became a standard measure (roughly in the mid-1990s). There is a strong possibility
that a version of the Lucas Critique applies—using historical performance (of broad institutions) to
guide policy actions can be misleading. Alternatively, it might be thought of as the Goodhart Effect—
any number that becomes a target for policy loses its meaning (while the underlying phenomenon
does not necessarily change.)




                                                 6
institutions in Africa today and our benchmark countries early in their growth process,

including measures of inequality and conflict. Section V provides a similar comparison for

trade outcomes and policies, while Section VI looks at the available measures of education

and health. Section VII concludes.



II. CONSTRAINTS ON SUSTAINED GROWTH

A. Institutions

       Economic thinking about growth has changed a great deal over the last 15 years.

Post-war growth theory stressed the need to accumulate factors of production—capital, and

unskilled and skilled labor—and to increase the productivity with which these factors are

used. But it left unanswered what has proved to be the more basic and essential question:

under what conditions do countries accumulate factors and improve productivity? To answer

this, attention has turned increasingly to broad economic institutions.

       Broad economic institutions are the set of laws, rules, and other practices that govern

property rights. They also encompass the provision of law and order, and efficient

bureaucracies. Good economic institutions create effective property rights for most people,

including both protection against expropriation by the state (or powerful elites), and

enforceable contracts between private parties. Although this definition is far from requiring

full equality of opportunity in society, it implies that societies where only a small fraction




10
  Experience in Latin America since 1960 suggests that repeated bouts of overvaluation are
damaging to both exports and, more broadly, to growth; see Berg, Ostry and Zettelmeyer (2006) for
more analysis and discussion.



                                                 7
of the population have well-enforced property rights do not have good economic

institutions.11

          Bad economic institutions mean insecure property rights for most people. Insecure

property rights can arise from expropriation by the state or powerful elites (often manifest in

the form of corruption) or from severe political instability (e.g., failed states and

conflict/post-conflict situations). Serious crime and the collapse of the state’s capacity to

maintain public order can very quickly undermine property rights. Thus, good economic

institutions are essential to create markets and sustain efficient market transactions.

          In the case of institutions, perceptions are key—if entrepreneurs can be confident that

their property rights will be protected, they will be comfortable investing with relatively little

in the way of formal rights. However, perceptions eventually need to be underpinned by

actual protections, i.e., if property can be stolen or expropriated, there should be recourse or

appeal of some meaningful kind. Property rights are never perfect, and conflicts often emerge

between alternative claimants on property. The issue is the extent to which property rights

are protected, preferably by a fair and transparent process of dispute resolution.

          The centrality of institutions in the growth process rests on the notion that if a country

builds good institutions, entrepreneurs will invest in capital goods and ordinary people will

invest in human capital; strong institutions will also reduce the likelihood of

economic/financial crises curtailing a growth acceleration, and will smooth adjustment to

adverse shocks that could also curtail an expansion. Empirical results from a range of authors

over the past decade suggest that the magnitude of the impact of institutions is likely to be

substantial. For example, in some estimates, an improvement in sub-Saharan Africa’s level of

11
     In a number of resource-rich economies, property rights are reasonably protected in the resource
                                                                                         (continued…)


                                                     8
institutional development from its current average to the mean of developing Asia could be

associated with as much as an 80 percent increase in its per capital income (from $800 to

over $1400).12 This long-run effect is likely to reflect the favorable impact of institutions on

the duration of growth spells and the volatility of economic growth.

       However, institutions do not necessarily have to be improved directly and

immediately in order for growth to occur. The question is, therefore, if initial institutions are

weak, what can we say—quantitatively—about the experience of countries as far as being

able to initiate growth, and sustain that acceleration. And, in circumstances in which a

durable acceleration takes place, to what degree is there also a virtuous circle with respect to

improvements in the quality of broad institutions? These are the issues to which we now turn.



B. A Benchmarking Approach

       There is a great deal of agreement on the qualitative issues that matter for sustained

growth, but little hard guidance on the numbers, i.e., when is a potential problem a real

problem? For example, the recent Barcelona Consensus—drafted by a Who’s Who of growth

economists—argues that while institutions matter, they are not the whole story.13 A similar

point is sometimes made about macroeconomic constraints—for example, inflation can be a




sector itself, but similar protection may not exist economy-wide.
12
   See also Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, and Rodrik, Subramanian and Trebbi, 2004, for
the empirical analysis that gives rise to these estimates.
13
   This is also known as the Barcelona Development Agenda, see
http://www.barcelona2004.org/esp/banco_del_conocimiento/docs/agenda_eng.pdf. The Barcelona
participants were: Olivier Blanchard, Guillermo Calvo, Daniel Cohen, Stanley Fischer, Jeffrey
Frankel, Jordi Galí, Ricardo Hausmann, Paul Krugman, Deepak Nayyar, José Antonio Ocampo, Dani
Rodrik, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Joseph E. Stiglitz, Andrés Velasco, Jaime Ventura, and John Williamson.
On these issues, there seems to have been considerable convergence with World Bank views; see
http://www1.worldbank.org/prem/lessons1990s/chaps/frontmatter.pdf



                                                9
problem, but no one argues that low inflation is sufficient to ignite growth. What exactly are

the critical constraints?

        We develop and apply simple benchmarks, based on the experience of countries that

plausibly (a) had weak institutions in 1960, and (b) sustained high rates of growth after 1960.

Point (a) is important because we take seriously the concern that developing countries today

may be different from European and other countries that either had good institutions already

by 1850 or were well on their way to developing such institutions.14

        Our benchmarks are therefore drawn from countries that have recently escaped

poverty (or are well on their way) despite a difficult starting position, as measured by their

economic and political institutions. The 12 countries that we characterize as having had weak

institutions at the time of their growth take-off clearly scored poorly on a widely accepted

measure of political institutions: on the Polity IV measure of constraint on the executive,

which ranges from 1-7, their average score was 2.2 (compared with 7 for most advanced

industrial economies).

        An alternative would be look only at countries that escaped poverty despite weak

initial economic institutions. Unfortunately, the standard measures of economic institutions

are available only from the mid-1980s and, given that economic institutions likely improved

over time in many of these rapidly growing countries, these are not appealing. However,

Adelman and Morris (1971) compiled measures of economic and social institutions circa

1960 (actually 1958-63). While their coverage is not as extensive as that of the Polity IV

database used in this paper, they tell a broadly similar story of economic institutions not


14
  While we do not necessarily agree with the arguments and interpretation of historical evidence in
Chang (2005), we do agree that it may be unreasonable to expect poor countries today to see
improving their institutions as a necessary condition for growth.



                                                 10
being strong at the time of the take-off of the SG countries. Their best proxy for the quality

of economic institutions is probably the “degree of administrative efficiency of public

administration.” On this measure, the average score for the sustained growth countries (SGs)

in 1960 is about the average for a group of all developing countries.15

        The benchmarking approach has several advantages. It is quite transparent—others

may disagree with the construction of our criteria, but at least these criteria are clear. Also,

while the composition of the benchmark can be criticized, once that benchmark is established

our judgment of what is happening in Africa is driven just by the numbers (not by any

preconceptions we may have about particular African countries.)

        The main disadvantage of this approach is that it does not incorporate any notion of a

tradeoff. For example, perhaps good performance on one dimension can compensate for

weaker performance on another dimension. This being said, the benchmarking of Africa

today against post-war growth success-from-initial-weakness stories does reveal a number

of common features that appear to drive the latter and a number of common hurdles that

African countries appear to need to overcome.



C. Cases of Sustained Growth Accelerations

        Defining sustained growth accelerations cannot be an entirely objective exercise

because it depends on the criteria for defining sustained growth and accelerations, in

particular there can be long debate about the level of growth rates worthy of being regarded


15
   There are nine SGs for which this measure is available (China, Malaysia, and Singapore, are
missing), and their average is 51.1. For the sample of 74 developing countries for which Adelman and
Morris provide data, the average is 47.7 with a standard deviation of 30. Adelman and Morris provide
a letter code and a separate conversion to a numerical scale; we applied this scale to the above
calculations.



                                                11
as high, and also the change in growth that deserves to be called an acceleration. Here we

adopt the (well-known, but still debated) criteria from Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik

(2004). These yield a set of sustained growth acceleration that accord broadly with anecdotes

of success stories—no notable successes are left out, and applying the same criteria in an

even-handed fashion actually includes several cases that usually do not get much attention.

        The exact criteria are as follows.16 Countries must have experienced: an improvement

in growth rates of at least 2 percentage points per capita (this captures the idea of

acceleration);17 sustained growth of at least 3½ percent per capita for seven years; and higher

post-acceleration income level than the pre-acceleration peak (this is to ensure that

accelerations are not simply a rebound from a prior period of very bad performance, for

example, due to wars or conflict or other shocks). In addition, growth per capita must remain

above 3 percent after seven years, which captures the sense that good performance is

sustained.

        These criteria are actually quite moderate—leading to a doubling of income in 20-35

years. As we will see, there are (a few) countries that have greatly exceeded these growth

rates on average. Nevertheless, these numbers offer a minimum level of performance that can

reasonably be regarded as sustained growth.

        Also, while the timing of these accelerations can be debated further, assigning a

precise date is useful, because it allows us to focus our attention on the conditions that


16
   We exclude from our sample industrial and transition countries. This excludes, for example,
Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, which have sustained high growth over at least part of this period;
a number of transition countries are also on the verge of qualifying, if their growth holds up.
17
   While our real interest is in cases of sustained and high growth rates, the fact that many
sub-Saharan African countries have been stagnating means that attaining high growth will almost
inevitably require an acceleration. Thus, identifying the features associated with such accelerations is
likely to be useful.



                                                   12
prevailed when the growth rate picked up (and shortly thereafter). Subject to data limitations,

we can discern something about what was or was not a constraint, and this may be relevant

for Africa today.

        Our focus is on whether African countries can sustain growth despite weak initial

institutions, so countries that had accelerations based on strong initial (around 1960)

institutions already are excluded from our benchmark (the data are not perfect, but countries

such as Botswana, India, Mauritius, and Sri Lanka are excluded from our sustained growth

benchmark on this basis).18 (Botswana and Mauritius will appear in our African data, as that

is based on geography, rather than country characteristics, but they will be treated there as

potentially distinct experiences and separated out from our calculations of mean values.)

        Applying these criteria gives 12 countries. Of these, 10 are usually regarded as

manufacturing export-based models. Of the ten, all but two are East Asian: China, Indonesia,

Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan Province of China, Thailand, and Vietnam. China

and Vietnam obviously started their growth accelerations much later (around 1980, rather

than around 1960), but they have shown consistently high growth rates since that time and fit

our criteria. Tunisia and the Dominican Republic are the other manufacturing export-based

successes.19


18
   Although India did not grow very rapidly from 1960-80 (per capita growth rate of 1.7 percent per
year), it experienced a dramatic improvement in performance thereafter (close to 4 percent per year
after 1980). Rodrik and Subramanian (2005) argue that this turnaround, which was sustained for at
least ten years without significant policy reforms, could be attributable to the fact that India had
previously significantly underperformed relative to the quality of its institutions. In this view, a small
change in the policy environment allowed these institutions to come into play and boost its growth
record.
19
   The Dominican Republic recently experienced a major banking crisis and growth has decelerated.
GDP growth per capita averaged 0.2 percent between 2000 and 2004, but bounced back to 7.3 percent
in 2005. Tunisia seems to fall into the East Asian pattern of having weak political institutions
initially, but achieving manufacturing-based export success through a combination of consistently
                                                                                          (continued…)


                                                   13
        With respect to the other two countries, concerns about data quality limit any

assessment of Egyptian performance.20 Only Chile appears to be a real exception to the rule

of manufacturing-based export success. As such, it might be an interesting model for Africa

and an alternative to the East Asian escape (from poverty) route. But even here, if we take

seriously the Adelman and Morris ratings, it would appear that Chile had strong economic

institutions already by 1960. As in the case of Botswana, these favorable initial conditions

might have played a role in alleviating the effects of the natural resource curse.21 Moreover,

in the case of Chile, while copper has been an important export, Chile has also developed

agribusiness/aquaculture exports that are very high value-added products.



D. Why Did Manufacturing Exports Matter So Much (after 1960)?

        This benchmarking strategy suggests we should pay attention to exports, and—

perhaps—particularly to manufacturing exports. One possible reason is that manufacturing

exports help create a middle class that favors further strengthening of institutions.

        Theoretically, the idea is that institutions do not spring up unassisted or without some

foundation of support from various social groups. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005a)

review some historical evidence on this point, and argue that it is the interaction of economic

and political power that produces (or changes) institutions. The literature that finds



competitive exchange rate and government assistance to manufacturing. If we had set the growth
threshold slightly higher, e.g., at 4 percent, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, and Tunisia would not
have qualified as sustained growth cases, but the other countries would still have qualified.
20
   Part of this concern stems from the puzzling coexistence of sustained growth over a 25-year period
and a decline in the share of overall exports relative to GDP of about 8 percentage points.
21
   We need to be careful in assessing the prospects for countries, such as Gabon or Sao Tomé and
Principe, where oil reserves are large relative to the economy. Some oil exporters have done very well
since 1960, e.g. Brunei, Saudi Arabia and other small Gulf states; they do not make it into our set of
benchmark countries due to lack of data.



                                                 14
significant effects of institutions on outcomes may have drawn too much attention to a state

variable (institutions) relative to the forcing variables (the power of various groups).22

        In particular, expansion of trade may sometimes create profound changes in the

distribution of economic power, with consequences for political power and, consequently, for

institutions. This is one interpretation for the effects of the expansion of long-run trade

through the Atlantic, to Asia and the New World, after 1500 (Acemoglu, Johnson, and

Robinson, 2005b).23 However, trade per se does not necessarily lead to better institutions; if

the returns from trade fall into the hands of monarchs or a small elite, they may actually lead

to a concentration of power and, ultimately, worse institutions.

        Although we do not have definitive evidence on this point, we note that while the

Sustained Growth cases began their growth episodes with weak political institutions, over

time, they benefited from a virtuous circle in which economic and political institutions

improved. This highlights the notion that institutions are not immutable, but can respond to

economic and policy changes, and thus that the quality of broad institutions is not a

permanent barrier to long-term growth. A significant number of countries with sustained

growth have improved their institutions over time, thus laying the foundation for sound

growth in the medium run.

        For example, Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand witnessed a

substantial strengthening of their political institutions. On the Polity IV scale that goes from



22
   Rajan (2006) also stresses the potential importance of constituencies relative to institutions.
However, he puts more emphasis on increasing education as a key lever that develops progrowth
constituencies.
23
   Keep in mind that this early “Atlantic trade” was much more about commodities than
manufactures. They key point is who controls the rents and the extent to which these can be seized by
the state, rather than the precise content of the cargo.



                                                 15
one (weak institutions) to seven (strong institutions), Indonesia’s and Taiwan Province of

China’s by four points, Korea’s by five points, Thailand’s rating improved by six points.

       The possibility that institutional development occurs only when growth is driven by

manufacturing exports is further suggested by the experience of countries whose exports

have been natural resource-based. A number of such countries have experienced a surge in

exports in the aftermath of terms of trade shocks without any commensurate improvement in

the quality of institutions. In some ways, this is the crux of the natural resource curse.

As rents to governments increase, there is even less incentive for them to work toward

improving institutions (Ross, 2001).



E. Recent Literature on Accelerations and Sustained Growth

       Our approach is closely related to part of the growth literature that has focused on the

information contained in turning points in countries’ growth performance. This is a

promising line of research because, by focusing on the correlates of accelerations or

decelerations in growth, it avoids many of the pitfalls of cross-country growth regressions

that attempt to explain developing countries’ average growth experience (where the average

typically confounds periods of steep hills and cliffs, rather than the smooth upward paths

of the industrial countries—a point emphasized by Pritchett, 2000). The papers by Rodrik

(1999), Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004), Jermanowski (2005), and Jones and Olken

(2005b) represent some initial attempts to uncover the informational content of growth

transitions, though not surprisingly they conclude that there is a lot we still do not understand

about the anatomy of growth transitions.




                                               16
        Of course, identifying the correlates of accelerations does not directly get at the issue

of what makes growth sustained. Indeed, it is likely that what ignites growth is not the same

as what curtails growth (Jones and Olken, 2005b): crises of one type or another, conflict, and

macroeconomic instability seem to be strongly correlated with the end of growth spells, but

the converse of these does not appear to be a particularly reliable indicator of what causes an

acceleration in growth. A more fruitful approach may therefore be to look at the correlates

of growth duration per se, i.e., once a growth spurt has begun, how can it be kept going?

        Berg, Ostry, and Zettelmeyer (2006) focus on growth duration, and point out that,

whereas economically significant increases in growth are relatively common events in the

developing world (including in Africa), much rarer are the very long sustained spells of the

type that lifted many countries in East Asia out of poverty over the past few decades. The

correlates of growth duration should thus have significant policy relevance. The authors use

survival analysis to relate the probability that a growth spell will end to a variety of economic

and political variables. They consider the role of democratic institutions, income inequality,

health and education, external competitiveness, and a number of variables related to

macroeconomic stability. While their results should probably still be viewed as somewhat

preliminary, their conclusions are nonetheless strikingly similar to ones we arrive at in our

benchmarking exercise.24




24
  Apart from the role mentioned above that inequality appears to play in limiting the duration of
growth spells, there appears to be a significant effect of high inflation and exchange rate crises as risk
factors. Reducing inflation from 50 to 10 percent, for example, halves the risk of a downbreak in
growth in any given year. Sharp currency depreciations (currency crises), following periods of
significant overvaluation, also appear to be significant predictors of the end of growth spells.



                                                   17
III. RECENT AFRICAN GROWTH EXPERIENCE

        To focus our attention on countries with potential for relatively high sustained

growth, in the discussion below we divide the countries into two groups based on whether or

not they attain a minimum threshold of growth over the past decade (Table 1a).25 We set the

threshold low, to be as inclusive as possible. We therefore have nineteen African countries

that had per capita growth over the last decade above 2 percent, and the rest of the region that

was below this threshold (31 countries for which we have data).

        Table 1a and Appendix Table 9 report basic growth measures for sub-Saharan Africa.

Column 1 shows GDP per capita growth and column 3 shows total GDP growth. Two points

are immediately obvious. First, while average GDP growth was respectable over the last

decade (4.5 percent unweighted and 4.1 percent weighted by population), average GDP per

capita growth was much lower (2 percent unweighted and only 1.4 percent weighted).

Column 6 confirms in more detail that population growth remains high in most sub-Saharan

African countries (there is much less variation across countries in population growth than in

income growth). The fact that per capita GDP growth is slightly larger than per worker GDP

growth (column 2) reflects the faster growth in labor force relative to the population, which is

sometimes characterized as a demographic dividend.

        It is worth noting that average growth rates for the 1990s are even being surpassed

today. In fact, over the past few years, GDP per capita growth has accelerated. The World

Economic Outlook growth rate for Africa in 2004 was 3.6 percent and in 2005 it was 3.5


25
  Given the discrepancy between the different sources of growth data, we averaged the growth
numbers for each country from two sources: the World Bank’s World Development Indicators and
the Penn World Tables, version 6.2. However, there is clearly an interesting and important question as
to the reasons for the deficiencies in African growth data across sources—an issue to which we hope
to return in the future.



                                                 18
percent. The IMF currently expects growth of 3.9 percent in 2006 and 3.7 percent in 2007.

Per capita growth rates in excess of 2 percent per annum are expected for most regions,

except the CFA Franc Zone.

        This said, there is a great deal of variation within Africa. Focusing just on per capita

growth rates, there are a number of countries with growth over 3 percent per annum. Some of

these countries were recovering from a civil war (Liberia). Others discovered oil (Angola,

Cape Verde, and Equatorial Guinea.) But five others had growth above or close to 3 percent

(Botswana, Lesotho, Mauritius, Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda) and another

eight countries were around 2 percent. A few countries continue to decline, with Zimbabwe

as the most notable outlier.

        We turn now to the growth picture in the two groups of SSA countries, The first

column of Table 1a shows that average growth in Group 1 was 4.8 percent per annum over

1996–2005. If we exclude Botswana (diamonds and good institutions), Angola, Chad, and

Equatorial Guinea (oil), Liberia and Rwanda (rebound from civil conflict) and Mauritius (a

long-standing manufacturing export story and arguably good institutions), average growth

was 3.1 percent. (We adopt the terms Group 1 and Group 2 for convenience; we are not

passing judgment on any countries, just trying to look at the data in an informative manner.)

        It is useful to test whether there was a difference in means between the Group 1

African countries and the SG cases. Specifically, we report the p-value from a t-test where

the null hypothesis is that there is no difference in means for the two groups.26


26
  The sample for the t-test includes the countries in Group 1 and the 12 SG countries. We report the
test for two types of comparison. In the first, we compare the means of the Group 1 countries for the
period 1993-2002 with the corresponding means for SGs at the time of their growth acceleration. In
the second, we adjust the mean value of a variable for the SGs for the trend increase in that variable
for the world as a whole. Specifically, we calculate the mean value of the variable for the world
                                                                                        (continued…)


                                                  19
       This test shows that if we take the entirety of Group 1, we fail to reject the null

hypothesis that their average growth is the same as that that experienced by the Sustained

Growth cases. But this finding is driven by the presence of a number of outliers (the

asterisked countries in Table 1a) whose growth reflects oil, rebound from civil conflict, or

which had reasonably strong institutions to begin with. If we drop those countries, average

per capita growth was 3.1 percent. This is significantly below what was experienced in our

Sustained Growth benchmark countries (see Table 1b).



IV. ARE INSTITUTIONS LIKELY TO BE A CONSTRAINT?

       Table 2a focuses on the Group 1 sub-Saharan African countries with relatively high

recent growth. The same data are reported for Group 2 in Appendix Table 10. Table 2b

reports comparable data from our Sustained Growth cases; the notes to this table explain the

exact time period from which the data are drawn (this is important as much of the relevant

data is not available for exactly the time of acceleration).



A. Broad or General Institutions

       The first standard measure captures the quality of broad institutions from the Polity

dataset. This measure is available for all time periods, so we can look at exactly the time of

acceleration (or any other time).




sample for 1970 and for the period 1993-2002. We subtract the latter from the former and add this
difference to the mean for the SGs at time T. The rationale for the second comparison is that the
improvement in performance of the Group 1 countries might just be due to “grade inflation” which
may not reflect a true improvement in performance. When the p-value is high it means that we cannot
reject the null hypothesis that the means for the African group are the same as those of the SGs.
A low p-value denotes a statistical difference in performance between the two groups.



                                                20
       Table 2b shows that constraint on the executive was low in most of the Sustained

Growth cases at the time of acceleration (we call this time T; the exact date of T is shown in

the first column of Table 2b.) The average score was 2.2, and 4 of the 12 cases had the lowest

possible score—Chile, Korea, Thailand and Tunisia.

       In contrast, in the Group 1 of African countries, the average score today is 3.8 and

only one (Sudan) has the lowest possible score. In terms of political institutions, as reported

in the second column, most Group 1 African countries already have a higher score than did

the SG cases when their accelerations began. Institutions are not today very strong, but they

are potentially good enough in much of Africa so as not to be an obvious constraint on

sustained growth.27 It is also noteworthy that levels of inequality today in this group of

African countries (column 7) is close to the average for the sustained growth countries when

the latter started their growth spurt. This is promising in light of the finding in Berg, Ostry

and Zettelmeyer (2006) about the importance of inequality for sustaining growth spurts. It is

countries in the second group that seem to have high levels of inequality, and hence poorer

prospects for sustaining growth.

       While comparable measures of the quality of broad economic institutions at the

beginning of the SG growth accelerations are unavailable, data from Adelman and Morris

(1971) suggest that countries such as Indonesia, Korea, Thailand and even the Dominican

Republic had improved their economic institutions substantially during the growth period.

For example, Korea and Thailand that were ranked below the mean on "administrative

efficiency" in 1960 saw their investment rating rise to about 1.5 and 2 standard deviations

above the mean, respectively on a measure of investment risk in 1984. While less dramatic,




                                                21
Indonesia and the Dominican Republic also saw improvements in their institutions by 1984,

with both countries moving from below average to substantially above average ratings on

these measures. Available data are not good enough to ascertain the exact timing of these

improvements but it appears that in the preponderance of Sustained Growth cases, the

improvement in economic institutions happened relatively early in the growth acceleration.

The World Bank (1993) has noted that China's investment climate improved dramatically

and relatively early during its growth acceleration.

           For this reason, when the broad measures of economic institutions begin, in the mid-

1980s, the scores for countries that accelerated in the 1960s are already good. The average

score for Economic Risk (a composite indicator that contains the leading dimensions of

economic institutions, such as corruption and rule of law) was 31.7 (out of 50), while for

Investment Risk (an alternative measure) it was 7.1 (out of 12).

           Note that for China and Vietnam, data from the mid-1980s are at or close to the time

of acceleration (1978 for China and 1985 for Vietnam). Vietnam had a relatively low (i.e.,

bad) score, of 5.0, at that time, while China was already at a relatively high 8.6 in terms of

Investment Risk.

           Remarkably, our Group 1 African countries have an average Economic Risk indicator

of 31.7 and an Investment Risk just above 8. There is nothing here to indicate that broad

economic institutions are worse in this part of Africa today than they were 20 years ago in

our Sustained Growth cases. Most likely, many of the Sustained Growth cases began their

accelerations with broad economic institutions that were no better than in much of Africa

today.


27
     Indeed, the p-value for the t-test of similar political institutions between Group 1 countries and the
                                                                                            (continued…)


                                                      22
        The story in terms of control of corruption is more complicated. Column 6 in Table

2a shows the Kaufmann-Kraay index, which is out of 6 (higher is less corrupt), and which is

normalized. In other words, our corruption measure is relative, while our other measures of

broad institutions are in absolute terms, i.e., everyone can improve in terms of the latter but

not the former. These data are only available from the mid-1990s.28

        Of the sustained growth cases, half of the countries had corruption scores of 3 or

below in the mid-1990s. This is not very different from the preponderance of Group 1

African countries as of 2005. No doubt corruption is an important issue in many countries,

but it does not appear to prevent growth. Nor does controlling corruption necessarily lead to

growth.

        In terms of testing for differences in means, we find no difference in the adjusted

broad measures, but we do find Group 1 has significantly higher corruption than was the case

for Sustained Growth countries (but recall that these data are for a later point in the SGs

growth experience.)29



B. Costs of Doing Business

        One area worthy of further attention relates to businesses’ costs of entry (the units

here are hours of time and fraction of income per capita per annum) and to the costs of

trading. These data are from the World Bank’s Doing Business database. These are plausible

measures for the specific institutions that directly impact business.


SGs is rejected, but in the direction of suggesting that the former had significantly better institutions.
28
   The original Kaufmann-Kraay index, which is a measure of relative performance, ranges from
minus 2.5 to plus 2.5. Our transformation changes the range from 1 to 6, which we achieve by adding
3.5 to the original value.




                                                   23
        In contrast to the measures of broad institutions, where the Group 1 African countries

do well relative to other countries, in terms of these more micro measures, the picture is

mixed.30

        It is very surprising that the time for paying taxes is actually lower than in the SG

cases today (average of 229 hours in the Group 1 African countries vs. 348 in the Sustained

Growth cases). On the total amount of tax payable, the Group 1 African countries rank about

the same as the SG cases—45 percent of gross profits on average.

        It is on the costs of entry, i.e., registering a new business, that African countries do

worse than the SGs as well as the average developing country. In the average Group 1

country, costs are about 123 percent (measured in terms of per capita income) compared with

25 percent in the SGs and 78 percent in the average developing country. The t-test for

differences in means confirms that Africa has a disadvantage in this category.

        While there is a presumption that macro and micro institutions should broadly co-

move, there can clearly be exceptions. One possibility is that macro and micro institutions

could be measuring distinct functions that institutions perform. For example, while broad

institutions such as the judiciary will determine the protection of property rights and

enforcement of contracts, the costs of doing business measured at the micro-level could relate

to ease of acquiring specific licenses, which could be the domain of other administrative

institutions/authorities. Another explanation for the lack of co-movement could simply be

time. Even where, say, laws and regulations relating to property rights can be relatively


29
   In an earlier version of this paper, the sample of Group I countries was slightly different but that did
not alter the basic conclusions that we obtain for the sample used in this version.
30
   Comparisons between African countries and SG cases in relation to the costs of doing business
should be treated more cautiously because, unlike in the rest of the paper, countries are being
compared at the same point in real time and not the same point in “acceleration” time.



                                                    24
easily changed, their effective enforcement (which would be picked up at the micro-level)

may take more time.

        Finally, the measurement of micro-institutions has not yet acquired the prominence of

their macro counterparts. Further work is required to understand the differences between

macro and micro differences, and what policy levers are available to countries to remedy the

high costs of trading and doing business more generally.



C. Conflict and Fractionalization

        It is possible that while broad institutions in Africa are at reasonable levels, the

problem could be the potential for, or actual, conflict. Wars of various kinds definitely have

been an issue in Africa’s recent past.

        Tables 3a, 3b, and Appendix Table 11 explore this issue in more detail, using data

from the Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset. Interestingly, what we find here is that in terms of

“all conflicts,” Group 1 African countries are not significantly worse than were the SG

countries at the start of their growth.

        Looking at interstate conflicts, in the window of T-9 to T, there was actually less

conflict in the Group 1 countries than in the Sustained Growth cases. However, in terms of

internal conflict, there appears to have been more in Africa—most of this has been

concentrated in a few countries, but it has still spilled out into wider regions (e.g. Sudan-

Chad, Liberia-Sierra Leone, Democratic Republic of Congo and several neighbors.) The

potential for more intense and disruptive conflict in Africa should not be discounted.

        In Tables 4a, 4b, and Appendix Table 12, we present various measures of societal

fractionalization, which is an indicator of the potential for conflict. Societies can potentially




                                                25
fracture along different lines—ethnic, religious, or linguistic. These tables indicate that

regardless of the measure, all African countries (Groups 1 and 2) fare significantly worse

than the SG cases. While the widely-noted reduction in internal African conflicts over the

last decade offers some basis for optimism, the divided nature of many of these countries

should serve to temper such optimism.



V. TRADE OUTCOMES AND POLICIES

       Tables 5a and 5b look in more detail at trade outcomes and trade policies. Apart from

micro institutions that may have hampered the export orientation of a number of African

countries, trade policies—as well as the exchange rate to which we turn later—are other

possible candidates.



A. Export Performance

       The Sustained Growth cases generally attained great success in manufacturing

exports. The average increase in the ratio of manufacturing exports to GDP for this group

over their growth episode was 36 percentage points. For example, Singapore and, to a lesser

extent, Korea and Malaysia, achieved a rapid increase in manufacturing exports at a very

early stage: within the first five years of the growth spurt, the share of manufactured exports

in GDP had risen by 7.3 percentage points for Singapore, and by about 2.5 percentage points

for the other two countries. Clearly, there was two-way causality between export ratios and

growth, but even to the extent that early rapid export growth was a proximate cause, it raises

the question as to the underlying policy choices that facilitated this growth.




                                               26
        The average export-GDP ratio is quite high in the Group 1 African countries—their

average ratio of 31 percent is almost double that of the Sustained Growth cases at the time of

their accelerations (19 percent). The Group 1 numbers are high in part because of Botswana

(diamonds), Equatorial Guinea (oil), Mauritius (clothing) and Lesotho (clothing). Even if we

drop the asterisked countries in Table 5a, the average remains at 25 percent, which is still

high.

        In terms of manufactured exports too, African countries do not start at a very great

disadvantage compared to the SGs. Even after excluding the few African countries with high

levels of manufactured exports relative to GDP (Botswana, Lesotho, and Mauritius), in most

cases the ratio of manufactured exports to GDP is close to what it was for the SGs.

        This picture is similar if we focus on apparel, footwear, and textile exports—the

traditional starting point for countries that export manufactures. Aside from Lesotho and

Mauritius (and Swaziland, which is in the Group 2 countries), these exports are small at less

than 0.5 percent of GDP but this was also true of the SGs.

        The SGs, however, increased their manufactured exports dramatically. Table 5a

seems to suggest that, at least during the last ten years, there has not been any significant

improvement in manufacturing or textiles exports from Africa. The question is whether the

current policy environment is conducive to SSA countries repeating the feat of the SGs over

the medium term. On the one hand, the external trading environment facing SSA countries is

more difficult now because of the competition from Asian exporters, particularly China,

India, and Vietnam. On the other, SSA exporters face virtually duty-free access to the

markets of industrial countries in manufactures thanks to the various preferential schemes in

the European Union (Everything But Arms) and the United States (The Africa Growth and




                                               27
Opportunity Act) whereas barriers facing Asian exporters in the 1960 and 1970s were much

higher than today.31 On balance, it is therefore difficult to assess whether today’s

environment is actually more difficult for the SSA countries.



B. Trade Liberalization

        Countries do seem to become more open as they grow and this is borne out by the

experience of the SGs. While it is true that some countries in the SG group did not liberalize

(and to some degree still have not—e.g., China and Vietnam), the weight of the evidence

points in a different direction, as the examples of Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and

Taiwan Province of China show. In terms of the aggregate data, the average percent of years

that a country has been open (since the growth acceleration began) is 58 percent for the

Sustained Growth cases.

        The (perhaps) surprising fact is that many African countries are quite liberal on trade.

Table 5a shows that the augmented Sachs-Warner measure for the Group 1 countries is 0.6

(out of 1, with higher meaning more liberal).32 They are more open than the SGs were at the

comparable stage of their growth spurt (0.4 is the average on the SW measure for the SGs),

and they are more open than the average developing country today (0.5 on the SW measure).




31
   Of course, some of this duty-free access is undermined by onerous rules of origin (Mattoo et. al.,
2003)
32
   The Sachs-Warner measure is a broad measure of trade liberalization and incorporates data on
tariffs, quantitative restrictions (QRs), black market premium, export marketing boards, and whether
a country has a socialist regime. This measure was updated by Wacziarg and Welch (2003).
Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000) criticize the results obtained by Sachs and Warner (1995) based on their
measure on the grounds that it captures not just trade but a variety of macroeconomic and institutional
factors. They also showed that it was the black market premium component of the indicator that was
driving the results rather than tariffs and QRs.



                                                  28
C. Exchange Rate Overvaluation

          Anecdotally, one important factor that supported export growth in the SG cases was

the avoidance of exchange rate overvaluation.33 While this is hard to measure exactly, we

have constructed the following, relatively standard, proxy for overvaluation.

          First, following Frankel (2004), for every year beginning in 1960, we ran a cross-

section regression of the log of a country’s price level relative to the United States (available

in the Penn World Tables) on the country’s per capita GDP in PPP terms. This equation

captures (in a cross-section context) the Balassa-Samuelson effect, which predicts that as

countries grow richer, the real exchange rate—measured by the price level relative to the

United States—should appreciate. The predicted value of the real exchange rate from this

regression provides a sense of equilibrium, while the difference between the predicted and

actual real exchange rate is a measure of overvaluation.34

          We look at average currency overvaluation (last 5 years for which data are available

for the African countries and for the entire duration of the growth episode for the SG cases),


33
   Conditions for success in global markets might be slightly different today than in the 1960s and
1970s, when the Asian countries succeeded: for example, reputation (for quality and reliability) has
become very important in today’s manufacturing based on global production chains. Hence, a
competitive exchange rate is by no means sufficient to guarantee export success.
34
   We estimate the following cross-section equation for every year since 1960 for the sample of all

countries: log p = α + β log yi + ε i where p is the log of the price level for country i in terms of the
                      i




United States, and y the level of per capita PPP GDP. Our measure of overvaluation is then:

overvali = log p − (α$ + β$ log yi ).
                  i            We average this measure for each country over the relevant time period.
Clearly, there are alternative ways of measuring overvaluation that are parsimonious in only
considering relative income as a determinant of real exchange rates. But the key point is that here the
relationship is estimated over the very long run—in effect when we run the annual cross-sectional
regression, what we are assuming is that PPP will apply over the very long run, spanning the period
over which the United States and other OECD countries have become rich and others have not.
Implicitly, the timeframe for estimating the PPP relationship is 300-400 years.




                                                     29
the longest consecutive spell of overvaluation, and the extent of overvaluation during that

spell (Table 6).35

          Almost all the sustained growth cases avoided overvaluation during the growth

period, with some (Indonesia and Thailand) exhibiting substantial undervaluation. The

average degree of overvaluation for the SGs was minus 18 percent (i.e. these countries’

exchange rate was substantially undervalued) compared with an average overvaluation of

7 percent for the Group 1 countries and 18 percent for Group 2 African countries.36

          On average in the Group 1 African countries, there either is now or has been

substantial overvaluation in almost all cases, although today this problem is less marked on

average. The degree and extent of overvaluation in Group 2 countries has been even greater

(on average 20 percent or so in recent years).

          Another indicator is to see how long and how large have been “spells”—consecutive

periods—of overvaluation. Spells can be important especially if there are hysteresis effects

and fixed costs of adjustment. In the SG cases, the average duration of the longest spell was

6.4 years, while for Group 1 countries it is 13 years and for the Group 2 countries is 15 years.

During this spell, the average amount of overvaluation was 11 percent for the average SG

country, while it was 37 percent for the average African country. Thus, the striking finding is

that the average African country is likely to have persistent overvaluation that is twice as

long as for the average SG country and that is almost three times as large in magnitude. On

nearly all the measures of overvaluation—average, duration and persistence—the SSA

countries and Group 1 countries are significantly worse off than the SGs at a comparable

35
     Spells of overvaluation are consecutive periods for which our measure of overvaluation is positive.




                                                    30
point in time (the statistical tests reject the hypothesis that the overvaluation measures for

Group 1 countries and SGs are similar).

        If development, and in the case of Africa, diversification, is about creating the

incentives to invest in the tradable goods sector, and given the inability and unwillingness of

African country governments to pursue interventionist industrial policy, the exchange rate

becomes a key instrument in promoting this objective. The question then arises as to the

feasibility of sustaining a competitive exchange rate.

        The real exchange rate is not an easy policy lever for at least two reasons. First, the

fact that changes in the real exchange rate have serious distributional consequences,

especially in Africa (Bates, 1981), suggests a role for deeper, political economy factors

constraining choices on the exchange rate. Second, the ability of countries in East Asia as

well as China and India (and Tunisia) to sustain a competitive exchange rate has been helped

by their caution in opening up to capital flows (see Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian, 2006).

Latin America has witnessed periodic bouts of currency appreciation driven by surges in

capital flows. While Africa has not witnessed private flows, it too has seen large inflows in

the form of aid, which puts upward pressure on the exchange rate.37 Reconciling the tension

between the need for a competitive exchange rate and the constrained ability to achieve it (in




36
   It is noteworthy that the Sustained Growth countries avoided overvaluation even in cases where
there were substantial aid inflows (e.g., Indonesia, in the 10 year window around its acceleration, had
aid-to-GDP of 24 percent).
37
   Aid-to-GDP at current levels is high compared to the initial starting point of most SG cases, though
it is lower than the aid levels received by Indonesia at the time its takeoff, suggesting perhaps that the
present level of aid should not inevitably constrain, one way or another, these countries’ ability to
enjoy sustained growth. While, Rajan and Subramanian (2005) provide evidence that aid and the
consequent exchange rate overvaluation have a significant negative effect on exports of manufactures,
it is possible that countries can mitigate the adverse effects through policy changes, such as
improvements aimed at enhancing productive efficiency.



                                                   31
light of the political economy and aid factors) will remain a major challenge for African

countries.



D. Costs of Importing and Exporting

       While the Group 1 countries in SSA are comparable to—or even better than—other

developing countries on broad measures of trade policy (the trade restrictiveness rankings

and Sachs-Warner openness measures), they seem to do distinctly worse on the more micro

measures of the costs of trading (Tables 7a and 7b).

       For example, in the average Group 1 country it takes about 12 documents and 57 days

to undertake imports: these numbers are of course vastly superior today in the SGs (the

comparable numbers are 9 and 21 respectively); more strikingly, these numbers are also

inferior to the average developing country where it takes 11 documents and only 37 days,

the latter being about 25 percent better than for the average Group 1 country. There is a

similar difference on the export side.

       The fact that African countries do worse than the average developing country is not

surprising, but what is interesting is that this discrepancy is not reflected in the broader

measures of trade policy, where as discussed earlier, the average African country does,

if anything, marginally better.

       Here again, we see a difference between macro and micro measures. In this case, it is

possible that the macro measures are too coarse, and hence are less informative than the

micro measures. Or, it could be the case that, while broad policy reform has taken place,

implementation lags behind. Either way, though, these figures suggest some scope for

remedial action to improve the micro-environment for importing and exporting.




                                                32
VI. OTHER POTENTIAL CONSTRAINTS

A. Education

       The educational attainment measures are gross primary and secondary enrollment

ratios at the time of the growth spurt (from the World Bank’s World Development

Indicators); see Tables 8a and 8b. For example, the average enrollment ratio in primary

education for the Group 1 countries was 91 compared with 95 for the SGs. Indeed, the

comparable figures for secondary education (32 and 36 percent, respectively) show Group 1

countries as being comparable to the SGs. Of course, it must be kept in mind that these

measures do not adjust for the quality of education.



B. Health and Infrastructure

       Without a doubt, there are some difficult health problems in Africa today. Rates of

HIV/AIDS infections may have been revised downwards recently, but this still remains a

major issue in many countries, particularly in southern Africa. One important measure

of health is life expectancy.

       We report data for two years: the latest available and 1982. We include 1982 so as to

have a measure from before the HIV/AIDS epidemic became widespread, i.e., we are looking

for evidence that health has become more of a constraint over the past 20 years. Note that life

expectancy has not declined everywhere in Africa over this time period, but there have been

dramatic and shocking declines in some countries (particularly in southern Africa.)

       Life expectancy in Group 1 was 49.6 years in 1982 and 48.2 years in the most

recently available data. Some countries (with rapid growth currently) in this group have very




                                              33
low life expectancy—for example, 42 years in Ethiopia and Mozambique. Average life

expectancy in Group 2 is similar (50.9 years in 1982 and 48.8 years today). These figures are

significantly poorer than those for the SGs at the start of their growth episodes.

        The only Sustained Growth country with such low life expectancy at the start of its

acceleration was Indonesia—Table 8b shows that this was 46 in 1967. However, a number

of other SG cases started with life expectancy in the low 50s (e.g., Egypt, Korea, Thailand,

and Tunisia; India too had a life expectancy of 54 in the early 1980s).

        Health in Africa definitely needs to improve, but the jury is out on whether this

constitutes a binding constraint on sustained growth. Bad health may prevent growth from

accelerating, for example because it limits effort. But there is no clear theory of why ill-

health would allow accelerations but not sustained growth.38 In addition, the available

evidence suggests that while improving health can definitely increase incomes, the size of the

effect is small (see the discussion in Acemoglu and Johnson, 2006).

        We are not suggesting that the African health sector does not need further investment.

It is hard to find comparable data on inputs into the health system, as measures of spending

are either not available or are difficult to compare across income levels. However, number of

doctors is a reasonable proxy for the scope of the health system. Column 5 of Table 8a shows

that the Group 1 countries have on average only 150 physicians per million inhabitants, and

this falls to 88 per million if we exclude the exceptional starred cases. This is low by any

standards. Efforts to provide more international assistance for health care in Africa seem well

placed; the historical evidence suggests that this spending could save many lives and

38
  This would need a mechanism through which growth worsens health sufficiently to prevent further
investments in human capital. Alternatively, people might be willing to acquire basic skills (for an
                                                                                     (continued…)



                                                 34
significantly reduce ill health (see the post-World War II experience, reviewed in Acemoglu

and Johnson, 2006.)

        Again, Table 8b shows that the availability of physicians was much higher in many

SG cases, e.g., Korea already had 600 per million people at the time of its acceleration. But

some SGs had poor health systems when they started to grow rapidly. According to this

indicator—Indonesia had 37.3 and Thailand had 129 doctors per million, which are

comparable to the numbers in many African countries.

        A closely related argument is that Africa more broadly lacks the basic infrastructure

to develop. Again, it is hard to find comparable measures, but telephone mainlines and roads

are two rough but reasonable proxies for infrastructure. On both these measures, many of the

SG cases were worse off when they started to grow than Africa is today. For example, China,

Vietnam and Indonesia had two or fewer mainlines per 1,000 people. (Table 8c indicates that

these data are available only from the mid-1970s; this is therefore informative about

conditions when China and Vietnam started to accelerate, but Indonesia had already been

growing for 10 years when it still only had 1.5 mainlines per 1,000).

        Roads are harder to compare, because we would need to adjust for mountainous or

desert terrain, as well as the quality of the road surface. Also, these data are not available

before 1990. Still they indicate that roads per surface area in the Sustained Growth cases

were not generally much more developed that in the Group 1 African countries (with the

notable exception of Singapore.) For example, road infrastructure in Indonesia and Thailand

(in 1990) was quite comparable to many African countries (today). The t-test indicates no



acceleration) but not more advanced skills (to sustain growth). In the British Industrial Revolution,
perhaps for 50 years during the nineteenth century, health probably worsened, yet growth continued.



                                                 35
significant difference in means for Group 1 African countries and the sustained growth cases

in terms of roads.

       Overall, while more infrastructures are presumably better than less, there is no

evidence that the Sustained Growth countries took off after a massive push in terms of public

investment (including health). They may have been slightly healthier than Africa today, but

their overall infrastructure was at comparable levels.

       Africa is often compared with Korea in the 1950s or 1960s, but this may be

misleading. In part because of the Korea war and associated U.S. military-related

investments (e.g., in roads), Korea may have had an unusual starting point. Perhaps a

comparison with Indonesia in the mid-1960s is more instructive. In this regard, at least the

Group 1 African countries have no significant disadvantage.



VII. CONCLUSIONS

       For those who view Africa’s prospects through the perspective of the “deep”

determinants of development—geography, institutions and history—the outlook seems bleak.

For others, the outlook appears rosier, either because of the current commodity-powered

upturn or because of a faith that pulling certain policy levers (especially foreign aid) will

deliver strong results. Both these views are far from persuasive. Extrapolating the recent past

is a cardinal sin of forecasting, especially since Africa has seen many a false dawn of

commodity booms turning bust. And foreign aid has had disappointing effects in the past.

       But implicit in these assessments has been a comparison of Africa with its own past

or Africa with other countries today. The contribution of this paper has been to look at the

evidence differently. We compared Africa today with countries that were similarly weak in




                                               36
the past—in terms of their institutional development—and yet managed to escape from

poverty. Looking at the data suggests (but does not prove) that these “deep” indicators,

especially for a group of “promising” African countries, are not much worse in Africa today

than they were in much of East Asia in the early 1960s (e.g., Indonesia and Thailand) or in

Vietnam and China circa 1980. There are inherited institutional weaknesses in Africa—and

internal conflict and societal fractionalization remain concerns—but the East Asian

experience definitely demonstrates that some institutional weaknesses can be escaped. So the

good news is that breaking away from a country’s institutional legacy is possible because it

has been done by others, including some East Asian countries which were not that dissimilar

from some promising performers in Africa today.

       But when we turn from the deep “why” to the proximate “how” question, we find that

since the 1960s, escapes from poverty in the face of weak institutions have generally

involved exports and—in almost all cases—manufacturing exports. Africa need not, of

course, take exactly the same route, but a stronger and more dynamic manufacturing export

sector would surely help sustain growth. To achieve this, though, reducing the direct

regulatory costs for exporters and avoiding real exchange rate overvaluation will be essential.

And on these scores, we see risks going forward that were less of an issue for the east Asian

escapees: commodity-based growth and sizable aid inflows—that partly underpin the rosier

prognosis for Africa—can be pitfalls for institutional development and the avoidance of real

exchange rate overvaluation. Sub-Saharan Africa’s escape from poverty, while certainly

possible, may be more challenging than it was for east Asia. Clearly, fatalism is unwarranted

but the means of escape need to be found.




                                              37
      Table 1a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries, 1996-2005: Income,
                                     Growth, and Population1
                                              Real Per Capita
                                               GDP Growth                                       PPP Real GDP Per
                                               (WDI, Penn Real Per Worker         Real GDP       Capita (Constant GDP (Current    Population   Population
                                                 Tables)3     GDP Growth4          Growth4           2000 $)      US$ Millions)    Growth      (Millions)
                                                    (1)           (2)                (3)                (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)
Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0 percent

Angola*                                             4.7              4.7              7.9             1,857          11,880          2.6         14.2
Botswana*                                           4.6              4.1              5.7             7,809           6,190          0.9          1.8
Burkina Faso                                        2.0              2.1              4.7             1,024           3,380          3.0         11.5
Cameroon                                            2.0              1.8              4.3             1,875          11,611          2.0         15.0
Cape Verde                                          4.2             4.4               5.6             4,816            658           2.3          0.5
Chad*                                               2.4             2.3               8.2             1,055           2,390          3.3          8.4
Equatorial Guinea*                                 24.3             24.2             23.2             9,172           1,649          2.3          0.5
Ethiopia                                            1.8              2.0              5.0              796            8,390          2.3         64.9
Ghana                                               2.1             2.4               4.7             1,918           7,300          2.2         20.1
Guinea                                              2.4             2.2               3.6             1,975           3,420          2.2          8.5
Lesotho                                             3.3              2.8              2.9             2,220           1,006          0.6          1.8
Liberia*                                            9.4              9.5             18.0              n.a.            441           4.3          3.0
Mali                                                2.8             2.4               5.7              832            3,300          2.9         11.9
Mauritius*                                          3.8              4.4              4.7             9,745           4,820          1.1          1.2
Mozambique                                          4.7              4.4              8.5              946            4,300          2.2         18.1
Rwanda*                                             6.1              6.8              7.5             1,096           1,800          5.1          7.8
Sudan*                                              2.3             2.8               6.3             1,656          15,070          2.1         33.2
Tanzania                                            5.1              5.4              5.5              549            9,250          2.1         35.1
Uganda                                              3.6              3.4              6.0             1,238           6,410          3.2         25.0

Average                                             4.8              4.9             7.3              2,810           5,435          2.5         14.9
Average (excl. * countries)                         3.1              3.0             5.1              1,654           5,366          2.3         19.3

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                                   0.98             0.77              ...               ...             ...           ...          ...
mean for SGs

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.        0.00             0.04              ...               ...             ...           ...          ...
asterisked countries) equals mean for SGs

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%
Average                                            0.04             0.37             2.7              2,533          10,329          2.5         13.6
Average (excl. * countries in group 2)             0.24             0.52             2.6              2,756          11,182          2.4         12.9
Average Sub-Saharan Africa                          2.0              2.1             4.5              2,644           8,350          2.4         14.1

Weighted Average Sub-Saharan Africa2               1.44             1.51             4.1              1,720            …             2.4          …

Source: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download), unless otherwise indicated.

1/ All variables are averages for the period 1996-2005, unless otherwise indicated.
2/ Weighted by population.
3/ Real per Capita GDP Growth is the average of WDI and Penn World Table's estimates for the period 1995-2004.
4/ GDP is measured in national currency terms (WDI).
                                  Table 1b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Income, Growth, and Population1

                                               Real Per Capita
                                                GDP Growth                      PPP Real GDP Per Latest PPP Real                     Latest GDP
                                                (WDI, Penn                       Capita (Constant  GDP Per Capita                   (Current US$         Population       Latest Population   Real Per Worker
                                     Year T       Tables)3     Real GDP Growth4 2000 $) at Time T (Constant 2000 $)4                  Millions)5          Growth             (Millions)5       GDP Growth4
                                                     (1)              (2)               (4)              (5)                              (6)               (7)                   (8)                (9)
Chile                                 1986          4.35             6.01             5,018            11,301                          120,000              1.5                  16.3               3.86
China,P.R.: Mainland                  1978          8.41             9.73              674              5,878                         2,200,000             1.2                1304.5               8.82
Dominican Republic                    1969          3.23             5.35             3,335             6,779                           28,000              2.0                  8.9                4.83
Egypt                                 1976          3.46             5.61             1,742             3,985                           89,000              2.1                  74.0               3.46
Indonesia                             1967          3.96             6.14             1,099             3,437                          290,000              1.9                 220.6               2.73
Korea                                 1962          5.97             7.33             3,498            19,560                          790,000              1.4                  48.3               5.21
Malaysia                              1970          4.50             6.66             2,998             9,699                          130,000              2.4                  25.3               4.04
Singapore                             1969          5.21             7.75             6,536            26,764                          120,000              2.1                  4.4                3.07
Taiwan Province of China              1961          6.30              n.a              n.a.              n.a.                            n.a.               n.a.                 n.a.               n.a.
Thailand                              1960          4.69             6.69             1,899             7,649                          180,000              2.0                  64.2               2.46
Tunisia                               1968          3.40             5.28             3,415             7,423                           29,000              1.9                  10.0               4.72
Vietnam                               1985          4.68             6.72              n.a.             2,739                           52,000              1.7                  83.0               5.95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                29
Average                                …              4.8                 6.7               3,021.5               9,564.7             366,181.8              1.8                169.0               4.5
                   2
Weighted Average                       …              7.1                 8.6                 977                  5,877              1,559,704             1.39                 …                  7.1

Source: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download), unless otherwise indicated.

1/ The variables are averages for the period T to 2005, unless otherwise indicated, where T refers to the start of the growth episode.
2/ Weighted by population.
3/ Real per Capita GDP Growth is the average of WDI and Penn World Table's estimates for the period 1995-2004.
4/ GDP is measured in national currency terms. Growth rates are averages for the period T (the start of the growth episode) to L (2005), the latest year for which data are available.
5/ The latest year is 2005.
      Table 2a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Institutions and Costs
                                         of Doing Business1

                                                                 Growth         Institutions     Economic Institutions.    Governance     Inequality              Costs of Doing Business8
                                                                 Real Per
                                                               Capita GDP                                                                                Time for     Total Amount Costs of Entry
                                                                 Growth                                                                                Paying Taxes of Tax Payable (measured in
                                                                (Constant       Constraint on    Economic Investment       Control of                  (in hours per (as a percentage % per capita
                                                                          2                  3          4         5                  6            7
                                                               2000, WDI)      the Executive       Risk      Risk          Corruption       Gini           year)     of gross profits) income)
                                                                   (1)              (2)             (3)       (4)              (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)           (9)
Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0%
Angola*                                                             5.1              3             28.0          7.67          2.0           n.a.          272               64              487
Botswana*                                                           4.8              7             39.3         10.83          3.0           63            140               53               11
Burkina Faso                                                        1.6              3             28.3            9           2.0           40            270               51              121
Cameroon                                                            2.1              2             37.7            8           2.0           45            n.a.              46              152
Cape Verde                                                          3.2             n.a.           n.a.          n.a.          3.8           n.a.          100               54               46
Chad*                                                               4.8              2             n.a.          n.a.          2.4           n.a.          122               68              226
Equatorial Guinea*                                                 20.3              2             n.a.          n.a.          1.9           n.a.          212               62              101
Ethiopia                                                            2.6              3             32.5            7           2.0           30            212               33               46
Ghana                                                               2.4              6             29.1           8.5          2.0           41            304               32               50
Guinea                                                              1.3              3             34.0            5           2.5           40            416               49              187
Lesotho                                                             2.3              7             n.a.          n.a.          3.5           63            352               26               40
Liberia*                                                           12.4             n.a.           31.6           5.0          2.0           n.a.
Mali                                                                2.7              5             24.0           7.5          2.0           51            270               50              202
Mauritius*                                                          3.6              7             n.a.          n.a.          3.8           n.a.          158               25                8
Mozambique                                                          6.1              4             25.5          8.67          1.5           40            230               39               86
Rwanda*                                                             2.2              3             n.a.          n.a.          3.1           n.a.          168               41              188
Sudan*                                                              4.1              1             34.0           7.5          2.5           n.a.          180               37               59
Tanzania                                                            3.2              3             34.5          11.5          3.0           35            248               45               92
Uganda                                                             2.6                3            33.5           8            2.5           43            237               32              114
Average                                                            4.6               3.8           31.7          8.0           2.5           44.5         228.9             45.0             122.9
Average (excl. * countries)                                        2.8               3.9           31.0          8.1           2.4            43           264               42               103
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl. asterisked
                                                                   0.00             0.01           0.78         0.27           0.01          0.43          0.30             0.62             0.00
countries) equals mean for SGs
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals adjusted mean
                                                                    …               0.04           2.29         0.27            …            …              …                …                …
for SGs9

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl. asterisked              …               0.03           0.10         0.35            …            …              …                …                …
                                        9
countries) equals adjusted mean for SGs
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%
Average                                                            0.22              4.0           29.9          7.2           1.7           49.0          331               87               153
Average (excl. * countries)                                        0.24              4.0           30.4          7.1           1.7           49.0         318.1             74.7             137.9
       Average, 1980 (excl. * countries in group 2)10               …                2.6           26.6          5.4           …              …            …                 …                …

Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)                                   4.9               2.2           31.7          7.1           3.4           39.5          348               44               25
Developing world                                                    …                …              …            …              …            …            283.7             55.2             77.6
Sources: WDI (November 2006 download), ICRG, Polity IV, and World Bank Doing Business websites.
1/ Data are for the most recent 10 year period available, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs). Asterisk denote countries with strong initial institutions or
those recovering from conflict or experiencing a commodity boom.
2/ The data from WDI. For SGs, data refer to the average for the period T to L, where T refers to the start of the growth episode and L the latest year (2005).
3/ Score ranges from 1 to 7. The higher the score the more the constraints on the executive. The data refer to year 2004 for SSA countries, and to the period T for SGs.
4/ Score for economic risk ranges from 1 to 50. The higher the score the lower the risk. For SGs data refer to 1984, and for SSA economic risk to 2002.
5/ Score investment risk ranges from 1 to 12. For SGs data refer to 1996, and for SSA to 2006.
6/ Score ranges from 1 to 6. The higher the score the less the corruption. For SGs data refer to 1996, and for SSA to 2004 or 2005.
7/ For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see table 8c)
8/ The data are from the World Bank Doing Business websites: "http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/PayingTaxes/". Data for all the countries
including SGs are for the most recent period based on the survey of January 2006.
9/ Mean for SGs adjusted by adding the change in world mean between 1970 and the average for the period 1996-2005. Year 1985 is used for Chad.
10/ 1: For constraint on the Executive, Namibia is excluded since the earliest data on it is 1990;
    2: For Economic risk and Investment risk, the averages are for year 1985. Namibia is exlcuded since the earliest data available on them are 1990.
                                Table 2b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Institutions and Costs of Doing Business1

                                                               Political
                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                            Growth           Institutions.       Economic Institutions.        Governance         Inequality                  Costs of Doing Business


                                      Real Per Capita                                                                                               Time for Total Amount of Costs of Entry
                                       GDP Growth                                                                                                 Paying Taxes Tax Payable (as (measured in %
                                        (Constant            Constraint on       Economic     Investment       Control of                         (in hours per a percentage of  per capita
                                                  2
                               Year T 2000, WDI)            the Executive3         Risk4         Risk4         Corruption5          Gini6             year)      gross profits)   income)
                                            (1)                  (2)                (3)           (4)              (5)               (6)               (7)            (8)            (9)
Chile                           1986        4.4                  1.0               22.2           2.7              3.8              55.7               432           26.3           9.8
China,P.R.: Mainland            1978        8.5                  3.0               35.5           8.6              2.0              21.2               872           77.1            9.3
Dominican Republic              1969        3.2                  3.0               26.2           4.3              3.3              45.5               178           67.9           30.2
Egypt                           1976        3.4                  3.0               28.6           6.3              2.1              33.0               536           50.4           68.8
Indonesia                       1967        4.2                  2.0               30.1           6.5              3.0              32.7               576           37.2           86.7
Korea                           1962        5.8                  1.0               34.8           9.8              5.0              32.0               290           30.9           15.2
Malaysia                        1970        4.1                  3.0               37.5           7.5              4.0              51.3               190           35.2           19.7
Singapore                       1969        5.5                  3.0               39.5          10.8              4.0              40.0                30           28.8           0.8
Taiwan Province of China        1961        6.8                  2.0               40.6          10.0              4.0              31.7               n.a.          35.8            4.6
Thailand                        1960        4.6                  1.0               35.2           8.0              3.0              46.6               104           40.2            5.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                31
Tunisia                         1968        3.3                  1.0               30.3           5.3              3.0              48.5               268           58.8           9.3
Vietnam                         1985        4.9                  3.0               20.0           5.2              3.0              35.7               n.a.          41.6           44.5

Average                          …            4.9                 2.2               31.7          7.1              3.4               39.5             347.6           44.2              25.4

Developing world                 …            …                   …                  …            …                 …                 …               283.7           55.2              77.6
Sources: WDI (November 2006 download), ICRG, Polity IV, and World Bank Doing Business websites.

1/ Data refer to the start (T) of the growth episode, unless otherwise specified.
2/ Average for the period T to L, where T refers to the start of the growth episode and L the latest year (2005).
3/ Data refer to the period T. Score ranges from 1 to 7. The higher the score the more the constraints on the executive.
4/ Data refer to the mid-1980s (1984). Score for economic risk ranges from 1 to 50, and for investment risk from 1-12. The higher the score the lower the risk.
5/ Data refer to the mid-1990s (1996). Score ranges from 1 to 6. The higher the score the less the corruption.
6/ For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see table 8c)
7/ The data are from the World Bank Doing Business websites: "http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/PayingTaxes/". Data for all the countries
   including SGs are for the most recent period based on the survey of January 2006.
                   Table 3a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Conflicts1

                                                       All Conflicts2                                        Internal Conflicts                                      Interstate Conflicts
Country                                    T - 4 to T + 5            T - 9 to T                    T - 4 to T + 5           T - 9 to T                      T - 4 to T + 5            T - 9 to T
                                          Mean         Max            Mean         Max            Mean         Max            Mean         Max              Mean      Max          Mean       Max

Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0%

Angola*                                    2.1          3.0            2.7          3.0             0.8         3.0            1.9          3.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Botswana*                                  0.1          1.0            0.1          1.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Burkina Faso                               0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Cameroon                                   0.1          1.0            0.1          1.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.1        1.0          0.1        1.0
Cape Verde                                 0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Chad*                                      1.4          3.0            1.2          3.0             0.7         1.0            0.8          1.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Equatorial Guinea*                         0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Ethiopia                                   1.7          3.0            1.4          3.0             1.0         1.0            0.8          3.0             1.0        3.0          0.9        3.0
Ghana                                      0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Guinea                                     0.8          3.0            0.6          3.0             0.2         1.0            0.1          1.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Lesotho                                    0.1          1.0            0.1          1.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Liberia*                                   0.7          3.0            1.2          3.0             0.7         3.0            1.2          3.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Mali                                       0.0          0.0            0.1          1.0             0.0         0.0            0.1          1.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Mauritius*                                 0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Mozambique                                 0.0          0.0            0.6          3.0             0.0         0.0            0.6          3.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Rwanda*                                    2.0          3.0            2.3          3.0             1.4         3.0            1.8          3.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Sudan*                                     3.0          3.0            2.8          3.0             2.9         3.0            2.8          3.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Tanzania                                   0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0
Uganda                                     2.6          3.0            2.1          3.0             2.1         3.0            1.7          3.0             0.0        0.0          0.0        0.0

Average                                    0.8          1.4            0.8          1.6             0.5         3.0            0.6          3.0             0.1        0.2          0.1        3.0
Average (excl. * countries)                0.5          1.0            0.5          1.4             0.3         0.5            0.3          1.0             0.1        0.4          0.1        0.4
Average, 1980 (excl. * countries)          0.4                                                      0.4                                                     0.0
T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                          0.42         0.53            0.54        0.56            0.03         0.04           0.03        0.03             0.03      0.01         0.01       0.00
mean for SGs
T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.
asterisked countries) equals mean for     0.82         0.31            0.96        0.45            0.15         0.26           0.19        0.11             0.07      0.02         0.02       0.01
SGs

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1      0.64         0.53            0.78        0.56            0.09         0.04           0.08        0.03             0.40      0.01         0.14       0.00
equals adjusted mean for SGs3

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1
                                          0.94         0.31            0.70        0.45            0.30         0.26           0.38        0.11             0.58      0.02         0.23       0.01
(excl. asterisked countries) equals
adjusted mean for SGs3

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Average                                    1.3          1.3            1.3          1.3             0.6         0.6            0.5          0.5             0.2        0.2          0.4        0.4
Average, 19804                             0.2          …              …            …               0.2         …              …            …               0.0        …            …          …

                                           0.5          1.8            0.6          1.9             0.1         0.3            0.1          0.4             0.4        1.6          0.5        1.8
Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)
Sources: PRIO / Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al 2005).

1/ 0: No conflict    1: Minor (at least 25 deaths per year for every year in the period)
   2: Intermediate (more than 25 but fewer than 1000 deaths per year)
   3: War (at least 1000 deaths per year)
   T refers to year 2000 for Sub-Saharan African Countries.
2/ Values are based on maximum value of any conflict (internal extra-state, interstate, or internationalized internal) during a year.
3/ Mean for SGs adjusted by adding the change in world mean between 1970 and the average for the period 1996-2005.
4/ Since average 1980 is for one year, only one value is valid and reported for each category; Namibia is excluded since the earliest data on it is 1990.
                                                         Table 3b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Conflicts1


                                                           All Conflicts 2                                         Internal Conflicts                     Interstate Conflicts
Country                        Year_T           T - 4 to T + 5           T - 9 to T                     T - 4 to T + 5            T - 9 to T     T - 4 to T + 5           T - 9 to T
                                               Mean         Max            Mean         Max            Mean         Max            Mean   Max    Mean      Max         Mean       Max

Chile                            1986           0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   0.0       0.0          0.0        0.0
China,P.R.: Mainland             1978           1.0          3.0            0.2          1.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   1.0       3.0          0.2        1.0
Dominican Republic               1969           0.1          1.0            0.1          1.0            0.1          1.0            0.1    1.0   0.0       0.0          0.0        0.0
Egypt                            1976           0.3          3.0            1.2          3.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   0.3       3.0          1.0        3.0
Indonesia                        1967           0.7          1.0            1.4          2.0            0.4          1.0            1.0    2.0   0.4       1.0          0.5        1.0
Korea                            1962           0.9          3.0            0.3          3.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   0.9       3.0          0.3        3.0
Malaysia                         1970           0.3          1.0            0.4          1.0            0.3          1.0            0.4    1.0   0.1       1.0          0.4        1.0
Singapore                        1969           0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   0.0       0.0          0.0        0.0
Taiwan Province of China         1961           0.3          3.0            0.6          3.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   0.3       3.0          0.6        3.0
Thailand                         1960           0.9          3.0            1.2          3.0            0.0          0.0            0.1    1.0   0.3       3.0          0.9        3.0
Tunisia                          1968           0.0          0.0            0.3          3.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   0.0       0.0          0.3        3.0
Vietnam                          1985           1.9          3.0            1.8          3.0            0.0          0.0            0.0    0.0   1.2       2.0          1.4        3.0




                                                                                                                                                                                         33
Average                        …            0.5         1.8            0.6               1.9            0.1          0.3            0.1   0.4    0.4       1.6          0.5        1.8
Sources: PRIO / Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al 2005).

1/ 0: No conflict    1: Minor (at least 25 deaths per year for every year in the period)
   2: Intermediate (more than 25 but fewer than 1000 deaths per year)
   3: War (at least 1000 deaths per year)
2/ Values are based on maximum value of any conflict (internal extra-state, interstate, or internationalized internal) during a year.
                              Table 4a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Social Fractionalization


                                                  Ethnic based on     Ethnic based
                                                    Easterly and       on Fearon   Religious based on  Ethnic based on       Linguistic based on Religious based on
                     country                       Levine (1997)         (2003)      Fearon (2003)    Alesina et al.(2003)   Alesina et al. (2003) Alesina et al. (2003)
Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0%
Angola*                                                 0.78              0.76            0.61                0.79                   0.79                  0.63
Botswana*                                               0.51              0.35            0.50                0.41                   0.41                  0.60
Burkina Faso                                            0.68              0.70            0.58                0.74                   0.72                  0.58
Cameroon                                                0.89              0.89            0.64                0.86                   0.89                  0.73
Cape Verde                                              n.a.              n.a.            n.a.                0.42                   n.a.                  0.08
Chad*                                                   0.83              0.77            0.63                0.86                   0.86                  0.64
Equatorial Guinea*                                      n.a.              n.a.            n.a.                0.35                   0.32                  0.12
Ethiopia                                                0.69              0.76            0.61                0.72                   0.81                  0.62
Ghana                                                   0.71              0.85            0.70                0.67                   0.67                  0.80
Guinea                                                  0.75              0.67            0.27                0.74                   0.77                  0.26
Lesotho                                                 0.22              0.25            0.32                0.26                   0.25                  0.72
Liberia*                                                0.83              0.90            0.64                0.91                   0.90                  0.49
Mali                                                    0.78              0.75            0.18                0.69                   0.84                  0.18




                                                                                                                                                                           34
Mauritius*                                              0.58              0.63            0.63                0.46                   0.45                  0.64
Mozambique                                              0.65              0.77            0.62                0.69                   0.81                  0.68
Rwanda*                                                 0.13              0.18            0.51                0.32                   n.a.                  0.51
Sudan*                                                  0.74              0.71            0.45                0.71                   0.72                  0.43
Tanzania                                                0.93              0.95            0.64                0.74                   0.90                  0.63
Uganda                                                  0.90              0.93            0.72                0.93                   0.92                  0.63

Average                                                 0.68              0.70            0.54                0.65                   0.71                  0.53
Average (excl. * countries)                             0.72              0.75            0.53                0.68                   0.76                  0.54

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                                        0.00              0.00            0.00                0.00                   0.00                  0.25
mean for SGs
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.
                                                        0.00              0.00            0.02                0.00                   0.00                  0.28
asterisked countries) equals mean for SGs

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Average                                                  0.6               0.7             0.5                 0.7                   0.6                   0.5

Sources: Easterly and Levine (2003); Fearon (2003), and Alesina et. al. (2003)
                         Table 4b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Social Fractionalization


                                Ethnic based on                                                                                   Religious based on
                                  Easterly and     Ethnic based on Religious based on Ethnic based on     Linguistic based on       Alesina et al.
           country               Levine (1997)      Fearon (2003)    Fearon (2003)   Alesina et al.(2003) Alesina et al. (2003)         (2003)

Chile                                0.14                0.50               0.20              0.19                 0.19                 0.38
China                                0.12                0.15               0.55              0.15                 0.13                 0.66
Dominican Republic                   0.04                0.39               0.10              0.43                 0.04                 0.31
Egypt                                0.04                0.16               0.11              0.18                 0.02                 0.20
Indonesia                            0.76                0.77               0.22              0.74                 0.77                 0.23
Korea                                0.00                0.00               0.54              0.00                 0.00                 0.66
Malaysia                             0.65                0.60               0.69              0.59                 0.60                 0.67
Singapore                            0.42                0.39               0.40              0.39                 0.38                 0.66
Taiwan Province of China             0.27                0.27               0.13              0.27                 0.50                 0.68
Thailand                             0.66                0.43               0.10              0.63                 0.63                 0.10
Tunisia                              0.16                0.04               0.04              0.04                 0.01                 0.01




                                                                                                                                                       35
Vietnam                              0.27                0.23               0.50              0.24                 0.24                 0.51
Average                              0.30                0.33               0.30              0.32                 0.29                 0.42
Sources: Easterly and Levine (2003); Fearon (2003), and Alesina et. al. (2003)
                                              Table 5a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Trade Outcomes1

                                                                               Manufacturing        Apparel, Footwear and     Fuel&Ore Exports to        Agriculture & Food    Manufacturing    Apparel, Footwear and
                                               Total Exports to GDP           Exports to GDP2         Textiles to GDP3              GDP                   Exports to GDP      Exports to GDP4     Textiles to GDP5
                                                        (1)                         (2)                      (3)                     (4)                         (5)                (6)                  (7)
Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0 percent
Angola*                                                     70.1                    n.a.                     n.a.                     n.a.                      n.a.               n.a.                 n.a.
Botswana*                                                   39.8                    44.1                      0.7                      2.7                      1.8                46.7                  0.9
Burkina Faso                                                 8.6                     0.9                      4.7                      0.1                      6.2                 1.1                  4.9
Cameroon                                                    19.4                     1.1                      1.1                      7.7                      7.6                 1.4                  1.1
Cape Verde                                                  31.2                     1.5                      0.9                      0.0                      0.1                 5.7                  0.9
Chad*                                                       52.8                    n.a.                     n.a.                     n.a.                      n.a.               n.a.                 n.a.
Equatorial Guinea*                                          n.a.                    n.a.                     n.a.                     n.a.                      n.a.               n.a.                 n.a.
Ethiopia                                                    15.4                     0.9                      0.2                      0.1                       6.9                0.5                  0.1
Ghana                                                       34.5                     2.8                      0.4                      2.5                      15.9                2.7                  0.2
Guinea                                                      21.8                     3.7                      0.0                      9.7                      19.3                3.9                  0.1
Lesotho                                                     55.8                    37.6                     33.1                      0.0                      6.3                37.1                 32.6
Liberia*                                                    34.5                    n.a.                     n.a.                     n.a.                      n.a.               n.a.                 n.a.
Mali                                                        27.5                     1.8                      0.8                      0.4                      1.1                 0.9                  8.6
Mauritius*                                                  55.6                    25.6                     20.5                      0.1                      9.3                27.6                 23.8
Mozambique                                                  30.9                     0.9                      0.8                     11.9                      4.8                 0.9                  0.8
Rwanda*                                                     10.3                     0.1                      0.1                      1.0                      3.7                 0.1                  0.0
Sudan*                                                      17.7                     0.2                      0.4                     10.6                      3.0                 0.4                  0.9
Tanzania                                                    17.8                     1.3                      0.8                      0.9                      6.7                 1.2                  1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        36
Uganda                                                      13.7                     0.6                      0.5                      0.4                      5.4                 0.7                  0.4
Average                                                     31.0                     8.2                      4.3                      3.2                      6.5                 8.7                  5.1
Average (excl. * countries)                                 25.1                     4.8                      3.9                      3.1                      7.3                 5.1                  4.6
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                                            0.74                    0.42                     0.28                      …                        …                  0.37                 0.19
mean for SGs
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.
                                                            0.71                    0.98                     0.46                      …                        …                  0.89                 0.32
asterisked countries) equals mean for SGs
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0 percent
Average                                                     44.0                     5.9                      1.6                      6.2                      9.0                 4.9                  1.8
Average (excl. Swaziland)                                   42.1                     4.1                      1.1                      6.5                      8.3                 3.7                  1.3
Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)6                           19.1                     2.2                      1.1                      4.2                      7.8                 2.2                  1.1
Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)7                           48.9                    24.9                      5.0                      5.6                      5.5                24.9                  5.0

Sources: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download) and World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database.
1/ Data are averages for the period after year 2000, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs) and unless otherwise specified.
2/ Manufacturing corresponds to the products in SITC categories 5 (chemicals), 6 (basic manufactures), 7 (machinery and transport equipment), and
8 (miscellaneous manufactured goods), excluding category 68 (non-ferrous metals).
3/ Correspond to the products in SITC categories 26 (textile fibres, not manufactured, and waste), 65 (textile yarn, fabrics, made-up articles, etc.),
85 (footwear), and 84 (clothing).
4/ Data are averages for the period 1995-2000, and correspond to the products in SITC categories specified in footnote 2/.
5/ Data are averages for the period 1995-2000, and correspond to the products in SITC categories specified in footnote 3/.
6/ Data are averages excluding Singapore for the period T to T+4, where T is the first year of the growth acceleration.
7/ Data are averages excluding Singapore for the most recent 5 years.
                                           Table 5b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Trade Outcomes
                                                                Trade Outcomes: Initial1                                                       Trade Outcomes: Latest2
                                                                         Apparel,                                                                  Apparel,
                                          Total                        Footwear and Fuel & Ore Agriculture &            Total                    Footwear and                Agriculture &
                                        Exports to    Manufacturing     Textiles to Exports to Food Exports           Exports to Manufacturing    Textiles to   Fuel & Ore Food Exports
                              Year T      GDP        Exports to GDP3      GDP4         GDP       to GDP                 GDP      Exports to GDP3    GDP4      Exports to GDP   to GDP
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)                  (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)          (10)
Chile                          1986       32.9             2.5             0.3         14.2         8.7                 35.3           4.3            0.2          12.6           9.4
China,P.R.: Mainland           1978        7.2             4.9             2.8          2.6         2.1                 26.9          21.9            5.3           1.1           1.3
Dominican Republic             1969       18.9             3.3             0.0          0.5        14.3                 44.7           1.3            0.1           0.6           1.6
Egypt                          1976       25.3             2.5             4.6          4.7         4.4                 20.4           2.1            1.0           2.8           1.0
Indonesia                      1967       11.7             0.2             0.0          4.9         5.8                 34.6          16.7            4.6           8.9           4.5
Korea                          1962        6.6             2.1             1.4          0.7         1.3                 39.2          29.8            3.0           1.9           0.8
Malaysia                       1970       39.7             3.7             0.5          9.6        23.9                 118.0         81.3            3.5          11.3           9.8
Singapore                      1969       113.3           28.1             5.9         20.7        32.9                 150.5        133.6            3.1          15.5           3.9
Taiwan Province of China       1961        n.a.            n.a.            n.a.        n.a.         n.a.                 n.a.          n.a.          n.a.          n.a.           n.a.
Thailand                       1960       15.9             0.3             0.6          1.2        12.4                 66.6          43.1            5.2           2.3          10.4
Tunisia                        1968       22.9             2.4             0.3          4.1         5.2                 44.9          25.6           14.0           3.6           2.9
Vietnam                        1985       10.1             0.0             0.0          0.0         0.0                 58.2          22.9           13.3          11.1          13.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 37
Average5                                19.1           2.2            1.1          4.2            7.8           48.9                    24.9             5.0             5.6               5.5
Sources: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download) and World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database.

1/ Average for the period T to T+4, except China (1984) and Dominican Republic (1974).
2/ Average for the latest 5 years (2000 to 2004).
3/ Manufacturing corresponds to the products in SITC categories 5 (chemicals), 6 (basic manufactures), 7 (machinery and transport equipment), and 8 (miscellaneous manufactured goods),
excluding category 68 (non-ferrous metals).
4/ Correspond to the products in SITC categories 26 (textile fibres, not manufactured, and waste), 65 (textile yarn, fabrics, made-up articles, etc.), 85 (footwear), and 84 (clothing).
5/ Averages are excluding Singapore.
Table 6a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Macroeconomic and Trade Policies
                                           and Outcomes1
                                                             Largest
                                            Balassa-    Consecutive Spell                            Average                           Trade
                                           Samuelson     of Overvaluation                         Overvaluation                    Restrictiveness
                                        Average Currency in Years Since                           during Largest                   (Sachs-Warner-
                                         Overvaluation2       1970              Years of Spell         Spell         Inflation3   Welch-Wacziarg)4    Aid to GDP5
                                             (1)                   (2)                (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)                 (7)
 Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0%

 Angola*                                       42.3               15.0           1982 to 1996          53.0            23.0             0.0                  5.5
 Botswana*                                      2.6               10.0           1988 to 1987          11.2            8.6              1.0                  0.4
 Burkina Faso                                   6.7               16.0           1985 to 2000          16.8             6.4             1.0                  12.7
 Cameroon                                       1.7                9.0           1985 to 1993          28.5            2.0              1.0                  4.8
 Cape Verde                                    -2.9               10.0           1970 to 1979          35.8             0.4             1.0                  14.7
 Chad*                                          4.5                4.0           1990 to 1993           6.4            n.a.             0.0                   7.4
 Equatorial Guinea*                            15.5                8.0           1990 to 1997          27.9            n.a.             0.0                   0.9
 Ethiopia                                     -12.5                9.0           1984 to 1992          28.7            11.6             1.0                  18.6
 Ghana                                          9.6               30.0           1970 to 1999          53.7            15.1             1.0                  15.7
 Guinea                                       -66.2               n.a.                …                n.a.            n.a.             1.0                  7.4
 Lesotho                                       20.7               10.0           1991 to 2000          16.1            n.a.             0.0                   7.1
 Liberia*                                      n.a.               n..a               n.a.              n.a.            n.a.             0.0                  42.0
 Mali                                          20.5               15.0           1986 to 2000          29.7             6.4             1.0                  11.6
 Mauritius*                                   -78.2               n.a.                …                n.a.             4.9             1.0                   0.6
 Mozambique                                    -5.3                3.0           1984 to 1986          34.3            n.a.             1.0                  20.3
 Rwanda*                                       17.9                8.0           1993 to 2000          18.1             9.1             0.0                  26.1
 Sudan*                                       -0.5                n.a.                …                 n.a.            n.a.            0.0                  4.0

 Tanzania                                    113.1                31.0           1970 to 2000           75.0            8.6             1.0                  15.5
 Uganda                                      33.5                 21.0           1970 to 1990          119.0            8.2             1.0                  17.6

 Average                                      6.8                 13.3                …                37.0             8.7             0.6                  12.3
 Average (excl. * countries)                 10.82               15.40                …                43.8            7.3              0.9                  13.3
 Average, 1980 (excl. * countries)                                                                                     33.4

 P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1
                                              0.04                0.02                …                0.01            0.37             0.24                 0.02
 equals mean for SGs
 P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1
 (excl. asterisked countries) equals          0.04                0.02                …                0.01            0.28             0.03                 0.00
 mean for SGs

 P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1          …                   …                  …                 …              0.05              …                   0.02
 equals adjusted mean for SGs6

 P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1
                                               …                   …                  …                 …              0.04              …                   0.00
 (excl. asterisked countries) equals
 adjusted mean for SGs6

 Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

 Average                                      18.2                15.3                …                26.6             8.7             0.4                  15.0
 Average, 19807                                …                   …                  …                 …              16.6             …                     …



                                              -17.7               6.4                 …                11.4            14.6             0.4                  4.7
 Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)


 Developing world                              …                   …                  …                 …               …               0.5                  …

 Sources: Various

 1/ Data are for the most recent period available after 2000, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs).
 2/ For Sub-saharan Africa, data refer to the average for the last 5 years for which data were available, except for Djibouti, Eritrea and Sudan
 for which they refer to 1996. For the SGs, data corresponds to the average for the period T to L, where T is the start of the growth episode and L the
 latest year for which data were available. The computation of overvaluation is described in the text.
 3/ For Sub-saharan Africa, data refer to the maximum annual overvaluation between 1970 and L, and for SGs, data refer to the maximum annual
 overvaluation between T and L, where the overvaluation for any year is computed as the average over the following 5 years.
 4/ The score ranges from 0 to 1, with higher values denoting more open regimes. For SGs, data refer to the year T.
 5/ For SGs, data are averages for the period T-4 to T+5, where T is the first year of the growth acceleration.
 6/ Mean for SGs adjusted by adding the change in world mean between 1970 and the average for the period 1996-2005.
 7/ For inflation, Benin and Namibia are excluded since the earliest data on them are 1991; year 1981 data are used for Certral Afr. Republic, and Malawi.
             Table 6b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Macroeconomic and Trade Policies and Outcomes1


                                                                Largest
                                                              Consecutive                              Average
                                            Average             Spell of                            Overvaluation                  Trade Restrictiveness
                                            Currency        Overvaluation in                        during Largest                 (Sachs-Warner-Welch- Aid to
                                Year T    Overvaluation2    Years Since 1970     Years of Spell          Spell        Inflation3        Wacziarg)4       GDP5
                                                (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)             (5)              (6)            (7)
Chile                            1986         -15.6                5.0           1979 to 1983            12.2            19.6              1.0            0.1
China,P.R.: Mainland             1978         -27.9               12.0           1970 to 1981            20.6            n.a.              0.0            0.1
Dominican Republic               1969          1.9                10.0           1970 to 1979            10.6             6.4              0.0            3.9
Egypt                            1976         -14.5                5.0           1985 to 1989            30.5            13.0              0.0            8.8
Indonesia                        1967         -27.3                3.0           1976 to 1978            13.0            53.4              0.4           24.0
Korea                            1962         -13.7                9.0           1989 to 1997            10.8            10.6              0.0            6.8
Malaysia                         1970          -9.0                6.0           1970 to 1975             7.4             6.9              1.0            0.8
Singapore                        1969         11.1                 9.0           1970 to 1978            15.4            4.7               1.0            0.8




                                                                                                                                                                 39
Taiwan Province of China         1961          9.3                18.0           1980 to 1997            16.5            n.a.              0.6            2.9
Thailand                         1960         -22.8                0.0                …                   0.0             1.9              1.0            1.1
Tunisia                          1968         -29.3                0.0                …                   0.0            n.a.              0.0            6.3
Vietnam                          1985         -73.9                0.0                …                   0.0            n.a.              0.0            0.9

Average                                        -17.7               6.4                 …                 11.4            14.6              0.4            4.7
Developing world                                 …                  …                  …                  …               …                0.5            …
Sources: Various

1/ The data refer to the start (T) of the growth episode, unless otherwise specified.
2/ Average for the period T to L, where T refers to the start of the growth episode and L the latest year for which data are available.
3/ Average for the period T to T+4, except Korea (1967).
4/ Average for the period T to T+4.
5/ Average for the period T-4 to T+5.
               Table 7a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Costs of Trading1

                                               No. of Documents   No. of Signatures Time for Export   No. of Documents       No. of Signatures        Time for Import
                                              Required to Export Needed to Export (in Procedures (in Required to Import (in Needed to Import (in       Procedures (in
                                                   (in units)          units)         calendar days)        units)                units)               calendar days)
                                                      (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                   (5)                     (6)
Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0%

Angola*                                                 6.0                    n.a.                74.0                  10.0                  28.0        85.0
Botswana*                                               6.0                    7.0                 37.0                   9.0                  10.0        42.0
Burkina Faso                                            9.0                    19.0                69.0                  13.0                  37.0        66.0
Cameroon                                                10.0                   11.0                38.0                  14.0                  20.0        51.0
Cape Verde                                              4.0                    n.a.                18.0                  9.0                   n.a.        16.0
Chad*                                                   7.0                    32.0                87.0                  14.0                  42.0       111.0
Equatorial Guinea*                                      6.0                    20.0                26.0                   6.0                  33.0        50.0
Ethiopia                                                8.0                    33.0                45.0                  11.0                  45.0        52.0
Ghana                                                   5.0                    11.0                21.0                   9.0                  13.0        42.0
Guinea                                                  7.0                    11.0                43.0                  12.0                  23.0        56.0
Lesotho                                                 6.0                    n.a.                46.0                   9.0                  15.0        51.0
Liberia*                                                n.a.                   n.a.                n.a.                  n.a.                  n.a.        n.a.
Mali                                                    10.0                   33.0                66.0                  16.0                  60.0        61.0
Mauritius*                                              5.0                    4.0                 16.0                   7.0                   4.0        16.0
Mozambique                                              6.0                    12.0                39.0                  16.0                  12.0        38.0
Rwanda*                                                 14.0                   27.0                60.0                  20.0                  46.0        95.0
Sudan*                                                  12.0                   35.0                56.0                  13.0                  50.0        83.0

Tanzania                                                 3.0                   10.0                24.0                  10.0                  16.0        39.0
Uganda                                                  12.0                   18.0                42.0                  19.0                  27.0        67.0

Average                                                  7.6                   18.9                44.8                  12.1                  28.3        56.7
Average (excl. * countries)                              7.3                   17.6                41.0                  12.5                  26.8        49.0

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                                        0.24                   0.00                0.00                  0.02                  0.00        0.00
mean for SGs

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.             0.24                   0.00                0.00                  0.01                  0.00        0.00
asterisked countries) equals mean for SGs

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Average                                                  8.8                   18.5                36.2                  12.4                  30.9        47.3

Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)                         6.6                   6.5                 19.1                  9.4                   8.0         21.3


Developing world                                         7.5                   12.6                29.4                  10.6                  19.1        36.6

Source: The World Bank Doing Business websites: "http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/TradingAcrossBorders/".

1/ Data are for the most recent period based on the survey of January 2006, except (2) and (5), which are based on a survey of January 2005.
                                     Table 7b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Costs of Trading1


                                         No. of Documents       No. of Signatures    Time for Export    No. of Documents    No. of Signatures   Time for Import
                                         Required to Export     Needed to Export      Procedures (in    Required to Import Needed to Import (in Procedures (in
                               Year T        (in units)             (in units)        calendar days)        (in units)           units)          calendar days)
                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)             (6)
Chile                           1986             7.0                  7.0                  20.0                  9.0                  8.0            24.0
China,P.R.: Mainland            1978             6.0                   7.0                 18.0                 12.0                 8.0             22.0
Dominican Republic              1969             7.0                   3.0                 17.0                 11.0                 6.0             17.0
Egypt                           1976             8.0                  11.0                 20.0                 8.0                   8.0            25.0
Indonesia                       1967             7.0                   3.0                 25.0                 10.0                 6.0             30.0
Korea                           1962             5.0                  3.0                  12.0                  8.0                  5.0            12.0
Malaysia                        1970             6.0                   3.0                 20.0                 12.0                 5.0             22.0
Singapore                       1969             5.0                  2.0                   6.0                 6.0                  2.0             3.0
Taiwan Province of China        1961             8.0                   9.0                 14.0                  8.0                 11.0            14.0




                                                                                                                                                                  41
Thailand                        1960             9.0                  10.0                 24.0                 12.0                 10.0            22.0
Tunisia                         1968             5.0                   8.0                 18.0                  8.0                 12.0            29.0
Vietnam                         1985             6.0                  12.0                 35.0                 9.0                  15.0            36.0

Average                          …               6.6                   6.5                 19.1                 9.4                   8.0            21.3
Developing world                 …               7.5                  12.6                 29.4                 10.6                 19.1            36.6

Source: The World Bank Doing Business websites: "http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/TradingAcrossBorders/".

1/ Data are for the most recent period based on the survey of January 2006, except (2) and (5), which are based on a survey of January 2005.
                                  Table 8a. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries:
                                                 Social and Physical Infrastructure1
                                                                                        Life Expectancy
                                                                                                                                       Telephone         Total Roads per
                                                     Primary          Secondary                                 Physicians (per      Mainlines (per      Surface Area (in
                                                    Education2        Education2       Latest3       1982       million people)3     1,000 people)3           km)4
                                                   (1)                    (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)                  (6)                     (7)
Group 1: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth >= 2.0%

Angola*                                                 n.a.             16.5           40.9         39.9             77.0                  6                  43
Botswana*                                               104              73.4           36.0         63.2            343.0                  76                 34
Burkina Faso                                             48              11.5           47.7         47.7             41.2                  6                  46
Cameroon                                                111              35.7           45.9         50.7            132.9                  7                  121
Cape Verde                                              114              65.1           70.1         61.7            329.7                 148                 273
Chad*                                                    71              13.7           43.7         44.5             32.1                  1                  26
Equatorial Guinea*                                      119              29.2           43.1         43.6            251.9                  20                 103
Ethiopia                                                 73              24.5           42.3         42.0             24.1                  6                  29
Ghana                                                    79              38.7           56.9         53.8            101.2                  14                 186
Guinea                                                   73              24.8           53.8         42.8            112.9                  3                  152
Lesotho                                                 127              34.0           36.0         54.3             51.7                  20                 196
Liberia*                                                n.a.             n.a.           42.5         44.9             26.3                 n.a.                95
Mali                                                     60              21.3           48.0         42.7             57.0                  5                  13
Mauritius*                                              104              80.3           72.3         66.7            953.4                 286                 966
Mozambique                                               86              8.7            41.9         42.8             25.6                  4                  38
Rwanda*                                                 108              13.5           43.7         45.7             33.0                  3                  456
Sudan*                                                  57               31.3           56.4         50.1            156.1                 28                      5
Tanzania                                                 89               n.a.          46.1         54.8             31.8                  4                  88
Uganda                                                  131              18.0           47.8         49.9             64.9                  2                  294

Average                                                91.4              31.8           48.2         49.6            149.8                35.6                166.4
Average (excl. * countries)                             90                28             49           49               88                  20                  130
Average, 1980 (excl. * countries)                      68.6              28.9

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                                       0.60              0.56           0.00          …               0.01                0.45                 0.30
mean for SGs

P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.            0.67              0.20           0.00          …               0.00                0.86                 0.29
asterisked countries) equals mean for SGs5
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 equals
                                                       0.00              0.00           0.04          …               0.00                0.00                     …
adjusted mean for SGs
P-value for T-test: mean for Group 1 (excl.
asterisked countries) equals adjusted mean for         0.01              0.00           0.06          …               0.00                0.00                     …
SGs5

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Average                                                 89               34.6           48.8         50.9             216                  27                  155
Average, 19806                                         79.4              19.2            …            …                …                   …                    …
Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)                        95               35.9           59.5         64.7            522.5                 21                  204
Sources: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download), and Deninger and Squire (1996).

1/ Data are for the most recent period available after 2000, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs).
2/ Measured as the gross enrollment ratio. For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see tables 6b and 6c for details).
3/ For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see table 8c).
4/ For SGs, data refer to 1990 and exclude Singapore.
5/ Mean for SGs adjusted by adding the change in world mean between 1970 and the average for the period 1996-2005.
6/ Eritrea (1992), Seychelles (1998), Gabon (1990), Namibia (1998) and Sao Tome & Principe (1998) are excluded.
Years for which the latest data available are stated in brackets.
                             Table 8b. Indicators for Sustained Growth Countries (SGs): Social and Physical Infrastructure1


                                                                             Life Expectancy
                                             Primary       Secondary                                 Physicians (per       Telephone Mainlines    Total Roads per Surface
                               Year T       Education2     Education2      Year T   3
                                                                                          1982       million people)3       (per 1,000 people)3        Area (in km)4
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)                     (6)                     (7)

Chile                              1986       105.0            66.9          72.7         70.7             816.8                   45.4                   105.2
China,P.R.: Mainland               1978       112.6            45.9          65.4         67.8            1080.0                    2.0                    123.0
Dominican Republic                 1969        98.4            21.2          59.9         63.0             435.0                   19.0                   227.8
Egypt                              1976        70.0            40.3          54.1         56.5            535.9                    8.9                     45.9
Indonesia                          1967        80.0            16.1          46.0         56.2             37.3                     1.5                   151.6
Korea                              1962       103.4            41.6          55.2         67.7             600.0                   30.0                   571.4
Malaysia                           1970        88.7            34.2          63.0         68.0             232.0                   13.8                    261.2
Singapore                          1969       105.5            46.0          68.5         71.8             656.9                   93.0                   4114.7
Taiwan Province of China           1961        n.a.            n.a.          n.a.         n.a.              n.a.                   n.a.                     n.a.
Thailand                           1960        81.4            17.4          53.9         65.2             128.9                    5.5                   140.6




                                                                                                                                                                            43
Tunisia                            1968       100.4            22.7          52.1         63.7             168.5                   11.6                   122.4
Vietnam                            1985       103.0            42.7          63.4         61.4            1056.0                   1.2                    289.7

Average                                  95.3         35.9        59.5        64.7           522.5                                 21.1                   203.9
Sources: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download), and Deninger and Squire (1996).

1/ The data refer to the start (T) of the growth episode, unless otherwise specified.
2/ Measured as the gross enrollment ratio. Data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see table 6c for details).
3/ Data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see Table 6c for details)
4/ Data refer to 1990. Average excludes Singapore.
                                                 Table 8c. Years Corresponding to Data in Table 8b.

                                                                 Life Expectancy
                                      Primary       Secondary                                                               Total Roads per Surface
                           Year T    Education      Education   Year T      1980      Physicians      Telephone Mainlines            Area
                                        (1)            (2)       (4)         (5)         (6)                  (7)                     (8)

Chile                         1986     1985           1985       1987       1982        1984                 1986                    1990
China,P.R.: Mainland          1978     1980           1980       1977       1982        1978                 1978                    1990
Dominican Republic            1969     1970           1970       1972       1982        1975                 1980                    1990
Egypt                         1976     1975           1975       1977       1982        1975                 1976                    1990
Indonesia                     1967     1970           1970       1967       1982        1970                 1975                    1990
Korea                         1962     1970           1970       1962       1982        1985                 1975                    1990
Malaysia                      1970     1970           1970       1972       1982        1970                 1975                    1990
Singapore                     1969     1970           1970       1972       1982        1970                 1975                    1990
Taiwan Province of China      1961      n.a.           n.a.       n.a.       n.a.        n.a.                 n.a.                    n.a.
Thailand                      1960     1970           1970       1963       1982        1960                 1975                    1990
Tunisia                       1968     1970           1970       1968       1982        1970                 1975                    1990




                                                                                                                                                      44
Vietnam                       1985     1985           1985       1987       1982        1986                 1985                    1990
                                 Appendix Data and Sources

We describe briefly the data used in the analysis in this paper and their sources.
       Variable                           Description                            Source
Economic growth        Annual average per capita GDP growth                 World
                                                                            Development
                                                                            Indicators
                                                                            (WDI)
Political institutions Measured as the constraint on the executive          Polity IV
                       (which is an assessment of the operational (de
                       facto) independence of the chief executive of
                       the country). Values range from 1-7, with
                       higher score denoting better institutions
Manufacturing          Manufacturing exports exclude agricultural           WDI World
exports to GDP         raw materials, food, minerals and ores, and          Integrated
                       fuels                                                Trade Solution
                                                                            (WITS)
Apparel, footwear      SITC categories 26, 65, 84, and 85                   WITS
and textile exports
Exports of fuel and                                                         WDI
ore and agricultural
products
Trade openness         Dummy taking value of 1 if country is                Wacziarg and
                       considered open (as defined in Sachs and             Welch, 2003
                       Warner, 1985) and 0 otherwise.                       (which updates
                                                                            Sachs and
                                                                            Warner, 1985)
Exchange rate          This is a measure of a deviation of a country’s Staff estimates
overvaluation          actual real exchange rate from a benchmark
                       PPP exchange rate. Details are described in the
                       text.
Aid                    Ratio of net overseas development assistance         OECD’s DAC
                       to GDP and includes all multilateral and             database
                       bilateral assistance, including debt relief
Size of government     Ratio of real government consumption to GDP PWT
Fiscal position        Ratio of general government fiscal balance           World
                       (after grants) to GDP                                Economic
                                                                            Outlook (WEO)
Nominal instability    Measured as the logarithm of the annual              Satyanath and
                       average percentage change in the nominal             Subramanian
                       parallel market exchange rate                        (2004)
                               Appendix Data and Sources

     Variable                          Description                       Source
Primary education   Measured as the gross primary schooling           WDI
                    enrollment ratio. The gross enrollment ratio is
                    the total enrollment at a given educational
                    level, regardless of age, divided by the
                    population of the age group that typically
                    corresponds to that level of education. The
                    specification of age groups varies by country,
                    based on different national systems of
                    education and the duration of schooling at the
                    primary and secondary levels.
Secondary education Measured as the gross secondary schooling         WDI
                    enrollment ratio
Inequality          Measured as the gini coefficient of income        WDI
                    inequality
Economic            This is an assessment of factors affecting the    International
institutions        risk to investment. The risk rating assigned is   Country Risk
                    the sum of three subcomponents (contract          Guide
                    viability/expropriation, payments delays, and     Economic
                    profits repatriation), each with a maximum        Rating (ICRGE)
                    score of four points and a minimum score of 0
                    points. The measure thus varies from 0 (high
                    risk) to 12 (low risk).
Business            Measured as the costs per capita of starting a    World Bank’s
environment/Trading business; and various measures of costs of        Doing Business
costs               imports and exports.                              Database
Measures of social                                                    WDI
and physical
infrastructure
                Table 9. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries, 1996-20051: Income,
                                                Growth, and Population


                                              Real Per
                                             Capita GDP   Real Per
                                               Growth     Worker                PPP Real GDP Per
                                             (WDI, Penn    GDP       Real GDP    Capita (Constant GDP (Current US$   Population   Population
                                              Tables)3    Growth      Growth4        2000 $)         Millions)        Growth      (Millions)
                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0 percent
Benin                                          1.69         1.85      4.71              959                2,850       3.08          7.4
Burundi                                        -1.94       -1.55      0.43              607                 760        2.03          6.7
Central African                                0.57         0.78      0.85             1,092              1,102        1.68          3.8
Comoros                                        -1.85       -1.42      1.99             1,777                262        2.11          0.5
Congo, Dem. Rep.*                              -2.92       -2.87      0.10              702                5,650       2.46         51.2
Congo, Republic*                               -1.31       -2.15      3.46              965                3,110       3.16          3.5
Côte d'Ivoire                                  -0.15        0.12      1.46             1,542             12,700        2.07          16.8
Djibouti                                       1.11         1.52      1.31             1,908                573        2.65          0.7
Eritrea                                        -0.68       -0.83      2.64             1,000                742        3.51          3.7
Gabon                                          -1.49       -1.08      1.75             6,223              5,570        2.13          1.3
Gambia, The                                    0.73         0.91      4.20             1,697                409        3.08          1.3
Guinea-Bissau                                  0.00        -0.03      0.47              769                 240        2.88          1.4
Kenya                                          0.02         0.04      2.55             1,036             14,000        2.30          31.0
Madagascar                                     -0.55       -0.27      3.22              796                4,260       2.88         16.5
Malawi                                         1.11         0.77      3.33              579                1,970       2.42         11.7
Mauritania                                     1.35         1.48      4.87             1,743              1,240        2.88          2.7
Namibia                                        1.69         1.71      3.96             6,224              3,990        2.07          1.9
Niger                                          -0.26       -0.20      3.45              728                2,300       3.40         12.0
Nigeria                                        1.39         1.40      4.25              916               50,400       2.36         119.0
Senegal                                        1.35         1.38      4.68             1,450              5,480        2.46          10.5
Seychelles                                     0.92         n.a.      2.05            16,247                631        1.15          0.1
Sierra Leone*                                  -0.64       -0.59      5.20              590                 879        2.89          4.7
South Africa                                   1.65         1.35      3.28             9,814             153,000       1.44          43.7
Swaziland                                      1.42         1.42      2.76             4,352              1,640        2.28          1.0
São Tomé & Prínc                               0.53         1.00      2.94              n.a.                 50        2.05          0.1
Togo                                           -0.20       -0.34      3.51             1,451              1,640        3.09          5.4
Zambia                                         0.05         0.12      3.80              816                4,100       1.99         10.7
Zimbabwe                                       -2.43       -1.88      -2.44            2,416              9,650        0.96          12.6

Average                                         0.04       0.10        2.7            2,533              10,328         2.4          13.6
Average (excl. * countries in group 2)          0.24       0.34        2.6            2,756              11,182         2.4         12.9

Average Sub-Saharan Africa                      1.97        2.1        4.53           2,644               8,350        2.43          14.1
                                         2
Weighted Average Sub-Saharan Africa             1.44       1.51        4.15           1,720                 …          2.38          …

Source: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download), unless otherwise indicated.
1/ All variables are averages for the period 1996-2005, unless otherwise indicated.
2/ Weighted by population.
3/ Real per Capita GDP Growth is the average of WDI and Penn World Table's estimates for the period 1995-2004.
4/ GDP is measured in national currency terms (WDI).
                 Table 10. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Institutions and Costs
                                                    of Doing Business1
                                                       Political
                                     Growth          Institutions.     Economic Institutions.       Governance         Inequality                   Costs of Doing Business7
                                                                                                                                        Time for
                                 Real Per Capita                                                                                         Paying      Total Amount of Costs of Entry
                                  GDP Growth                                                                                            Taxes (in    Tax Payable (as (measured in %
                                 (Constant 2000,     Constraint on    Economic      Investment      Control of                          hours per    a percentage of   per capita
                                     WDI)2          the Executive3      Risk4          Risk5        Corruption6          Gini8            year)       gross profits)    income)
                                       (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)            (9)
Uganda                                 4.1               3.0            33.5            9.0             2.8                               237.0            42.9          117.8

Average                                4.7               3.8             32.3           7.9              3.1                              282.3            49.8                127.7
Average (excl. * countries)            2.9               3.3             32.2           7.9              3.1                              319.2            48.9                138.5


Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Benin                                  1.5                5              n.a.          n.a.             3.2               36               270              68.5               173.3
Burundi                                -1.6              n.a.            n.a.          n.a.             2.3               42               140             286.7               222.4
Central African                        -0.8               2              n.a.          n.a.             2.1               61               504             209.5               209.3
Comoros                                -0.1               7              n.a.          n.a.             2.4               n.a.             100              47.5               192.3
Congo, Dem. Rep.*                      -2.4               2              21.8          6.0              1.0               n.a.             312             235.4               481.1
Congo, Republic*                       0.2               n.a.            35.4           8.5             2.0               n.a.             576              57.3               214.8
Côte d'Ivoire                          -0.6              n.a.            34.3           5.0             1.5               45               270             45.7                134.1
Djibouti                               -1.3               3              n.a.          n.a.             2.6               n.a.             114              41.7                222
Eritrea                                -0.9               2              n.a.          n.a.             n.a.              n.a.             216              86.3               115.9
Gabon                                  -0.4               2              36.6          9.0              1.0               n.a.             272             48.3                162.8
Gambia, The                            1.0                2              34.6           8.5             2.5               50               376             291.4               292.1
Guinea-Bissau                          -2.4               2              26.0          7.5              2.0               47               208             47.5                261.2
Kenya                                  0.2                6              33.0          9.5              1.0               43               432             74.2                 46.3
Madagascar                             0.3                5              30.3          8.0              4.0               47               304             43.2                  35
Malawi                                 0.9                6              27.7           8.0             2.0               50               878              32.6               134.7
Mauritania                             1.9                3              n.a.          n.a.             3.5               39               696             104.3               121.6
Namibia                                1.8                5              35.8          10.0             1.5               74               n.a.             25.6                 18
Niger                                  0.0                5              30.7           7.5             1.0               51               270               46                416.8
Nigeria                                1.8                5              28.6           6.5             1.3               44               n.a.             31.4                54.4
Senegal                                2.1                6              35.2           8.0             2.5               41               696              47.7               112.6
Seychelles                             0.9               n.a.            n.a.          n.a.             3.5               n.a.              76              48.8                 9.1
Sierra Leone*                          2.1                5              25.5           8.0             2.0               n.a.             399              277                 n.a.
South Africa                           1.8                7              36.3          2.0              1.0               58               350             38.3                  6.9
Swaziland                              0.4                2              n.a.          n.a.             2.5               61               104              39.5                41.1
São Tomé & Prínc                       0.8               n.a.            n.a.          n.a.             2.8               n.a.             424             55.2                147.2
Togo                                   0.4                2              31.5           8.5             1.5               n.a.             270              48.3               252.7
Zambia                                 1.8                5              24.0           7.0             3.0               42               131              22.2                29.9
Zimbabwe                               -3.4               2              11.8          1.5              0.0               50               216               37                 35.6

Average                                0.22              4.0             29.9           7.2              2.1              49.0            330.9            87.0                153.5
Average (excl. * countries)            0.24              4.0             30.4           7.1              2.1              49.0            318.1            74.7                137.9
Sustained Growth Countries
                                       4.9               2.2             31.7           7.1              3.4              39.5             348              44                  25
(SGs)

Developing world                                                                                                                          283.7            55.2                77.6
Sources: WDI (November 2006 download), ICRG, Polity IV, and World Bank Doing Business websites.

1/ Data are for the most recent 10 year period available, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs). Asterisk denote countries with strong initial institutions or
those recovering from conflict or experiencing a commodity boom.
2/ The data from WDI. For SGs, data refer to the average for the period T to L, where T refers to the start of the growth episode and L the latest year (2005).
3/ Score ranges from 1 to 7. The higher the score the more the constraints on the executive. The data refer to year 2004 for SSA countries, and to the period T for SGs.
4/ Score for economic risk ranges from 1 to 50. The higher the score the lower the risk. For SGs data refer to 1984, and for SSA economic risk to 2002.
5/ Score investment risk ranges from 1 to 12. For SGs data refer to 1996, and for SSA to 2006.
6/ Score ranges from 1 to 6. The higher the score the less the corruption. For SGs data refer to 1996, and for SSA to 2004 or 2005.
7/ The data are from the World Bank Doing Business websites: "http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/PayingTaxes/". Data for all the countries
including SGs are for the most recent period based on the survey of January 2006.
8/ For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see table 8c).
                                                 Table 11. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Conflicts 1

                                                            All Conflicts2                                              Internal Conflicts                                  Interstate Conflicts
Country                                        T - 4 to T + 5              T - 9 to T                        T - 4 to T + 5              T - 9 to T                T - 4 to T + 5            T - 9 to T
                                              Mean          Max              Mean          Max             Mean           Max             Mean              Max    Mean      Max         Mean        Max

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 1.85%

Benin                                           0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Burundi                                         3             3                3             3                3             3               3                3      0          0           0          0
Central African                                 1             1                0             0                1             1               0                0      0          0           0          0
Comoros                                         1             1                1             1                1             1               1                1      0          0           0          0
Congo, Dem. Rep.                                3             3                3             3                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Congo, Republic                                 3             3                3             3                0             0               1                1      0          0           0          0
Côte d'Ivoire                                   1             1                0             0                1             1               0                0      0          0           0          0
Djibouti                                        1             1                1             1                1             1               1                1      0          0           0          0
Eritrea                                         3             3                3             3                1             1               1                1      3          3           3          3
Gabon                                           0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Gambia, The                                     0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Guinea-Bissau                                   3             3                3             3                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Kenya                                           0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Madagascar                                      0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Malawi                                          0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Mauritania                                      0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Namibia                                         3             3                3             3                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            49
Niger                                           1             1                3             3                1             1               1                1      0          0           3          3
Nigeria                                         1             1                1             1                1             1               0                0      1          1           1          1
Senegal                                         3             3                3             3                2             2               2                2      0          0           3          3
Seychelles                                     n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.            n.a.             n.a.   n.a.       n.a.        n.a.       n.a.
Sierra Leone                                    3             3                3             3                3             3               3                3      0          0           0          0
South Africa                                    1             1                1             1                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Swaziland                                       0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
São Tomé & Prínc                               n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.            n.a.             n.a.   n.a.       n.a.        n.a.       n.a.
Togo                                            0             0                1             1                0             0               1                1      0          0           0          0
Zambia                                          0             0                0             0                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0
Zimbabwe                                        3             3                3             3                0             0               0                0      0          0           0          0

Average                                        1.3           1.3              1.3           1.3              0.6           0.6             0.5              0.5    0.2        0.2          0.4        0.4
Average, 1980   3                              0.2           …                 …             …               0.2           …                …               …      0.0        …            …          …



Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)               0.5           1.8              0.6           1.9              0.1           0.3             0.1              0.4    0.4        1.6          0.5        1.8

Sources: PRIO / Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset (Gleditsch et al 2005).

1/ 0: No conflict    1: Minor (at least 25 deaths per year for every year in the period)
   2: Intermediate (more than 25 but fewer than 1000 deaths per year)
   3: War (at least 1000 deaths per year)
   T refers to year 2000 for Sub-Saharan African Countries.
2/ Values are based on maximum value of any conflict (internal extra-state, interstate, or internationalized internal) during a year.
3/ Since average 1980 is for one year, only one value is valid and reported for each category; Namibia is excluded since the earliest data on it is 1990.
                              Table 12. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Social Fractionalization

                                                  Ethnic based on     Ethnic based
                                                    Easterly and       on Fearon Religious based on  Ethnic based on       Linguistic based on Religious based on
                    country                        Levine (1997)         (2003)    Fearon (2003)    Alesina et al.(2003)   Alesina et al. (2003) Alesina et al. (2003)

Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%
Benin                                                   0.62              0.62           0.47                0.79                  0.79                  0.55
Burundi                                                 0.04              0.33           0.55                0.30                  0.30                  0.52
Central African                                         0.69              0.79           0.78                0.83                  0.83                  0.79
Comoros                                                 n.a.              n.a.           n.a.                0.00                  0.01                  0.01
Congo, Dem. Rep.*                                       0.90              0.93           0.68                0.87                  0.87                  0.70
Congo, Republic*                                        0.66              0.88           0.52                0.87                  0.69                  0.66
Côte d'Ivoire                                           0.86              0.78           0.56                0.82                  0.78                  0.76
Djibouti                                                0.69              0.61           0.11                0.80                  0.66                  0.04
Eritrea                                                 0.59              0.65           0.58                0.65                  0.65                  0.43
Gabon                                                   0.69              0.86           0.46                0.77                  0.78                  0.67
Gambia, The                                             0.73              0.76           0.18                0.79                  0.81                  0.10
Guinea-Bissau                                           0.80              0.82           0.55                0.81                  0.81                  0.61
Kenya                                                   0.83              0.85           0.70                0.86                  0.89                  0.78




                                                                                                                                                                         50
Madagascar                                              0.06              0.86           0.56                0.88                  0.02                  0.52
Malawi                                                  0.62              0.83           0.62                0.67                  0.60                  0.82
Mauritania                                              0.34              0.62           0.00                0.62                  0.33                  0.01
Namibia                                                 0.68              0.72           0.26                0.63                  0.70                  0.66
Niger                                                   0.73              0.64           0.32                0.65                  0.65                  0.20
Nigeria                                                 0.87              0.80           0.58                0.85                  0.85                  0.74
Senegal                                                 0.72              0.73           0.15                0.69                  0.70                  0.15
Seychelles                                              n.a.              n.a.           n.a.                0.20                  0.16                  0.23
Sierra Leone*                                           0.77              0.76           0.54                0.82                  0.76                  0.54
South Africa                                            0.88              0.88           0.46                0.75                  0.87                  0.86
Swaziland                                               0.39              0.28           0.48                0.06                  0.17                  0.44
São Tomé & Prínc                                        n.a.              n.a.           n.a.                n.a.                  0.23                  0.19
Togo                                                    0.71              0.88           0.46                0.71                  0.90                  0.66
Zambia                                                  0.82              0.73           0.46                0.78                  0.87                  0.74
Zimbabwe                                                0.54              0.37           0.51                0.39                  0.45                  0.74

Average                                                 0.65              0.72           0.46                0.66                  0.61                  0.50

Sources: Easterly and Levine (2003); Fearon (2003), and Alesina et. al. (2003)
                                                  Table 13. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Trade Outcomes1
                                                 Total Exports to   Manufacturing Exports Apparel, Footwear and         Fuel&Ore Exports to    Agriculture & Food   Manufacturing        Apparel, Footwear and
                                                                                     2                           3                                                                   4                       5
                                                       GDP                  to GDP               Textiles to GDP              GDP               Exports to GDP      Exports to GDP         Textiles to GDP
                                                        (1)                    (2)                      (3)                    (4)                     (5)                (6)                     (7)
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0 percent
Benin                                                  13.5                    0.7                      4.9                      0.0                     7.0             0.7                      7.3
Burundi                                                 8.5                    0.2                      0.0                      0.2                     4.7             0.1                      0.0
Central African                                        n.a.                    3.1                      0.4                      1.6                     2.3             5.1                      1.5
Comoros                                                14.3                    1.0                      0.0                      0.0                     1.7             0.7                      0.0
Congo, Dem. Rep.*                                      34.1                    1.4                      n.a.                    n.a.                     n.a.            n.a.                    n.a.
Congo, Republic*                                       82.3                    1.5                      n.a.                     n.a.                    n.a.            1.4                      0.0
Côte d'Ivoire                                          50.4                    8.6                      2.0                      5.1                     27.9             5.8                     2.1
Djibouti                                               n.a.                   n.a.                      n.a.                    n.a.                     n.a.            n.a.                    n.a.
Eritrea                                                 8.9                    0.7                      0.1                      0.1                     1.2             0.6                      0.1
Gabon                                                  58.5                    2.1                      0.1                     30.9                     4.7             1.7                      0.1
Gambia, The                                            43.4                    0.6                      0.1                      0.0                     1.5             0.9                      0.4
Guinea-Bissau                                          37.3                    0.0                      0.2                      n.a.                    9.4             0.7                      0.2
Kenya                                                  24.7                    3.2                      0.5                      3.1                     7.7             3.3                      0.6
Madagascar                                             25.6                    4.0                      2.7                      0.7                     8.3              3.8                     2.8
Malawi                                                 26.8                    3.3                      2.7                      0.1                     21.3            2.6                      1.9
Mauritania                                             38.5                   20.4                      0.0                      2.2                     14.8            0.9                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 51
Namibia                                                46.3                   18.0                      0.3                      3.8                     15.3            21.4                     0.3
Niger                                                  15.0                    0.5                      0.5                      4.4                     3.3             4.1                      2.2
Nigeria                                                53.1                    1.0                      0.1                     38.5                     0.1             0.5                      0.1
Senegal                                                n.a.                    6.5                      0.5                      4.1                     6.1             4.7                      0.5
Seychelles                                            106.4                    2.3                      0.0                     12.7                     28.2            3.2                      0.0
Sierra Leone*                                          24.0                    0.3                      0.0                      0.0                     4.1             n.a.                    n.a.
South Africa                                           26.6                   11.9                      0.5                      5.3                     2.4             9.1                      0.5
Swaziland                                              88.3                   43.2                     12.1                      0.8                     22.6            34.6                    11.7
São Tomé & Prínc                                       47.6                    0.3                      0.0                      0.0                     8.3             0.1                      0.0
Togo                                                   33.7         10.1                                2.8                      2.6                     6.6             4.6                      6.6
Zambia                                                 16.4                    3.0                      1.6                     17.9                     4.5             3.8                      2.1
Zimbabwe                                               170.2                      5.2                   2.6                       4.4                    9.2              8.1                     3.0
Average                                                 43.8                      5.7                   1.4                       5.8                    8.9              4.9                     1.8
Average (excl. Swaziland)                               41.9                      4.2                   0.9                       6.0                    8.4              3.7                     1.3
                                   6
Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)                        19.1                      2.2                   1.1                       4.2                    7.8              2.2                     1.1
                                   7
Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)                        48.9                     24.9                   5.0                       5.6                    5.5             24.9                     5.0
Sources: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download) and World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database.
1/ Data are averages for the period after year 2000, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs) and unless otherwise specified.
2/ Manufacturing corresponds to the products in SITC categories 5 (chemicals), 6 (basic manufactures), 7 (machinery and transport equipment), and
8 (miscellaneous manufactured goods), excluding category 68 (non-ferrous metals). Data are for the period 1995-2000.
3/ Correspond to the products in SITC categories 26 (textile fibres, not manufactured, and waste), 65 (textile yarn, fabrics, made-up articles, etc.),
85 (footwear), and 84 (clothing). Data are for the period 1995-2000.
4/ Data are averages for the period 1995-2000, and correspond to the products in SITC categories specified in footnote 2/.
5/ Data are averages for the period 1995-2000, and correspond to the products in SITC categories specified in footnote 3/.
6/ Data are averages for the period T to T+4, where T is the first year of the growth acceleration.
7/ Data are averages for the most recent 5 years.
                    Table 14. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Macroeconomic and Trade
                                                       Policies and Outcomes1

                                                  Largest Consecutive                                 Average
                                                       Spell of                                    Overvaluation
                                 Average Currency  Overvaluation in                                during Largest                   Trade Restrictiveness (Sachs-
                                  Overvaluation2   Years Since 1970            Years of Spell           Spell          Inflation3    Warner-Welch-Wacziarg)4        Aid to GDP5
                                     (1)                 (2)                        (3)                  (4)              (5)                    (6)                    (7)
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Benin                                  29.2                   15.0             1986 to 2000             30.3              5.4                    1.0                    9.5
Burundi                                  4.1                  8.0              1980 to 1987             18.3              13.5                   1.0                   53.0
Central African                         30.9                  12.0             1987 to 1998             19.9              2.9                    0.0                    7.7
Comoros                                -15.7                    .                   …                   0.0               n.a.                   0.0                    6.8
Congo, Dem. Rep.                        72.9                  28.0             1970 to 1997             83.4              21.3                   0.0                   27.7
Congo, Republic                         49.3                  31.0             1970 to 2000             53.5              1.3                    0.0                    2.8
Côte d'Ivoire                           18.1                  15.0             1986 to 2000             20.8              3.9                    1.0                    1.0
Djibouti                                12.5                   1.0                1996                  12.5              n.a.                   0.0                    9.7
Eritrea                                  4.3                   1.0                1996                  4.3               n.a.                   0.0                   28.0
Gabon                                   -0.7                   9.0             1985 to 1993             17.2              0.1                    0.0                    0.5
Gambia, The                             20.7                   9.0             1992 to 2000             20.3              3.2                    1.0                   15.8
Guinea-Bissau                           30.5                  31.0             1970 to 2000             42.9              n.a.                   1.0                   28.1
Kenya                                    9.4                  21.0             1970 to 1990             16.9              10.3                   1.0                    4.0
Madagascar                              38.9                  15.0             1973 to 1987             18.7              18.5                   1.0                   27.3
Malawi                                  20.2                  24.0             1977 to 2000             20.0              15.4                   0.0                   25.3
Mauritania                              19.4                  19.0             1981 to 1999             26.0              12.1                   1.0                   12.0
Namibia                                 12.0                  11.0             1970 to 1980             52.8              2.3                    0.0                    3.2
Niger                                    8.5                  16.0             1984 to 1999             16.1              7.8                    1.0                   17.4
Nigeria                                125.6                  31.0             1970 to 2000             94.1              13.5                   0.0                    0.8
Senegal                                 17.0                  16.0             1985 to 2000             30.0              1.7                    0.0                   14.5
Seychelles                              14.0                  12.0             1986 to 1997             23.4              n.a.                   0.0                    1.4
Sierra Leone                            -8.8                   9.0             1977 to 1985             18.7              12.1                   0.0                   32.7
South Africa                           -14.7                  n.a.             1994 to 1995              0.0              3.4                    1.0                    0.3
Swaziland                              -47.2                  n.a.                  …                   1.3               n.a.                   0.0                    4.8
São Tomé & Prínc                        -4.8                   4.0             1986 to 1989             24.4              n.a.                   0.0                   57.9
Togo                                    45.0                  14.0             1987 to 2000             30.1              6.8                    0.0                    2.9
Zambia                                  64.6                  16.0             1970 to 1985             33.3              18.3                   1.0                   20.4
Zimbabwe                               -46.0                  14.0             1970 to 1983             15.0              n.a.                   0.0                    4.0

Average                                 18.2                  15.3                   …                  26.6              8.7                    0.4                   15.0
Average, 1980   6                        …                     …                     …                   …                16.6                    …                     …

Sustained Growth Countries              -17.7                 6.4                    …                  11.4              14.6                   0.4                    4.7
(SGs)


Developing world                         …                     …                     …                   …                …                      0.5                    …

Sources: Various

1/ Data are for the most recent period available after 2000, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs).
2/ For Sub-saharan Africa, data refer to the average for the last 5 years for which data were available, except for Djibouti, Eritrea and Sudan for which
they refer to 1996. For the SGs, data corresponds to the average for the period T to L, where T is the start of the growth episode and L the latest year for
which data were available. The computation of overvaluation is described in the text.
3/ For SGs, data are averages for the period T to T+4, where T is the first year of the growth acceleration.
4/ The score ranges from 0 to 1, with higher values denoting more open regimes. For SGs, data refer to the year T.
5/ For SGs, data are averages for the period T-4 to T+5, where T is the first year of the growth acceleration.
6/ For inflation, Benin and Namibia are excluded since the earliest data on them are 1991; year 1981
   data are used for Certral Afr. Republic, and Malawi.
                      Table 15. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Costs of Trading1


                                 No. of Documents       No. of Signatures Time for Export   No. of Documents       No. of Signatures           Time for Import
                                Required to Export (in Needed to Export (in Procedures (in Required to Import (in Needed to Import (in          Procedures (in
                                       units)                units)         calendar days)        units)                units)                  calendar days)
                                       (1)                      (2)                  (3)                  (4)                    (5)                 (6)
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Benin                                     8                     10                   35                    11                    14                 48
Burundi                                  12                     29                   80                    14                    55                 124
Central African                           9                     38                   63                    19                    75                 60
Comoros                                   9                     n.a.                 28                     8                    n.a.               22
Congo, Dem. Rep.                          8                     45                   64                    12                    80                 92
Congo, Republic                          12                     42                   50                    15                    51                 62
Côte d'Ivoire                             9                     11                   21                    19                    21                 48
Djibouti                                 15                     n.a.                 25                    14                    n.a.               26
Eritrea                                  11                      2                   69                    18                     5                 69
Gabon                                     4                     n.a.                 19                    10                    n.a.               26
Gambia, The                               4                     n.a.                 19                     8                    n.a.               23
Guinea-Bissau                             8                     n.a.                 27                     9                    n.a.               26
Kenya                                    11                     15                   25                     9                    20                 45
Madagascar                                8                     15                   48                    11                    18                 48
Malawi                                    8                     12                   44                    16                    20                 60
Mauritania                                9                     13                   25                     7                    25                 40
Namibia                                   9                      7                   32                    14                     7                 25
Niger                                    n.a.                   n.a.                 n.a.                  19                    52                 89
Nigeria                                  11                     39                   25                    13                    71                 45
Senegal                                   6                      8                   22                    10                    12                 26
Seychelles                                6                     n.a.                 17                     7                    n.a.               19
Sierra Leone                              7                      8                   29                     7                    22                 33
South Africa                              5                      7                   31                     9                     9                 34
Swaziland                                 9                     n.a.                  9                    14                    n.a.               35
São Tomé & Prínc                          8                     n.a.                 27                    10                    n.a.               29
Togo                                      7                      8                   32                     9                    14                 41
Zambia                                   16                     25                   60                    19                    28                 62
Zimbabwe                                  9                     18                   52                    15                    19                 66

Average                               8.8                  18.5                36.2               12.4                           30.9               47.3
Sustained Growth Countries
(SGs)                                 6.6                   6.5                19.1                9.4                            8.0               21.3
Developing world                      7.5                  12.6                29.4               10.6                           19.1               36.6
Source: The World Bank Doing Business websites: "http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreTopics/TradingAcrossBorders/".

1/ Data are for the most recent period based on the survey of January 2006, except (2) and (5), which are based on a survey of January 2005.
                      Table 16. Indicators for Selected sub-Saharan African Countries: Social and Physical


                                                                             Life Expectancy
                                                                                                                           Telephone      Total Roads per
                                          Primary          Secondary                                Physicians (per      Mainlines (per   Surface Area (in
                                         Education2        Education2       Latest3      1982       million people)3     1,000 people)3        km)4
                                          (1)            (2)                  (3)          (4)             (5)                 (6)              (7)
Group 2: Sub-Saharan African Countries with Growth < 2.0%

Benin                                       92.5              23.8           55            51              45                    9               60
Burundi                                     71.6              11.3           44            47              28                    3              520
Central African                             66.8              11.6           39            48              85                    2               38
Comoros                                     87.8              31.6           63            50             146                  23               395
Congo, Dem. Rep.*                           64.0              23.0           44            48             107                    0               68
Congo, Republic*                            84.5              33.8           52            57             198                    3               37
Côte d'Ivoire                               73.3              24.9           46            54             123                   13              156
Djibouti                                    37.6              18.8           53            49             181                  14               125
Eritrea                                     64.4              28.5           54            44              50                    9               34
Gabon                                       129.2             49.7           54            56             292                  29                61
Gambia, The                                 78.8              34.3           56            44              n.a.                n.a.             285
Guinea-Bissau                               69.7              17.8           45            39             122                    7              122
Kenya                                       105.3             44.6           48            59             139                    9              110
Madagascar                                  113.4              n.a.          56            49             291                    3               85
Malawi                                      133.5             31.1           40            46              22                    7              240
Mauritania                                  88.5              21.5           53            47             105                   13               8
Namibia                                     101.0             59.9           47            59             297                   64               71
Niger                                       39.0               6.5           45            39              30                    2               8
Nigeria                                     104.5             35.0           44            46              n.a.                  8              210
Senegal                                     70.4              17.1           56            48              57                   21               72
Seychelles                                  114.4             110.9          n.a.          69             1513                 255              n.a.
Sierra Leone*                               78.9              26.2           41            38              33                    5              158
South Africa                                105.5             88.6           45            58             770                  105              302
Swaziland                                   100.0             42.4           42            53             158                   42              191
São Tomé & Prínc                            129.0             38.6           63            60             491                   47              333
Togo                                        103.1             38.3           55            56              45                  10               132
Zambia                                      84.0              25.2           38            52             116                    8              105
Zimbabwe                                    98.0              39.7           37            60             161                   24              249

Average                                      88.9             34.6           48.8         50.9            215.6                27.2            154.7
Average, 1980 (excl. * countries)            79.4             19.2            …            …               …                    …               …

Sustained Growth Countries (SGs)             95.3             35.9           59.5         64.7            522.5                21.1            203.9
Sources: World Development Indicators (WDI, November 2006 download), and Deninger and Squire (1996).

1/ Data are for the most recent period available after 2000, except for the sustained growth countries (SGs).
2/ Measured as the gross enrollment ratio. For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available
   (see tables 8b and 8c for details).
3/ For SGs, data refer to T or to the year closest to T for which data are available (see table 8c).
4/ For SGs, data refer to 1990 and exclude Singapore.
                                        References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2006, “Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
     Expectancy on Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 12269 (Cambridge,
     Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

———, and James A. Robinson, 2001, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development:
   An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91 (December),
   pp. 1369–1401.

———, 2005a, “Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” Chapter 6 in
   Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1, Part A, edited by Philippe Aghion and
   Steven Durlauf, pp. 385–472. Also available as NBER Working Paper No. 10481
   (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

———, 2005b, “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic
   Growth,” American Economic Review, Vol. 95 (June), pp. 546–79.

———, and Yunyong Thaicharoen 2003, “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms:
   Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (January),
   pp. 49–123.

Adelman, Irma, and Cynthia Taft Morris, 1971, Society, Politics, and Economic
      Development: A Quantitative Approach (Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins Press).

Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain
       Wacziarg, 2003, “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 8 (No. 2),
       pp. 155-94.

Bates, Robert H., 1981, Markets and States in Tropical Africa (Berkeley, California:
       University of California Press).

Berg, Andy, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, 2006, “What Makes Growth
       Sustained?” (unpublished; Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Bio-Tchané, Abdoulaye, and Benedicte Vibe Christensen, 2006, “Right Time for Africa,”
      Finance and Development (December), pp. 8–13.

Chang, Ha-Joon 2005, Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in Historical
       Perspective (London: Anthem Press).

Collier, Paul, and Steve O’Connell, 2006, “Opportunities, Choices, and Syndromes,” in
        Explaining African Economic Growth (forthcoming; African Economic Research
        Consortium).

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 1997, “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
       Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112 (November), pp. 1203–50.
Fearon, James D., 2003, “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic
       Growth, Vol. 8 (No. 2), pp. 195–222.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2004, "On the Renminbi: The Choice Between Adjustment Under a Fixed
       Exchange Rate and Adjustment Under a Flexible Rate," written for a High-Level
       Seminar on Foreign Exchange System, Dalian, China, May 2004.

Freeman, Richard B., and David L. Lindauer, 1999, “Why Not Africa?” NBER Working
      Paper No. 6942 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
      Research).

Gleditsch, Nils Petter, Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg, and
       Håvard Strand, 2002, “Armed Conflict 1946–2001: A New Dataset,” Journal of
       Peace Research, Vol. 39 (September), pp. 615–37.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Lant Pritchett, and Dani Rodrik, 2004, “Growth Accelerations,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 11566 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
     Research).

Hernández-Catá, Ernesto, Stanley Fischer, and Mohsin S. Khan, 1998, “Africa—Is This the
      Turning Point?” IMF Papers on Policy Analysis and Assessment No. 98/6
      (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

International Monetary Fund, 2003, World Economic Outlook, (Washington: IMF,
        April 2003).

———, 2005, World Economic Outlook (Washington: IMF, September 2005).

——— and the World Bank, 2006, “Review of Low-Income Country Debt Sustainability
   Framework and Implications of the MDRI” (Washington: IMF and World Bank).

Jerzmanowski, Michal, 2006, “Empirics of Hills, Plateaus, Mountains and Plains: A
      Markov-Switching Approach to Growth,” Journal of Development Economics,
      Vol. 81 (December).

Johnson, Simon, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian, 2006, “Levers for Growth:
      Policy Lessons from Earlier Bouts of Growth in Developing Countries,” Finance and
      Development, Vol. 43 (March).

Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken, 2005a, “Do Leaders Matter? National
       Leadership and Growth Since World War II,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       Vol. 120 (August), pp. 835–64.

———, 2005b, “The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 1152
   (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Marshall, Monty G., Keith Jaggers, and Ted Robert Gurr, 2006, “Polity IV Project, Political
      Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2004,” (Maryland: Center for
      International Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland,
      College Park).

Mattoo, Aaditya, Devesh Roy and Arvind Subramanian, 2003, “The Africa Growth and
      Opportunity Act and Its Rules of Origin: Generosity Undermined?” The World
      Economy, Vol. 26, No. 6.

Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian, 2006, “Foreign Capital and
       Economic Development,” paper presented at the Kansas Federal Reserve Conference
       at Jackson Hole, Wyoming.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, “What Undermines Aid’s Impact on
       Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 11657 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
       Bureau of Economic Research).

Rajan, Raghuram, 2006, “The Persistence of Underdevelopment: Constituencies and
       Competitive Rent Preservation” (unpublished; Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).

Rodrik, Dani, 1999, “Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and
       Growth Collapses,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 4 (December), pp. 385–412.

——— and Arvind Subramanian, 2004, “From “Hindu Growth” to Productivity Surge: The
   Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition,” IMF Working Paper No. 04/77
   (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

——— and Francesco Trebbi, 2004, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over
   Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
   Growth, Vol. 9 (June), pp. 131–65.

Ross, Michael L., 2001, "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?" World Politics, Vol. 53, No. 3,
       pp. 325–61.

Satyanath, Shankar and Arvind Subramanian, 2007, “The Real Origins of Nominal
       Pathologies,” forthcoming: IMF Staff Papers, (Washington: International Monetary
       Fund).

Timmermann, Allan, 2006, “An Evaluation of the World Economic Outlook Forecasts,” IMF
     Working Paper 06/59 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

World Bank, 1993, “The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy,”
      (Washington: World Bank).

World Bank, 2000, “Can Africa Claim the 21st Century?” (Washington: World Bank).
