                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DO SECURITY ANALYSTS SPEAK IN TWO TONGUES?

                                        Ulrike Malmendier
                                        Devin Shanthikumar

                                        Working Paper 13124
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13124


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




We would like to thank Sris Chatterjee, Paul Healy, David Hirshleifer, Gerard Hoberg, Jennifer Juergens,
Charles Lee, Pat O’Brien, Tim McCormick, Zoran Ivkovich, Siew Hong Teoh, seminar participants
at the MIT Sloan School of Management, UC Irvine, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the
N.Y. Fed/Ohio State University/JFE 2004 conference on Agency Problems and Conflicts of Interest
in Financial Intermediaries, the 2005 Early Career Women in Finance Mini-Conference, the 2006
American Finance Association Annual Meeting, the 2006 Financial Accounting and Reporting Section
Mid-Year Meeting of the AAA, the 2006 Financial Management Association Europe Conference,
the Seventh Maryland Finance Symposium on Behavioral Finance, the 2007 European Accounting
Association Annual Meeting and the University of Minnesota. Michael Jung provided excellent research
assistance. Ulrike Malmendier gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Coleman Fung
Risk Management Research Center. Send correspondence to Devin Shanthikumar. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2007 by Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Security Analysts Speak in Two Tongues?
Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar
NBER Working Paper No. 13124
May 2007, Revised February 2014
JEL No. D14,D82,G12,G14,G24

                                             ABSTRACT

Why do security analysts issue overly positive recommendations? We propose a novel approach to
distinguish strategic motives (e.g., generating small-investor purchases and pleasing management)
from nonstrategic motives (genuine overoptimism). We argue that nonstrategic distorters tend to issue
both positive recommendations and optimistic forecasts, while strategic distorters “speak in two tongues,”
issuing overly positive recommendations but less optimistic forecasts. We show that the incidence
of strategic distortion is large and systematically related to proxies for incentive misalignment. Our
“two-tongues metric” reveals strategic distortion beyond those indicators and provides a new tool for
detecting incentives to distort that are hard to identify otherwise.


Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

Devin Shanthikumar
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 377
15 Harvard Way
Boston, MA 02163
dshanthikumar@hbs.edu
A large body of research shows that analyst recommendations are positively biased.1 The

explanations for the upward bias fall into two categories, “strategic” and “nonstrategic.”

Strategic distortion reflects misaligned incentives: analysts aim to please company man-

agement, generate corporate finance business, and induce investors to purchase stock.2

Nonstrategic distortion reflects genuine overoptimism: analysts have too-positive expec-

tations, for example, due to self-selection into covering stocks they view favorably, or

due to credulity (McNichols and O’Brien 1997; Teoh and Wong 2002).3 Despite the poli-

cy relevance of this distinction, especially for reducing analyst distortion, we know little

about the relative importance of strategic and nonstrategic motives. Analysts’ affiliation

with stock underwriters and other measures of incentive misalignment are often interpret-

ed as proxies for strategic distortion, but they are open to alternative interpretations. For

example, the higher incidence of positive recommendations among affiliated analysts

could reflect that an analyst’s genuine overoptimism encourages the corporate-finance di-

vision to underwrite in the first place.4

        In this paper, we propose a novel approach to distinguish strategic and nonstrate-

gic bias. We exploit the fact that strategic distorters have stronger incentives to distort

their recommendations than their forecasts. We construct a novel “two-tongues metric” of

strategic distortion, issuing optimistic recommendations but less optimistic or even pessi-

mistic forecasts. We find that a large number of analysts distort strategically.


1
  Michaely and Womack (2005) provide an excellent recent review of the recommendations literature.
2
  See Michaely and Womack (1999). Management often calls analysts to complain about low ratings, and
has “frozen out” the analysts who gave them (Francis, Hanna, and Philbrick 1997; Chen and Matsumoto
2006), while buy-side clients push for positive recommendations on stocks they hold (Boni and Womack
2002).
3
  Lin and McNichols (1998) use the terminology “strategic and non-strategic bias” more narrowly to
capture whether distortion is aimed at being selected as an underwriter or not. Kothari (2001) uses
“incentives-based versus cognitive” to capture the same distinction we make.
4
  Relatedly, Bradley, Jordan, and Ritter (2003) and Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006) show that
analysts fail to win underwriting business with positive recommendations.

                                                                                                   2
        We relate our metric to existing measures of incentive (mis-)alignment used in

prior work (Ljungqvist et al. 2007 and Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm 2006). We

show that affiliation and investment-banking pressure (share of a company’s previous

underwriting mandate) are highly predictive of strategic distortion, but other measures are

not, including bank reputation capital, bank loyalty index, institutional ownership, and

all-star status. As such, our results speak to the interpretation and relative strength of the

existing indicators of distortion. Our measure detects widespread and persistent strategic

distortion beyond that captured by existing proxies.

        Our empirical strategy consists of four steps. First, using Institutional Brokers’

Estimate System (IBES) data, we compare the average distortion of recommendations

and annual earnings forecasts.5 Consistent with prior studies (e.g., Lin and McNichols

1998; Michaely and Womack 1999), we find that recommendations are tilted toward

buys and strong buys, in particular if analysts are affiliated with a stock’s underwriter.

Annual earnings forecasts, instead, often underestimate the subsequent earnings, and af-

filiated forecasts are less positive than unaffiliated ones.6 We also find recommendation

timing to be as in O’Brien, McNichols, and Lin (2005): affiliated analysts are slower to

downgrade stocks from “buy” or “strong buy” than unaffiliated analysts. Going beyond

prior findings, we extend the timing analysis to forecasts and find no differential timing

of affiliated and unaffiliated forecasts. Sampling by other incentive measures reveals sim-

ilar contrasts.

        Second, we relate distortion to investor behavior. Using New York Stock Ex-

change Trades and Quotations (TAQ) data, we show that small and large investors react

5
  Quarterly earnings forecasts and long-term growth forecasts are discussed in the Online Appendix.
6
  Lin and McNichols (1998) find no difference for SEO-affiliated analysts (in 1989–1994). Our different
finding might reflect our longer post-IPO/SEO window and the different sample period (1993–2008).

                                                                                                     3
differently to recommendations and forecasts. Large investors correct for the upward dis-

tortion of recommendations while small investors do not, consistent with Iskoz (2002),

Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007), and Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (2007). We pre-

sent the new finding that small investors exert buy pressure in response to forecast up-

dates regardless of whether they convey good or bad news. Large investors, instead, re-

spond to the direction of the update, exerting buy (sell) pressure after positive (negative)

updates.7 Moreover, small investors react more strongly than large investors to whether

firms “meet or beat” last year’s earnings, but neglect the earnings surprise magnitude.

        The differences in small and large investors’ trade reactions generate incentives to

distort recommendations upward, but not forecasts. Biased recommendations induce

small investors to trade, and this distortion comes at little cost vis-à-vis large investors,

who correct for the distortion. Biased forecasts, however, entail little benefit in terms of

small-investor reaction and come at a higher cost of tarnishing reputation with large in-

vestors. Management pressures reinforce these incentives. While managers like to see op-

timistic recommendations, they tend to “guide” analysts to lower forecasts shortly before

the earnings announcement, allowing their firm to “meet or beat” the consensus.8

        For both reasons, strategic distortion should be more positive for recommenda-

tions than forecasts. Under nonstrategic distortion, instead, the most optimistic analysts

issue the most optimistic recommendations and the most optimistic forecasts. For exam-

ple, if analysts believe that the next earnings will be higher than the consensus, they


7
  The results add a directional (buy/sell) dimension to Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (2007), who find that
small trade volume does not vary with the absolute magnitude of forecast updates, while large trade volume
increases.
8
  Richardson, Teoh, and Wysocki (2004) document the within-year “walk-down” in forecasts. Chan,
Karceski, and Lakonishok (2007) argue that analysts strategically lower earnings forecasts so that firms
avoid negative earnings surprises. Baik and Yi (2007) document that firms meet or beat the forecasts of
affiliated analysts more often than those of unaffiliated analysts, consistent with our own results.

                                                                                                        4
should issue a “buy,” given the excess returns associated with positive earnings surprises.

       In the third step, therefore, we relate forecast optimism to recommendation opti-

mism and examine how the relationship varies with respect to analyst incentives. We re-

strict the primary analysis to recommendations issued by the same analyst for the same

stock on the same day as the forecast. In order to minimize concerns about unobserved

factors affecting the estimation, we restrict the analysis to analysts who are both affiliated

and unaffiliated and to stocks with recent issuance (so affiliation is possible), and conduct

reweighting and fixed effect analyses. We find that unaffiliated analysts who are more

optimistic in their recommendations tend to be insignificantly more optimistic in their

forecasts. Affiliated analysts, however, who are optimistic in their recommendations are

significantly more pessimistic in their forecasts. Investment-banking pressure predicts the

same strategic distortion, but bank reputation, institutional ownership, and all-star status

do not. Our “two-tongues metric” also reveals that bank loyalty predicts a pessimistic

forecast paired with an optimistic recommendation with marginal significance; that is, a

higher frequency of retaining clients appears not to lower distortion in our sample.

       Fourth, we use the difference between recommendation and forecast optimism to

construct a measure of strategic distortion, the “two-tongues metric.” The measure re-

veals widespread strategic distortion, among more than half of all analysts. It also reveals

that past distortion predicts future distortion. An analyst who has distorted investment

advice for a stock strategically will do so again at the next instance with 62% probability,

while one who did not has only 49% probability of doing so at the next instance. This

holds both for affiliated and unaffiliated analysts. These differences are even more strik-

ing when we account for strategic distortions “implicit” in the above-mentioned strategic

timing, that is, the delay of recommendation downgrades. If we include outstanding rec-

                                                                                            5
ommendations in instances where a forecast but no new recommendation is issued, the

same-stock persistence of strategic distorters is 75%, while only 34% of nonstrategic dis-

torters will start strategically distorting.

        The results suggest that strategic motives are more widespread and persistent than

is detectable with the leading proxies of incentive misalignment. Our “two-tongues met-

ric” reveals, for example, that an unaffiliated analyst who has distorted strategically in the

past is indistinguishable from an affiliated analyst who has distorted strategically in the

past—their probabilities of future distortion are high and virtually identical.

        Our finding that a large fraction of analysts speak in “different tongues” to differ-

ent audiences is important not only in light of the large role that security analysts play in

financial markets, but also because individual investors increasingly manage their in-

vestments and retirement savings on their own.9 A growing literature in household fi-

nance is concerned with their biases and suboptimal decision-making (Choi, Laibson, and

Madrian 2010; Choi et al. 2009; Lusardi and Mitchell 2007; Malmendier and Nagel

2011). Our results imply that precisely this group of investors receives the least reliable

investment advice. Mandatory separation of research and investment banking might re-

duce strategic upward distortions, but the incentive to communicate differently toward

distinct groups of investors will remain.

        This paper builds upon a large literature on analyst behavior.10 Several papers an-

alyze whether conflicts of interest explain the upward distortion of affiliated recommen-



9
  The Federal Reserve’s triennial Survey of Consumer Finances found that in 1989 fewer than one-third of
households had stock holdings, while in each of the surveys after 2000, over 50% of households had stock
holdings. Similarly, in 1989 only 37% of households had one or more retirement accounts (such as an IRA
or 401(k) account), while in 2001 the number was 52.6%.
10
   In addition to the literature cited above, important recent examples are Abarbanell and Lehavy (2003),
Barber et al. (2006), and Barber, Lehavy, and Trueman (2007).

                                                                                                       6
dations, with mixed results. McNichols and O’Brien (1997) argue that analysts choose to

cover firms about which they are genuinely optimistic. Kolasinski and Kothari (2008)

provide evidence of strategic distortion by analysts affiliated with acquirers or targets

around mergers. Cowen, Groysberg, and Healy (2006) argue that trade generation, not

underwriting, drives upward distortion. Groysberg et al. (2013) find that buy-side ana-

lysts, with different incentives, are less optimistic than the sell-side. Our paper does not

aim at distinguishing the different strategic motives. Rather, we complement prior work

by jointly examining recommendations and forecasts to assess strategic distortion direct-

ly.11

        The hypothesis of this paper, that analysts use recommendations and earnings

forecasts differently and communicate to different classes of investors “in two tongues,”

is new to the literature, as is the empirical evidence of widespread (identifiably) strategic

distortion not captured by previous proxies. As such, many of our tests are unique. Prior

literature does not examine within-analyst correlation of optimism in recommendations

and earnings forecasts, nor the effect of underwriting affiliation and other incentive prox-

ies on earnings forecasts issued just before an announcement.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the data. In

Section 2, we show aggregate differences in recommendation and forecast optimism.

Section 3 presents the trade reaction and walk-down results that motivate the “two-

tongues metric.” Section 4 presents the individual-level analysis of recommendation and

forecast optimism. Section 5 constructs the “two-tongues metric” to detect strategic dis-


11
  Few papers have examined recommendations and forecasts together. Two exceptions are Ertimur, Sun-
der, and Sunder (2007) and Loh and Mian (2006). Both show that analysts who issue more accurate
forecasts also issue more profitable recommendations, supporting our hypothesis that genuinely optimistic
analysts will reveal optimism in both forecasts and recommendations. Neither examines optimism and
pessimism.

                                                                                                       7
tortion (“forensic accounting”) and evaluate its prevalence and persistence. Section 6

concludes.


1.       Data and Measures

1.1      Analyst data

We obtain analyst recommendations, annual earnings forecasts, earnings realizations, and

information about analyst identities and brokerage firms from IBES. We include all U.S.

firms with Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) data. Thus our main sample in-

cludes the three major exchanges, NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq.12 Recommendations are

available starting from 10/29/1993. We choose 2/1/1994 as the start date because the first

three months of IBES data contain an unusually high number of recommendations, creat-

ing concerns about data consistency. We use the revdat variable to identify all outstand-

ing recommendations and forecasts.13 IBES converts the recommendation formats of dif-

ferent brokerage houses into a uniform numerical format. Like Jegadeesh et al. (2004),

we reverse the coding to 5 = strong buy, 4 = buy, 3 = hold, 2 = sell, and 1 = strong sell, so

that a “higher” recommendation is better.

         We use annual earnings forecasts occurring between the prior announcement and

the announcement to which the forecast relates. We eliminate forecasts relating to an-

nouncements that occur outside of the SEC-mandated reporting window of 0–90 days af-


12
   The sample (restricted to forecasts with a well-defined consensus of at least three analysts covering the
firm) is dominated by over 60% NYSE stock, while less than 2% is from Amex and 38% is from Nasdaq.
The Nasdaq portion increases when we restrict to forecast-recommendation pairs issued on the same day
(50%, 2%, 48%, respectively), and increases even further for the Regression Sample, defined in Section 2
(37%, 1.3%, 62%).
13
   Revdat is the most recent date on which IBES confirmed the accuracy and validity of an outstanding
forecast or recommendation and, hence, provides a floor for how long a forecast or recommendation was
valid. We follow IBES in assuming that, if there was no prior “stop” notice or update, a forecast or
recommendation is valid for 180 days after the last revdat. In cases where an analyst reports two forecasts
for the same stock on the same day, revdats can also be used to identify which one is the “correct” forecast.

                                                                                                           8
ter the end of the fiscal year.14 In order to avoid imprecision arising from IBES’s round-

ing of forecasts, we use the unadjusted data and split-adjust manually.15

         IBES reports recommendations and earnings forecasts in separate files. To match

a given analyst’s recommendations and earnings forecasts, we use the analyst identity

files of each data set, which maps from numeric analyst identification codes to names.

Since IBES acknowledges deviations between the “amaskcd” variable in the recommen-

dations file and the “analyst” variable in the forecasts file, we complement the numeric

match with programmed and hand matching of names. For most of our analyses, we limit

the sample to forecasts with an identified analyst, eliminating 1.4% of forecasts.

         Distortion benchmarks. We measure “optimism” as the difference between a

forecast or recommendation and the existing consensus. Since forecasts are in earnings-

per-share (dollars), we normalize the difference by the prior-day share price, and we take

the average of all outstanding forecasts to calculate the consensus. For recommendations,

the calculation is similar. Since recommendations do not apply to a specific time period

and are updated less frequently than forecasts, we use a range of periods to form the con-

sensus: either the prior one, two, six, or twelve months. (We show one-month results. Our

results are robust to these variations.) We require at least three outstanding forecasts or

recommendations, respectively, and a share price of at least $5.00. Both consensus calcu-


14
   Sections 13 and 15(d) of the Exchange Act require publicly traded firms to file 10-Ks within that window
(see also Rule 13a-1 and Rule 13a-13). Reports outside the window are in part IBES reporting errors and in
part late filers. Allowing for longer windows does not affect our results. When we use 0–105 days (to
account for late filers who submit Form NT and obtain a 15-day extension), or even for 0–180 days (as an
upper bound to include possible late filers, but not reporting errors), the magnitude and significance of all
results remain very similar. For example, the coefficients (s.e.) on Affiliation*(Recommendation
Optimism) in Table 5, column 1, are –0.6270 (.3519) using the 90-day cutoff, –0.6265 (.3503) using the
105-day cutoff, and –0.6226 (.3496) using the 180-day cutoff, all significant at the 5% level.
15
   Payne and Thomas (2003) document that using IBES split-adjusted summary data, which is rounded to
two decimal places, can have a significant effect on empirical estimates. Using the detailed IBES forecast
file, which is rounded to four decimal places (see, for example, Loh and Mian 2006), ameliorates the
problem, but similar issues may still arise. Manual adjustment remedies these problems.

                                                                                                           9
lations closely resemble those made in practice, for example, by IBES or Yahoo! Fi-

nance.16

        In our analysis, we construct a “two-tongues metric” of strategic distortion and re-

late it to the main determinants of analyst behavior identified in prior literature. These de-

terminants, whose construction is described in the Data Appendix, are as follows:

        Affiliation. The main determinant of distortion from previous literature is an indi-

cator variable that is equal to 1 if the analyst’s investment bank was the lead or co-

underwriter of an initial public offering (IPO) of the covered firm during the past five

years, or of a seasoned equity offering (SEO) during the past two.

        Investment-Banking Pressure. A second known determinant of analyst behavior

and, in a broad sense, a continuous version of the binary affiliation proxy is investment-

banking pressure. It uses the bank’s share of a company’s previous underwriting mandate

to measure the strength of the bank’s relationship with a particular company.

        Bank Reputation Capital. Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006) and

Ljungqvist et al. (2007) argue that highly reputable underwriters who dominate the issu-

ance market have lower incentives to seek deals via biased research. Reputational capital

is measured as a bank’s share in the underwriting market.

        Bank Loyalty Index. Another predictor of less underwriting pressure, introduced

by Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006) and Ljungqvist et al. (2007), is the bank

loyalty index. It measures to what extent a bank retains its clients in consecutive deals.

Like the investment-banking pressure variable, the loyalty index ranges from 0 to 1.


16
  We reestimate results using the median, instead of average, to calculate consensus. Results are virtually
identical for Tables 1–4 and similar for Tables 5–7, though the statistical significance decreases. The one
exception is the coefficient on Bank Loyalty Index in Table 7 in the full sample, which becomes
insignificant.

                                                                                                        10
        Institutional Ownership. Another potential determinant of strategic distortion is

the presence of institutional investors. Institutional investors publicize their assessment of

analysts’ performance in rankings such as the annual “All-Star Analyst” list of the Insti-

tutional Investor Magazine. The quality of the information provided by analysts also af-

fects which brokerage firm institutional investors choose. Hence, out of career concerns,

analysts might distort less when stocks have institutional ownership. Ljungqvist et al.

(2007) find a significantly negative relationship between analysts’ recommendation op-

timism and the percentage of stock owned by institutions. We examine whether institu-

tional ownership affects strategic distortion as evidenced by “speaking in two tongues.”

        All-Star Status. Relatedly, we control for analysts making the “All-Star Ana-

lyst.” While institutional investors’ rankings affect analysts’ reputations and careers, their

influence on the distortive behavior of analysts who are already “stars” is unclear.

1.2     Trading data

Trading data are from the NYSE Trades and Quotations (TAQ) database. We examine

trading of ordinary common shares for U.S. firms traded on the NYSE.17

        Investor type. We separate small and large investors by trading size, following

Lee and Radhakrishna (2000), with trades up to $20,000 (above $50,000) classified as

small (large). As discussed in the Data Appendix, these proxies are effective measures of

individual and institutional trade until about 2000 (Malmendier and Shanthikumar 2007).

Thus, we limit this portion of the (ancillary) analysis to 1993 through 2002.


17
  The TAQ database reports every round-lot trade and quote from January 1, 1993, onward on the NYSE,
Amex, and Nasdaq. We restrict the trade-reaction analysis to NYSE data following Lee and Radhakrishna
(2000) and Odders-White (2000), among others, as the Lee-Ready algorithm has only been tested on NYSE
data. Battalio and Mendenhall (2005) show that the use of TAQ data for Nasdaq requires a very different
approach to calculating cutoffs, and they restrict the analysis to one exchange, given the different market
microstructures. The inclusion of Amex has little effect due to the small sample size (<2%, as discussed
above).

                                                                                                       11
           Trade reaction. We use measures of “directional trade reaction” to capture buy

and sell pressure, using the Odders-White (2000) algorithm to determine whether the

buyer or seller initiated the trade (see Data Appendix for details). The raw trade imbal-

ance is

                                   buysi , x,t  sellsi , x ,t
                    TI i , x,t                                                      (1)
                                   buysi , x,t  sellsi , x,t

for firm i, investor type x, and date t. We normalize by subtracting the firm–investor type

specific mean of TI within the year surrounding t, and dividing by its standard devia-

tion.18 These normalizations allow us to compare trading across small and large investors,

and replace year and firm fixed effects in the regression framework.


2.         Recommendations versus Forecasts: Aggregate Analysis

We start our empirical analysis by evaluating the aggregate distortions of recommenda-

tions and forecasts. Table 1, Panel A, shows the summary statistics of consensus-adjusted

recommendations and forecasts (“Optimism”) in the IBES-SDC merged data set.

           In the full sample, mean Recommendation Optimism is slightly negative, –.002.

When we split by the leading proxy for incentive misalignment, affiliation, the mean is

negative for unaffiliated analysts (–.004), and positive for affiliated analysts (+.010). The

difference is highly statistically significant. While only a small fraction of recommenda-

tions are negative (7% “sells” or “strong sells”), the proportion is even lower for affiliat-

ed analysts (4%), and the proportion of “buy” and “strong buy” recommendations is

higher (63%, compared with 54% for unaffiliated analysts). The mean affiliated recom-

mendation, 3.86, is significantly higher than the mean unaffiliated recommendation, 3.67


18
     See Shanthikumar (2012), and the measures in Lee (1992) and Hvidkjaer (2006).

                                                                                           12
(p << 0.01), consistent with prior literature (e.g., Lin and McNichols 1998).

       Turning to annual earnings forecasts, on the right half of the table, we observe a

reversal: Forecast Optimism among unaffiliated analysts is insignificantly higher (less

negative) than among affiliated analysts, –.165 versus –.196 (p = .17).

       In our main analysis, it will be crucial to ascertain that these aggregate differences

do not simply reflect differences in the type of analyst issuing (optimistic) recommenda-

tions versus (pessimistic) forecasts, differences in the type of stock for which recommen-

dations and forecasts are issued, or differences in the timing and frequency of recommen-

dations and forecasts. We will need to distinguish differences in behavior due to incentive

misalignment from differences due to other analyst characteristics, such as ability of the

analyst or type of stock. We address these concerns by restricting the sample to a more

homogeneous set of stocks and analysts. We include only (i) analysts who are both affili-

ated (in some stocks) and unaffiliated (in some other stocks), (ii) firms for which affilia-

tion is possible, with an IPO during the last five years or SEO during the last two years,

and (iii) recommendations and forecasts that are issued simultaneously (on the same day)

by the same analyst. We denote this sample as the Regression Sample.

       The lower half of Table 1, Panel A, shows summary statistics for the Regression

Sample. As in the full sample, affiliated analysts are more optimistic in their recommen-

dations but more pessimistic in their forecasts. Here the difference in forecast optimism is

marginally significant with a p-value of 0.06. The same pattern emerges if we evaluate

the differences between affiliated and unaffiliated analysts in a regression framework,

controlling for year, month, and day-of-week fixed effects, apply various methods of

clustering standard errors (by date, by analyst, and by broker, or two-dimensional cluster-

ing by broker and date), and split by pre- and post-scandal period (with a cutoff on

                                                                                          13
8/1/2001)19 and by stock exchange (NYSE versus other exchanges). For all of these var-

iations, affiliation is a strongly significant predictor of recommendation optimism, but not

of forecast optimism. For forecasts, affiliation is a significantly negative predictor of op-

timism about NYSE stocks in the pre-scandal period and otherwise insignificantly nega-

tive. The results are also robust to controlling for the time until the next earnings an-

nouncement (to control for the “walk-down” pattern) and for heterogeneity in the firms

covered by affiliated and unaffiliated analysts by calculating weighted averages.20

         These statistics and regressions suggest that affiliated analysts bias their recom-

mendations but not their forecasts. This discrepancy is hard to reconcile with nonstrategic

distortion. While recommendation optimism is open to nonstrategic interpretations (selec-

tion bias, genuine overoptimism), only strategic behavior can easily explain why persis-

tently optimistic beliefs about a stock’s returns over the next months would not reflect

more positive beliefs about its earnings. Our main analysis will test whether the discrep-

ancy persists when directly linking an analyst’s forecast and recommendation.

         We will also relate distortive behavior to other known determinants of incentive

misalignment. The summary statistics are at the bottom of Table 1, Panel A. (For brevity,

we show only the Regression Sample. All patterns are similar in the full sample.) For in-

vestment-banking pressure, we find the same pattern as for affiliation: recommendation

optimism is significantly higher (p << 0.01), while forecast optimism is significantly



19
   The date marks the point in time when media coverage of analysts’ conflicts of interest skyrocketed after
Merrill Lynch settled a suit against the high-profile analyst Henry Blodget and additional suits were filed
against Morgan Stanley’s “star technology analyst” Mary Meeker (Financial Times, 2001).
20
   We weight recommendations and forecasts such that the sum of weights for affiliated analysts for a given
firm equals the sum of weights for unaffiliated analysts for the same firm. This effectively equalizes the
mix of firms in each sample. The weighted averages of recommendation optimism are –0.015 and 0.027 for
unaffiliated and affiliated analysts respectively, and differ significantly at the 1% level (p = 0.00). For
earnings forecast optimism, the weighted averages are –0.335 and –0.563, but the difference between the
two is not statistically significant with weighting to control for mix effects.

                                                                                                        14
lower (p = 0.01). The magnitudes are quite similar to the affiliation subsamples. The oth-

er four variables display a mixed pattern. Both recommendation and forecast optimism

are higher among analysts whose bank has reputational capital, and thus do not appear to

be strategic. The same is true for the bank loyalty index and institutional ownership,

though with the reverse sign. Finally, all-star analysts are less optimistic in their recom-

mendations but more optimistic in their forecasts.

        These aggregate statistics preview our findings: affiliation and investment-bank-

ing pressure are found to be significantly related to “speaking in two tongues,” reputa-

tional capital predicts less two-tongues behavior, and other measures are not consistent

predictors of (less) strategic distortion.

2.1 Differences in timing

As a second preliminary step, we consider the timing of recommendations and forecasts.

O’Brien, McNichols, and Lin (2005) find that affiliated analysts are significantly faster

than unaffiliated analysts to upgrade holds and downgrade buy or strong buy recommen-

dations in their first update after a stock issuance. The differential timing could be strate-

gic, reflecting incentives to move to more optimistic recommendations; or it could be

nonstrategic, reflecting optimistic beliefs or better access to positive information. In this

case, forecast updating should exhibit a similar pattern.

        In Table 2, we replicate the recommendation timing result and test whether it ap-

plies to earnings forecasts. Panel A shows that affiliated analysts are faster than unaffili-

ated analysts to update negative recommendations, but slower to update positive ones.

For example, they maintain strong sell recommendations for 24 days fewer but strong

buy recommendations for 40 days more than unaffiliated analysts. The regression analy-


                                                                                           15
sis in Panel B, Column 1, confirms this pattern. The estimated coefficients indicate that

affiliated analysts wait 36 days longer than unaffiliated analysts before changing a strong

buy or buy. Even hold recommendations are held for 12 more days (with p = 0.011). For

strong sell and sell recommendations, we estimate a negative coefficient (–14 days),

which is insignificant (p = 0.158), also reflecting low power due to the scarcity of nega-

tive recommendations. All significance levels are robust to alternate double clustering.

       Column 2 of Panel B addresses a subtle dimension of recommendation timing.

Regressing the difference to the consensus on the level of recommendation, we find that

strong buy and buy (strong sell, sell, and hold) recommendations of affiliated analysts are

significantly less likely to be above (below) the consensus at the time of issuance. Affili-

ated analysts wait until the consensus is high to issue a positive recommendation, possi-

bly to avoid “standing out,” but then hold those positive recommendations for longer.

       For earnings forecasts we find a different pattern. Affiliated analysts update at

almost exactly the same speed as unaffiliated analysts. As shown in Panel A, the differ-

ences between affiliated and unaffiliated forecast timing are less than a day for below-

and above-consensus forecasts, and only 3.5 days for equal-to-consensus updates. The

regression analysis in Column 3 of Panel B shows that none of these differences is statis-

tically significant. While the similarity in forecast updating speed is partly shaped by the

quarterly schedule of earnings releases, affiliated analysts could exploit more of the 90-

day interval between quarterly announcements, but choose not to do so.

       We also analyze the relationship between the timing of recommendations and

forecasts and the other determinants of analyst behavior. As expected, investment-

banking pressure displays the exact same pattern as affiliation. For the other variables

(bank reputation capital, bank loyalty index, institutional ownership, and all-star status),

                                                                                           16
the pattern is mixed. For example, analysts are slow to update their forecasts for stocks

with high institutional ownership both when their forecast is above the consensus and

when it is below. Analysts with high bank reputation capital or a high bank loyalty index

hold on to negative or neutral recommendations significantly longer than other analysts.

          Overall, the timing pattern of recommendations, on the one hand, and the lack

thereof for forecasts, on the other hand, suggests strategic behavior among affiliated ana-

lysts who are subject to investment-banking pressure.


3.        Incentives to “Speak in Two Tongues”

3.1       Investor trade reaction

What explains the differential recommendation/forecast optimism pattern? One potential

driver for incentives to “speak in two tongues” is differential trade reaction. If small trad-

ers react more strongly to recommendations (while large traders adjust for distortions)

and large traders react more strongly to forecasts, strategic distorters should bias recom-

mendations more than forecasts. In this section we test whether this is the case.

          The summary statistics for small and large trade reactions are in Table 1, Panel B.

As before, we restrict the analysis to recent equity issuers. In the “all dates” sample, small

investors initiate more than twice as many trades as large investors; on recommendation

dates they initiate 66% more trades (on earnings-forecast dates 49% more). Both groups

increase their buy and sell pressure on recommendation and earnings-forecast dates rela-

tive to other dates. All results are similar, whether expressed in dollars or number of

trades.

          Table 3, Panel A, displays trade reactions to updates of recommendations and

earnings forecasts, measured as the sum of abnormal trade imbalances over trading days

                                                                                           17
0 and 1. We focus on the leading proxy for distortion, affiliation, but also discuss the

analogous estimation results for the other determinants of analyst behavior.

       Columns 1–3 show that both small and large traders react significantly in the di-

rection of recommendation updates: they exert more buy pressure when an analyst in-

creases a recommendation. However, the coefficient in the small-trader sample is higher

for affiliated than for unaffiliated updates, while the reverse is true for large traders. As a

result, there is no (economically or statistically) significant difference between small and

large traders’ directional reaction to unaffiliated recommendation updates, but a large

(73%) and marginally significant difference for affiliated recommendations. Strikingly,

small traders exert more buy pressure on the occurrence of any recommendation, as the

higher intercepts reveal. The difference between small and large traders is highly signifi-

cant both for affiliated and unaffiliated recommendations. These results confirm the find-

ings in Iskoz (2002), Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007), and Mikhail, Walther, and

Willis (2007) that large investors discount recommendations, in particular affiliated ones,

while small investors do not.

       The results are virtually identical when we split the sample into analysts with and

without investment-banking pressure. Moreover, regardless of which determinant of ana-

lyst behavior we pick, we estimate a significantly positive slope coefficient for all inves-

tors but a significantly positive intercept only for small investors. The only exception is

the subsample of stocks with no institutional ownership, where the small-investor inter-

cept becomes insignificant, probably reflecting small sample size.

       For annual forecast updates (Columns 4–6), by contrast, small traders fail to re-

spond to the direction of the update: the slope coefficient is significantly negative for un-

affiliated forecasts and insignificantly negative for affiliated forecasts. Only large traders

                                                                                            18
react positively to an increase in a forecast, both unaffiliated and affiliated, and their av-

erage reactions (intercepts) are again small and insignificant. In other words, large inves-

tors react strongly to the amount and direction of earnings forecasts, while small traders

react positively regardless of whether an update is good news or bad news. As Column 6

shows, the differences in intercepts and slopes are highly significant. The results are the

same when we split the data by the other proxies for analyst behavior: small investors al-

ways react significantly positively to any new forecast, but their response does not in-

crease with the increase in forecast, relative to the previous one; and the reverse is true

for large investors (again, other than the very small sample of stocks with no institutional

ownership).

         All results are similar if we restrict the analysis to analysts with at least one affili-

ated and one unaffiliated recommendation or forecast outstanding. The forecast results

are consistent with the notion that small investors react to the information that a new

forecast has been made but are not able to interpret the specific amount forecasted.

         Related literature on earnings announcements suggests that small investors also

fail to process the good or bad news contained in earnings numbers.21 In Panel B, we test

this notion directly. Following Battalio and Mendenhall (2005), we calculate both an ana-

lyst-based measure of earnings surprise and the Seasonal Random Walk (SRW) measure

based on prior-year earnings. The analyst-based surprise is the announced value from

IBES minus the most recent consensus, normalized by share price 20 trading days before

the earnings announcement. The SRW surprise is fourth-quarter earnings minus earnings


21
   Kasznik and McNichols (2002) find that the market reaction to “meeting or beating” the consensus
forecast is significantly stronger for firms with below-median analyst coverage, and thus lower institutional
ownership (p. 755). Battalio and Mendenhall (2005) find that small traders respond more to SRW surprises
while large traders respond to the more sophisticated analyst-based surprise, and Hirshleifer et al. (2008)
find that individuals buy for both negative and positive extreme earnings surprises.

                                                                                                         19
for the same quarter in the prior year, using earnings data from Compustat, normalized by

the share price 20 trading days before the announcement.22 We examine trading reactions

on days [0,1] relative to the announcement.

        Columns 1–3 of Panel B show that small investors display a large and statistically

significant positive reaction to any news about the firm’s earnings, as evidenced by a sig-

nificantly positive intercept. Large traders also react significantly positively, but the reac-

tion of small traders is 177% stronger, and the difference is highly significant (Column

3). The amount of earnings surprise, however, does not trigger a significant response

among small investors, whether we include both measures or only one (unreported). The

large investor reaction to the amount of earnings surprise is also insignificant but, in case

of the analyst-based measure, significantly more positive than that of small investors.

        The latter result becomes stronger when we include a dummy for the (analyst-

based and/or SRW) surprise. As shown in Columns 4–6, large investors continue to react

significantly more positively than small investors to the amount of analyst-based surprise.

The surprise dummies reveal that the stronger small-trade reaction to any news reflects a

more positive reaction to firms “meeting or beating” the SRW expected earnings.23

        In summary, small investors discount less for the upward distortion of recommen-

dations than do large investors, and only large investors incorporate whether a forecast

update is good news or bad news. Relatedly, small investors react more positively than

large investors to (meet or beat) earnings news, but do not process the amount of good

news or bad news. The results imply that recommendation distortions have lower costs



22
  We require the Compustat earnings announcement date be within 2 days of the IBES date.
23
  The results are unaffected by various robustness checks, including variations in the calculation of the
SRW surprise measure (excluding or including extraordinary items), adding squared terms of the surprise
measures (to account for different reactions to extreme surprises), or controlling for the earnings value.

                                                                                                       20
and larger benefits than forecast distortions. Hence, analysts who distort strategically

might distort recommendations more than forecasts. Nonstrategic distorters, instead,

should issue both the most optimistic recommendations and the most optimistic forecasts.

3.2      Management pressures and walk-down in earnings forecasts

Management pressures reinforce these differential incentives. While managers like to see

optimistic recommendations, they tend to “guide” (or pressure) toward lower forecasts, at

least at the end of the quarter or year, so that the firm can “meet or beat” expectations

(Richardson, Teoh, and Wysocki 2004). As a last step of the auxiliary analysis, we test

for walk-down patterns in our sample and test whether proxies for incentive misalign-

ment are related to “walk-down.”

         In Table 4, we regress the error in the analyst’s last forecast on the error in his

first forecast (for the same annual earnings), to the usual misalignment proxies, and to the

respective interaction terms, controlling for the timing of the last forecast. The stronger

the walk-down pattern of an analyst, the more negative will be the correlation between

the analyst’s first and last forecast errors. As in Richardson, Teoh, and Wysocki (2004),

we define forecast error as the forecast minus the actual value of earnings per share an-

nounced, normalized by share price prior to the first forecast. We use the full sample of

all analysts in Columns 1 and 2, though restricted to recent issuers to avoid confounds

with firm characteristics,24 and the Regression Sample in Columns 3 and 4.

         In the full sample, we estimate a significantly positive coefficient of “error in ana-

lyst’s first forecast,” suggesting no walk-down among unaffiliated analysts. And we es-


24
  Richardson, Teoh, and Wysocki (2004), instead, consider issuing and nonissuing firms and examine how
the walk-down of the consensus forecast varies with respect to firm-level variables. If we include all firms,
our results are stronger. In all models (Columns 1–6), but using all firms, we find negative significant
coefficients on the interaction term Affiliation*(Forecast error for analyst’s first forecast), with p<0.001.

                                                                                                         21
timate a negative interaction effect of Affiliation and first-forecast error (p << 0.01). The

economic magnitude of the interaction effect is large, amounting to a reduction of the

baseline correlation (coefficient on first-forecast error) of over 60%. However, it is

smaller than the level effect, implying no net walk-down pattern. The statistical and eco-

nomic significance is virtually identical whether or not we include controls for the other

determinants of analyst behavior (Bank Reputation Capital, Bank Loyalty Index, Institu-

tional Ownership, and All-Star Status) as well as their interactions with first-forecast er-

ror. In addition, the interaction coefficient on Institutional Ownership is significantly pos-

itive, suggesting that firms with high institutional ownership exhibit less walk-down. If

we substitute for Affiliation with the closely related proxy for Investment-Banking Pres-

sure, we also estimate a significant differential walk-down pattern of similar magnitude.

       The estimation results for the more restricted sample, shown in the next two col-

umns, reveal, however, that even the differential walk-down pattern might reflect sample

heterogeneity rather than an incentive effect. In the more homogeneous Regression Sam-

ple, we estimate the coefficient on Affiliation*(First forecast error) to be small and insig-

nificant. The same is true for Investment-Banking Pressure.

       Overall, neither affiliated analysts nor unaffiliated analysts exhibit a strong walk-

down pattern. Even the difference between affiliated and unaffiliated analysts disappears

in the more homogeneous Regression Sample. In untabulated results, we find that the Af-

filiation/Investment-Banking Pressure interaction coefficients remain significant in the

restricted sample if we use indicators as in Table 1 (rather than continuous variables).

Still, while our results do not rule out the existence of walk-down behavior among sub-

sets of analysts, the lack of robustness raises concerns about the “strategic” interpretation

of the walk-down pattern. Only the discrepancy between optimism in recommendations

                                                                                           22
and lack thereof in simultaneous forecasts will allow us to identify a strategic component.


4.      Recommendations versus Forecasts: Individual-Level Analysis

In this section, we identify strategic motives on an individual level rather than in the ag-

gregate. The aggregate comparisons could address concerns about differences in the

composition of analysts or stocks or in the timing of recommendations and forecasts only

partly, by restricting the data to a homogeneous set of analysts (affiliated in some stocks)

and stocks (recent issuers). The individual-level analysis goes further: each recommenda-

tion/forecast pair holds constant the analyst, stock, and timing.

        In Table 5, we regress Forecast Optimism on same-analyst, same-stock, same-day

Recommendation Optimism, controlling for year, month, and day-of-the-week fixed ef-

fects, and compare the prevalence of strategic distortion between different types of ana-

lysts (e.g., affiliated and unaffiliated ones) by including the respective proxies (e.g., affil-

iation) and their interactions with Recommendation Optimism. Hence, our analysis tests

for the existence of strategic distortion on average and among different types of analysts.

To ensure a common time frame until the annual announcement, we consider all forecasts

issued 80 to 1 days prior to the annual earnings announcements (and after the previous

quarterly announcement).25

        In Column 1, we test for discrepancies in recommendation and forecast optimism

related to affiliation. We estimate an insignificantly positive coefficient on recommenda-

tion optimism, indicating that forecast optimism co-moves with recommendation opti-

25
  The timing of the prior quarterly earnings announcement varies. The vast majority occur 90–100 days
before the annual announcement, and another significant fraction 83 to 90 days before. The mode is 98
days (5,635 announcements); the second-highest frequency is 91 days (4,491). There are between 168 and
876 observations for each of the days from 83 to 90, but the number of observations drops sharply, below
100, for 82 days and fewer. As a robustness check, we redid the analysis for each time period from [–81,–1]
to [–89,–1]. All results are very similar, with the strongest effects for [–82, –1].

                                                                                                       23
mism insignificantly. For affiliated analysts, instead, we estimate a negative coefficient

on Affiliation*(Recommendation Optimism). Its magnitude is larger than the coefficient

on Recommendation Optimism, and it is significant ( p < .05). Both findings are unal-

tered if we include, separately or jointly, other proxies for incentive (mis-)alignment, as

shown in Columns 2 to 6. (Remember that we cannot include investment-banking pres-

sure at the same time as affiliation since it is a continuous version of the affiliation meas-

ure; we show it separately in the last column.) In all specifications, we can reject that the

coefficient on Affiliation*(Recommendation Optimism) is positive. A one-tailed test

generates p-values ranging from 0.036 to 0.046, and from 0.021 to 0.025 when we cluster

by both analyst and date. We also estimate weighted regressions to further control for dif-

ferences in the mix of firms with recent equity issuance covered by affiliated versus unaf-

filiated analysts for each firm. The coefficient on Affiliation*(Recommendation Opti-

mism) remains very similar, and is significant with p-values ranging from 0.023 to 0.027.

Hence, if an affiliated analyst has a more positive recommendation relative to the consen-

sus, the same analyst’s forecast is more negative, relative to the consensus, than it would

be if he were unaffiliated. 26

         The results show that affiliation has a significant effect on analyst behavior, and

that this change in behavior reflects a strategic choice. The economic significance is

large. A one-standard-deviation increase in recommendation optimism induces affiliated

analysts to become 59% more pessimistic in their forecast (using the Column 6 estimate,

26
  We also considered estimating a fixed-effects version of the econometric model estimated in Table 5.
While the sample restrictions ensure that the effect of affiliation reflects the difference in behavior among
analysts when they are affiliated versus not affiliated, a fixed-effects analysis would identify a given
analyst’s behavior when affiliated versus not. Such estimation would amount to including analyst fixed
effects, their interactions with recommendation optimism, and possibly their interactions with affiliation.
Unfortunately, the data do not provide enough of a time-series element to implement this: the majority of
analysts in our Table 5 sample, 1,792 of 2,651, enter with at most 2 observations. In fact, 1,147 enter with
only 1 observation. We conduct a more feasible fixed-effects approach in Table 7.

                                                                                                         24
and evaluated at the affiliated Regression Sample average of forecast optimism, –0.447).

        We also recalculate the effect including outstanding recommendations (rather

than only simultaneous ones). As we discussed with our results on the strategic timing of

recommendations, but not forecasts, a strategic distorter who is trying to “hide in the

crowd” will issue recommendations when the general consensus is high, and will delay

downgrading them when the consensus declines, even if he issues a less optimistic fore-

cast. Thus the negative relationship between affiliated forecast and recommendation op-

timism should hold for previously issued recommendations, possibly more strongly so.

When the strategic distorter finally updates his recommendation, the correlation between

the optimism of the new (on average lower) recommendation and the previous more pes-

simistic forecast should be less negative or even positive.

        Both implications hold in our data. In untabulated regressions, we estimate larger

and more significant negative coefficients when we relate forecasts to the most recent

outstanding recommendations rather than only simultaneous ones (and evaluate recom-

mendation optimism as of the forecast date). If, on the other hand, we use the next rec-

ommendation, we estimate a less negative or even positive relationship (interaction coef-

ficient).27 In other words, affiliated analysts incorporate the negative information with

some delay into their recommendations, and the relation between the optimism in their

forecast and in their next recommendation becomes (weakly) positive.

        A possible concern about the strategic interpretation of our findings is that differ-

ences between analysts’ short- and long-term views might explain the results. An analyst

might be pessimistic about near-term earnings but still recommend the stock because he

27
  Since the next recommendation may occur after the firm’s earnings announcement, and be affected by it,
we include before- and after-announcement dummies and interactions. The relevant (before-announcement)
interaction is significantly positive for affiliated analysts and insignificant for unaffiliated.

                                                                                                     25
is more optimistic about the firm’s long-term growth prospects. While such an explana-

tion cannot easily account for persistent discrepancies, we address the concern by analyz-

ing long-term growth forecasts. As shown in the Online Appendix, affiliated analysts

tend to exhibit lower long-term growth optimism than unaffiliated analysts, both for the

full sample and the Regression Sample (Table OA1). The differences are significant at

the 1% level. Relatedly, Table OA2 shows no differential timing in the updating of long-

term growth forecasts, and Table OA6 reveals that, while there is a positive relationship

between long-term growth optimism and recommendation optimism, it is not significant-

ly stronger for affiliated analysts. The coefficients on Affiliation*(Recommendation Op-

timism) are insignificant and an order of magnitude smaller than the coefficients on Rec-

ommendation Optimism. Hence, the data do not support this interpretation.

       We also test whether we can detect strategic behavior in other subgroups of ana-

lysts. We add, separately and jointly, the Recommendation Optimism interaction terms of

Bank Reputation Capital, Bank Loyalty Index, Institutional Ownership, and All-Star Sta-

tus. In Column 7, we show the joint specification (all estimation results from the separate

specifications are fully consistent). The coefficient estimates reveal that Bank Reputation

Capital, Institutional Ownership, and All-Star Status do not have predictive power.

Moreover, the Bank Loyalty Index appears not to be a useful measure of “less strategic

distortion.” It predicts a pessimistic forecast with an optimistic recommendation, and the

effect is significant at the 5% level. The latter result sheds light on the two competing ef-

fects discussed in Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006): investment-banking client

loyalty may induce analysts to distort more to continue the relationship, or the analyst

may have less pressure to distort since the client is already loyal. Empirically, the former

appears to be significantly more important in our sample. Finally, we substitute for Affil-
                                                                                          26
iation with Investment-Banking Pressure (Column 8). As expected, we find evidence of

strategic distortion, very similar in size and significance to the affiliation effect.

        In summary, our two-tongues identification reveals that, to a significant extent,

the distortion displayed by affiliated analysts is strategic. That is, when affiliated analysts

issue overly positive recommendations they are not misguided by their own overly opti-

mistic beliefs. They are aware of their upward bias, as their less optimistic forecasts re-

veal. The same holds for analysts under investment-banking pressure. The same also

holds for the Bank Loyalty Index, which has sometimes been interpreted as a proxy for

less incentive to distort strategically; instead, we find that a higher loyalty index is asso-

ciated with more strategic distortion. Other known determinants of analyst behavior are

shown to be neither positively nor negatively related to strategic distortion.


5.      “Forensic Accounting”: Measuring Analyst Distortion

The correlation in recommendation and forecast optimism reveals that, on average, affili-

ated analysts and analysts under investment-banking pressure “speak in two tongues.”

We now use the recommendation-forecast discrepancy to construct a measure of strategic

distortion that is independent of other determinants. The measure provides insights into

the distribution, heterogeneity, and persistence of strategic distortion.

        We construct the “two-tongues metric” based on the difference between an ana-

lyst’s recommendation optimism and (scaled) forecast optimism for a given firm, as illus-

trated in Figure 1. The top graph displays the distribution of recommendation optimism,

defined as recommendation minus the consensus as of the day of the recommendation. As

before, numerical values range from 1 for strong sell to 5 for strong buy. The vast majori-

ty of observations lie between –2 and +2. The middle graph displays earnings forecast


                                                                                            27
optimism, defined as earnings-per-share forecast minus consensus, normalized by prior-

day share price and multiplied by 100 (in order to make the economic magnitudes com-

patible with recommendations). Again, the vast majority of observations lie between –2

and +2. Our distortion measure is the difference between recommendation optimism and

scaled forecast optimism, and is shown at the bottom. We see that the majority of obser-

vations lie again in the interval from –2 to +2, but also that the distribution is skewed to

the right.

        The corresponding statistics in Table 6, Panel A, confirm the right-skewness of

the distribution. In the Regression Sample, the mean distortion is 0.34, but the median is

0.02. Overall, 56% of recommendation-forecast comparisons result in strictly positive

values, indicative of widespread strategic distortion. Splitting again by the leading proxy

for incentive misalignment, affiliation, we see that the mean distortion is larger among af-

filiated than among unaffiliated analysts, 0.47 versus 0.26. The difference is marginally

significant (p = 0.06). The fractions of analysts with positive strategic distortion are,

however, more similar, suggesting that affiliation fails to capture all strategic elements.

        We also consider the larger sample of forecast-recommendation pairs that include

the most recent outstanding recommendations issued prior to the forecast for cases of no

simultaneous forecast. In this case, strategic distortion includes the distortion that is “im-

plicit” in the delay of recommendation updates (as shown in Table 2). In the lower half of

Panel A, we show the summary statistics for the larger sample. The mean distortion in-

creases slightly, to 0.38, and the median goes up to 0.07. The difference between affiliat-

ed and unaffiliated analysts is somewhat narrower (0.43 and 0.34) but, given the larger

sample size, more significant (p = 0.01). Again, the fractions of analysts with positive

strategic distortion are similar.

                                                                                              28
        We now illustrate that the distortion measure has significant predictive power for

individual analyst behavior over time. That is, we show that there are significant analyst

fixed effects, beyond the degree of strategic distortion captured by existing proxies.

        One way to evaluate the persistence of strategic distortion in a given analyst is to

ask how the likelihood of future strategic distortion depends on whether the analyst dis-

torted strategically in the past. We calculate these transition probabilities using zero as a

cutoff point for strategic distortion. The upper half of Panel B displays the transition ma-

trix for same-day recommendation and forecast pairs. We find that a strategic distorter

will distort again strategically for the same stock with 62% probability, while an analyst

who did not distort strategically will start doing so with only 49% probability. A simple

logit regression of an indicator for “next strategic distortion” on an indicator for “previ-

ous strategic distortion” confirms that the difference is highly significant. The same holds

when we include year, month, and day-of-the-week indicators, and also if we control for

time until the annual earnings announcement. Thus, analysts are much more likely to dis-

tort strategically if they did so before.

        If we add implicit strategic distortion, that is, the component implicit in the timing

of recommendations, and include forecasts matched to outstanding recommendations, the

persistence increases, to 75% for a strategic distorter, and the difference to not-

strategically distorting analysts (34%) widens, as shown in the lower half of Panel B. The

increase from a 13 percentage point difference in the upper half of Panel B (0.62 – 0.49)

to a 41 percentage point difference in the lower half (0.75 – 0.34) reveals that about one-

third of the overall persistence is visible in “explicit distortion” while the remainder is

“implicit” in not updating the recommendation downward when the consensus recom-

mendation became more negative.

                                                                                           29
       The predictive power is much weaker for different stocks, where observed and

unobserved incentives to distort may differ. In the Regression Sample, a strategic distort-

er of one stock will do the same for another stock with 55% probability, while an analyst

who did not distort strategically will start distorting strategically with 51% probability;

this is similar in the larger sample (59% versus 51%). Hence, the predictive power

amounts to only about a third relative to the same-stock magnitude.

       We can go further in disentangling personal fixed effects from observable deter-

minants and illustrate that the persistence is largely orthogonal to affiliation or other

proxies for incentive (mis-)alignment. As shown in the next four columns of Panel B, the

persistence among affiliated and among unaffiliated analysts is quite similar: an affiliated

analyst will distort advice about the same stock again with 63% probability and will start

distorting with 50% probability. The corresponding likelihoods for unaffiliated analysts

are 61% and 50%. (The pattern is again even more striking in the larger sample, shown in

the lower half: whether the analyst is affiliated or not, the persistence is 75% for previous

strategic distorters, and new strategic distortion occurs with only 34–35% probability.)

We confirm that there are no significant differences between affiliated and unaffiliated

analysts with a simple logit estimation, relating an indicator for “next strategic distortion”

to “previous strategic distortion,” affiliation, and the interaction of affiliation and “previ-

ous strategic distortion.” The interaction effect is never significant (regardless of whether

and which time fixed effects and controls are included). Table 6, Panel B, also shows that

the probabilities are virtually unaffected if the stock changes status from affiliated to un-

affiliated. (The reverse is not true, but the sample size of unaffiliated analysts becoming

affiliated and issuing same-day recommendation-forecast pairs twice is minimal, with 38

observations.) The strategic distortion of different stocks is, instead, much less predicta-

                                                                                            30
ble based on past strategic distortion of another stock. The results are again virtually

identical for investment-banking pressure subsamples.

       Overall, our results imply persistence in strategic distortion over time, strongly so

for the same stock. The results indicate significant fixed effects in analyst behavior.

Hence, the two-tongues discrepancy across different types of information provision can

be used to identify analysts who distort strategically, above and beyond the distortive in-

centive effects due to affiliation. While affiliation is a strong predictor of strategic distor-

tion, our measure reveals that unaffiliated analysts who have distorted strategically in the

past are indistinguishable from affiliated analysts who have distorted strategically in the

past—their probabilities of future distortion are high and virtually identical.

       As a last step, we use the “two-tongues metric” as the dependent variable in a set

of regressions relating distortion to existing incentive proxies. We explore the robustness

of results to different samples: the most restricted sample used in our main Table 5 analy-

sis (Regression Sample, further restricted to forecasts within 80 days of the announce-

ment), the Regression Sample, and the full sample of all analysts and firms (all same-day

forecast-recommendation pairs). The regression allows us to assess the link between ex-

isting incentive proxies and strategic distortion, while exploring alternative and larger

samples.

       The results are in Table 7. We include Affiliation in Columns 1–3 and the alterna-

tive proxy, Investment-Banking Pressure, in Columns 4–6. The results for the most re-

stricted sample, which we used in our main analysis in Table 5, are shown in Columns 1

and 4; the results for the Regression Sample are in Columns 2 and 5; and the results for

the full sample are shown in Columns 3 and 6.

       Consistent with the main results in Table 5, we find that affiliation and, alterna-

                                                                                             31
tively, investment-banking pressure significantly increase the incidence of distortion,

whether we use the most restricted sample, the full sample, or anything in between (in-

cluding untabulated variations). Moreover, we find that, in the restricted sample, no other

proxy is significantly related to our two-tongues indicator of strategic distortion. That is,

affiliation-based proxies for incentive misalignment are the most reliable predictors of

strategic distortion. When we remove the restriction to the last quarter prior to the annual

announcement (Columns 2 and 4) or use the largest sample (Columns 3 and 6), Bank

Reputation Capital becomes significant. The negative coefficient estimate suggests that a

larger share in the underwriting market might relieve the pressure to distort. However, the

lack of a significant result and different sign in the last-quarter sample suggests that even

high-reputation firms occasionally distort strategically shortly before the annual earnings

announcement. Similarly, the Bank Loyalty Index reverses sign (becomes positive) when

moving to a less restricted sample and becomes significant in the full sample, implying

more strategic distortion, consistent with our estimation results in Table 5. Hence, if any-

thing, client retention appears to benefit from strategic distortion rather than relieving the

pressure to distort—though the discrepancy between the significant effects in Columns 3

and 6 for the full sample and the insignificant estimates in the more restricted samples

raise caution about confounds that are present in the less homogeneous sample, including

analyst-, firm-, or timing-related effects. In either case, the results confirm that the Bank

Loyalty Index is not a useful predictor of less incentive to distort.

       All-star status and institutional ownership do not predict strategic distortion in any

estimation, and the magnitude of the coefficients is very small. The (non-)results confirm

the insight from Table 5 that all-star status and institutional ownership are not reliable

predictors of less strategic distortion. As discussed in Section 1, all-star analyst status

                                                                                           32
captures an analyst’s reputation with institutional investors, and a high reputation might

reduce the pressure to distort strategically. However, strategic distortion might help ana-

lysts to protect their reputation. As for institutional ownership, the findings of Ljungqvist

et al. (2007) that institutional investor ownership reduces analyst recommendation opti-

mism relative to the consensus, and increases forecast accuracy, suggest that we should

expect less “speaking in two tongues.” In untabulated regressions, we find that the (small

and negative) coefficient estimate becomes significant when restricting the sample to re-

cent issuers but not when further restricting the set of analysts or the time period in which

the recommendation-forecast pairs are issued.

         Finally, we exploit the simpler regression model of Table 7 (relative to Table 5) to

explore the possibility of a fixed-effects estimation.28 We reestimate the regressions both

for the most restricted sample (Columns 1 and 4) and for the Regression Sample (Col-

umns 2 and 5), including analyst fixed effects. We find that the key coefficient estimates

(affiliation and investment-banking pressure) are very similar in magnitude. The coeffi-

cient on affiliation changes from 0.1285 to 0.1093 in Column 1 and from 0.1023 to

0.0818 in Column 2; the investment-banking coefficient changes from 0.1851 to 0.1669

in Column 4 and from 0.1284 to 0.1225 in Column 5. The new coefficients are highly

significant in the Regression Sample, but insignificant in the most restricted sample. The

lack of significance in the most restricted sample is not surprising since the cumulative

restrictions leave even less of a time-series element in the data. The other coefficient es-

timates are insignificant or marginally significant (Bank Reputation Capital). Finally, in


28
  In Table 5, we could not include analyst fixed effects, as the vast majority of analysts enter with at most
2 observations and because the analysis would have required the inclusion not only of analyst fixed effects
but also of their interactions with recommendation optimism, and possibly their interactions with
affiliation. The Table 7 setup does not require the inclusion of interaction terms; it does, however, still
suffer from the lack of analyst-level time series.

                                                                                                         33
the full sample (corresponding to Columns 3 and 6), the number of fixed effects is still

too high, with over 13,000 fixed effects.

       Overall, the table and the additional robustness checks not only confirm our main

result—significant strategic distortion among analysts who are affiliated or subject to in-

vestment-banking pressure—but also help to shed light on the role of strategic distortion

in other subgroups of analysts as well as on confounds that may falsely lead to a strategic

interpretation. Most important, our distortion measure identifies whether an analyst is

more or less strategically distorting, on a recommendation-specific level.


6.     Conclusion

This paper provides a novel empirical approach to disentangle strategic and nonstrategic

motivations to distort recommendations upward. We show that, compared with unaffiliat-

ed analysts, affiliated analysts issue more positive recommendations but similar or more

negative forecasts. In addition, recommendations and forecasts for the same stock are

more negatively correlated for a given analyst if he is affiliated than if he is unaffiliated.

Additional results on the timing and updating of recommendations and forecasts suggest

that affiliated analysts “hide in the crowd” when issuing new recommendations and then

maintain positive recommendations (but not forecasts) longer than unaffiliated analysts.

The same holds for analysts subject to investment-banking pressure.

       Our findings suggest that affiliated analysts (and analysts subject to investment-

banking pressure) strategically choose to display optimism about the firms they cover in

one outlet for investment advice, namely recommendations, which are consumed most di-

rectly by small investors. They abstain from doing so in another outlet, earnings fore-

casts, which are consumed most directly by large investors. Instead, they appear to distort

                                                                                           34
the last forecast before the earnings announcement downward, consistent with manage-

ment pressures to provide “beatable” forecasts. The stronger inclination of affiliated ana-

lysts to distort strategically holds even when comparing the same analyst’s behavior for

stocks with which he is affiliated and for stocks with which he is unaffiliated and using

recommendations and forecasts issued concurrently. Other determinants of analyst behav-

ior, such as Bank Reputation Capital, the Bank Loyalty Index, Institutional Ownership,

and All-Star Status, are not clearly indicative of less strategic distortion. That is, while

they are significantly related to analyst behavior, as shown in previous literature, these ef-

fects are not cleanly identifiable as less strategic; instead, these effects might reflect non-

strategic differences between analysts or underlying sample heterogeneity in the types of

analysts or stocks.

       We also identify significant analyst effects, above and beyond the effect of affilia-

tion (investment-banking pressure). We develop a metric capturing the discrepancy in

recommendations and forecasts, and show that an analyst who displayed strategic distor-

tion once is highly likely to do so again while an analyst who did not distort strategically

when covering a stock is significantly less likely to do so at the next instance.

       Our findings have implications for policy debates about brokerage-house regula-

tion. Given the strong results for affiliated analysts, our results corroborate the im-

portance of eliminating misaligned incentives due to affiliation. The persistence results,

however, imply that some analysts are generally more inclined to distort strategically,

above and beyond identifiable incentives. While our results do not imply a solution to the

distortion problem, our measures of strategic distortion can provide a useful tool to iden-

tify a candidate group of strategic distorters. The same applies to a broader realm, beyond

analyst behavior. The phenomenon of “speaking in two tongues” is likely to be found in

                                                                                            35
other settings of accounting and financial intermediation, wherever a strategic player is

faced with distinct audiences for different informational outlets. One example involves

earnings disclosure and financial accounting reports (Hirshleifer and Teoh 2003). Anoth-

er example is the way firms represent their earnings and growth prospects in front of in-

vestors versus in negotiations with unions. The comparison of the information provided

in both types of informational outlets can be helpful in measuring strategic components.




                                                                                       36
References
Abarbanell, J., and R. Lehavy. 2003. Biased forecasts or biased earnings? The role of re-

ported earnings in explaining apparent bias and over/underreaction in analysts’ earnings

forecasts. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36:105–46.



Baik, B., and H. Yi. 2007. Are affiliated analysts more likely than unaffiliated analysts to

provide EPS forecasts that management can meet or beat? Working Paper, Seoul Nation-

al University and Korea University.



Barber, B., R. Lehavy, M. McNichols, and B. Trueman. 2006. Buys, holds and sells: The

distribution of investment banks’ stock ratings and the implications for the profitability of

analysts’ recommendations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 41:87–117.



Barber, B., R. Lehavy, and B. Trueman. 2007. Comparing the stock recommendation per-

formance of investment banks and independent research firms. Journal of Financial Eco-

nomics 85:490–517.



Battalio, R. H., and R. R. Mendenhall. 2005. Earnings expectations, investor trade size,

and anomalous returns around earnings announcements. Journal of Financial Economics

77:289–319.



Boni, L., and K. L. Womack. 2002. Solving the sell-side research problem: Insights from

buy-side professionals. Working Paper, University of New Mexico and University of To-

ronto Rotman School of Management.

                                                                                          37
Bradley, D., B. Jordan, and J. Ritter. 2003. The quiet period goes out with a bang. Jour-

nal of Finance 58:1–36.



Chan, L. K. C., J. Karceski, and J. Lakonishok. 2007. Analysts’ conflict of interest and

biases in earnings forecasts. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42:893–913.



Chen, S., and D. A. Matsumoto. 2006. Favorable versus unfavorable recommendations:

The impact on analyst access to management-provided information. Journal of Account-

ing Research 44:657–89.



Choi, J., D. Laibson, and B. Madrian. 2010. Why does the law of one price fail? An ex-

periment on index mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies 23:1405–32.



Choi, J., D. Laibson, B. Madrian, and A. Metrick. 2009. Reinforcement learning and sav-

ings behavior. Journal of Finance 64:2515–34.



Cowen, A., B. Groysberg, and P. Healy. 2006. Which types of analyst firms are more op-

timistic? Journal of Accounting and Economics 41:119–46.



Dugar, A., and S. Nathan. 1995. The effect of investment banking relationships on finan-

cial analysts’ earnings forecasts and investment recommendations. Contemporary Ac-

counting Research 12:131–60.



                                                                                      38
Ertimur, Y., J. Sunder, and S. Sunder. 2007. Measure for measure: The relation between

forecast accuracy and recommendation profitability of analysts. Journal of Accounting

Research 45:567–606.



Francis, J., J. D. Hanna, and D. R. Philbrick. 1997. Management communications with

securities analysts. Journal of Accounting and Economics 24:363–94.



Groysberg, B., P. Healy, G. Serafeim, and D. Shanthikumar. 2013. The stock selection

and performance of buy-side analysts. Management Science 59:1062–75.



Hirshleifer, D., J. N. Myers, L. A. Myers, and S. H. Teoh. 2008. Do individual investors

cause post-earnings announcement drift? Direct evidence from personal trades. Account-

ing Review 83:1521–50.



Hirshleifer, D., and S. H. Teoh. 2003. Limited attention, information disclosure, and fi-

nancial reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36:337–86.



Hvidkjaer, S. 2006. A trade-based analysis of momentum. Review of Financial Studies

19:457–91.



Iskoz, S. 2002. Relative performance and institutional reaction to underwriter analyst

recommendations. Working Paper, Bracebridge Capital.



Jegadeesh, N., J. Kim, S. D. Krische, and C. M. C. Lee. 2004. Analyzing the analysts:

                                                                                      39
When do recommendations add value? Journal of Finance 59:1083–1124.



Kasznik, R., and M. McNichols. 2002. Does meeting earnings expectations matter? Evi-

dence from analyst forecast revisions and share prices. Journal of Accounting Research

40:727–59.



Kolasinski, A., and S. P. Kothari. 2008. Investment banking and analyst objectivity: Evi-

dence on analysts affiliated with mergers and acquisitions advisors. Journal of Financial

and Quantitative Analysis 43:817–42.



Kothari, S. P. 2001. Capital markets research in accounting. Journal of Accounting and

Economics 31:105–231.



Lee, C. M. C. 1992. Earnings news and small traders: An intraday analysis. Journal of

Accounting and Economics 15:265–302.



Lee, C. M. C., and B. Radhakrishna. 2000. Inferring investor behavior: Evidence from

TORQ data. Journal of Financial Markets 3:83–111.



Lee, C. M. C., and M. J. Ready. 1991. Inferring trade directions from intraday data. Jour-

nal of Finance 46:733–46.



Lin, H.-W., and M. F. McNichols. 1998. Underwriting relationships, analysts’ earnings

forecasts and investment recommendations. Journal of Accounting and Economics

                                                                                       40
25:101–27.



Ljungqvist, A., F. Marston, L. T. Starks, K. D. Wei, and H. Yan. 2007. Conflicts of in-

terest in sell-side research and the moderating role of institutional investors. Journal of

Financial Economics 85:420–56.



Ljungqvist, A., F. Marston, and W. J. Wilhelm Jr. 2006. Competing for securities under-

writing mandates: Banking relationships and analyst recommendations. Journal of Fi-

nance 61:301–40.



Loh, R., and G. M. Mian. 2006. Do accurate earnings forecasts facilitate superior invest-

ment recommendations? Journal of Financial Economics 80:455–83.



Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell. 2007. Baby boomer retirement security: The role of plan-

ning, financial literacy, and housing wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 54:205–24.



Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel. 2011. Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences

affect risk-taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 373–416.



Malmendier, U., and D. Shanthikumar. 2007. Are small investors naïve about incentives?

Journal of Financial Economics 85:457–89.



McNichols, M. F., and P. C. O’Brien. 1997. Self-selection and analyst coverage. Journal

of Accounting Research 35:167–99.

                                                                                        41
Megginson, W. L., and K. A. Weiss. Venture capitalist certification in initial public offer-

ings. Journal of Finance 46:879–903.



Michaely, R., and K. L. Womack. 1999. Conflict of interest and the credibility of under-

writer analyst recommendations. Review of Financial Studies 12:653–86.



———. 2005. Market efficiency and biases in brokerage recommendations. In Advances

in behavioral finance II, ed. R. H. Thaler, 389–419. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.



Mikhail, M. B., B. R. Walther, and R. H. Willis. 1999. Does forecast accuracy matter to

security analysts? Accounting Review 74:185–200.



———. 2007. When security analysts talk, who listens? Accounting Review 82:1227–53.



O’Brien, P., M. F. McNichols, and H.-W. Lin. 2005. Analyst impartiality and investment

banking relationships. Journal of Accounting Research 43:623–50.



Odders-White, E. R. 2000. On the occurrence and consequences of inaccurate trade clas-

sification. Journal of Financial Markets 3:259–86.



Payne, J. L., and W. B. Thomas. 2003. The implications of using stock-split adjusted

I/B/E/S data in empirical research. Accounting Review 78:1049–67.



                                                                                         42
Richardson, S., S. H. Teoh, and P. Wysocki. 2004. The walkdown to beatable analyst

forecasts: The roles of equity issuance and insider trading incentives. Contemporary Ac-

counting Research 19:885–924.



Shanthikumar, D. 2004. Small and large trader behavior: Reactions to information in fi-

nancial markets. PhD diss., Stanford Graduate School of Business.



———. 2012. Consecutive earnings surprises: Small and large trader reactions. Account-

ing Review 87 (5): 1709–36.




Teoh, S. H., and T. J. Wong. 2002. Why do new issuers and high-accrual firms underper-

form: The role of analysts’ credulity. Review of Financial Studies 15:869–900.




                                                                                     43
                                        Data Appendix
Determinants of analyst behavior. In our analysis, we relate the “two-tongues metric”
of strategic distortion to the main determinants of analyst behavior identified in previous
literature: affiliation, investment-banking pressure, bank reputation capital, bank loyalty
index, institutional ownership, and all-star status. We construct these variables as follows:
         Affiliation. Following prior work (e.g., Lin and McNichols 1998 and Michaely
and Womack 1999), we define analysts to be affiliated if their investment bank was the
lead or co-underwriter of an initial public offering (IPO) of the firm the analyst is report-
ing on during the past five years, or of a seasoned equity offering (SEO) of the firm dur-
ing the past two years. We use the SDC New Issues database to obtain all underwriting
data since 1987. We link IBES broker firms and SDC underwriters with the company
names provided by the IBES recommendation broker identification file and the SDC da-
tabase. We improve the match using company websites and news articles, in particular to
determine subsidiary relationships and corporate name changes. Finally, we use the map-
ping from Kolasinski and Kothari (2008) to identify additional matches.29
         Investment-Banking Pressure. Our definition of investment-banking pressure
follows Ljungqvist et al. (2007). We calculate the investment-banking pressure of ana-
lysts in bank j covering firm k in year t as follows: We use SDC New Issues data and de-
termine whether k extended an underwriting mandate to bank j (or any of j’s predecessors
in the case of mergers). We then accumulate the proceeds (file amounts) from the deals
that j and its predecessors managed for company k in the preceding five years and divide
by the total file amount of k’s deals during the same period.
         Bank Reputation Capital. To calculate reputational capital, measured as a bank’s
share in the underwriting market, we follow Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006)
and Ljungqvist et al. (2007) in applying the Megginson and Weiss (1991) measure of un-
derwriter quality (the bank’s share of the IPO market) to a broader set of securities. We
use the SDC New Issues data to calculate a bank’s market share as the amount of equity
it raised as the lead underwriter for its clients in the prior calendar year divided by the to-
tal amount of equity raised by all issuers in that year. In the case of more than one lead
underwriter, we assign one nth of the amount raised to each of the n underwriters. Fol-
lowing Ljungqvist et al. (2006), we ignore overallotment options; exclude equity transac-
tions by firms with Standard Industrial Classification codes 6000–6999 and 9000–9999;
and, after a merger between two banks, assign prior deals of both banks to the merged en-
tity.
         Bank Loyalty Index. We follow Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006) and
Ljungqvist et al. (2007) in constructing the bank loyalty index for bank j in year t as the
ratio of the number of firms that used bank j both in their penultimate and in their most
recent deals to the number of firms that used bank j in their penultimate deal. The calcu-
lation is based on all deals in the last five years. By construction, the loyalty index ranges
from 0 to 1.
         Institutional Ownership. We use the quarterly 13(f) SEC filings to calculate total
institutional ownership for all stocks in our sample. Section 13(f) of the 1934 Securities
Exchange Act requires all institutions who invest over $100 million in exchange-traded

29
  We are grateful to Adam Kolasinski and S. P. Kothari for providing us with their mapping, which uses
corporate websites, LexisNexis, Hoover’s Online, and the Directory of Corporate Affiliations.

                                                                                                   44
or Nasdaq-quoted stocks, equity options, and warrants (as well as in closed-end funds,
certain convertible debt, and exchange-traded funds) to report their aggregate equity
ownership of a stock. Only small positions (fewer than 10,000 shares of a given issuer
with an aggregate market value of less than $200,000) are exempt.
        All-Star Status. An analyst has all-star status if institutional investors have ranked
the analyst in the annual “All-Star Analyst” list in the October issues of the Institutional
Investor Magazine in the top, second, or third team. We exclude runners-up.

Investor trade reaction. As described in the paper, we analyze the reaction of small (in-
dividual) and large (institutional) investors to recommendation and forecast updates.
         Investor Type. We separate small and large investors by trading size. We follow
Lee and Radhakrishna (2000) in choosing dollar- rather than share-based cutoffs (since
they minimize noise in separating individuals from institutions) and in allowing for a
buffer zone between small and large trades. We choose $20,000–$50,000 as the buffer
zone. These cutoffs are derived from the three-month TORQ sample from 1990–91, in
which actual information on the identity of traders was available to check the accuracy of
the trade-size based classification method. (The results are robust to several variations:
≤$5,000; $5,000–$10,000; $10,000–$20,000.)
         Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007) show that these proxies are effective
measures of individual and institutional trades until about 2000. As they discuss, the
small portfolio size of most individual investors ensured that their trades remained below
$50,000. The distribution of trade sizes on the NYSE was quite stable from 1993 through
2000, but institutions began splitting their trades more aggressively in the early 2000s,
and the distinction between “small” and “large” trades disappeared. We thus limit the
analysis of trade reactions to 1993–2002, as in Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007).
         Trade Reaction. Our measure of “directional trade reaction” (trade initiation) is a
modified version of the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm, as developed in Odders-White
(2000). To determine who initiated a trade—the investor buying or the investor selling—
the algorithm matches the trade to the most recent quote that precedes the trade by at least
five seconds. If a price is nearer the bid (ask) price than the most recent preceding quote,
it is classified as seller (buyer) initiated. If a trade is at the midpoint of the bid-ask spread,
it is classified based on a “tick test.” The tick test categorizes a trade as buyer-initiated
(seller-initiated) if the trade occurs at an uptick (downtick), that is, if the price is higher
than the price of the previous trade. We drop trades at the bid-ask midpoint, which are
also the same price as in preceding trades.30 The raw and the normalized trade imbalance
measures are described in the main text and follow Shanthikumar (2004). (But see also
the measures in Lee 1992 and Hvidkjaer 2006.)




30
  The original Lee-Ready algorithm employs a “zero-tick” in the case that a trade is at the bid-ask midpoint
and the same price as the previous trade. Because of its low accuracy (about 60% according to Odders-
White 2000) the “zero-tick” is left out in the modified Lee-Ready algorithm.

                                                                                                        45
                           Online Appendix
  Results using Quarterly Earnings and Long-Term Growth Forecasts

        We replicate Tables 1-4 of the paper relating quarterly earnings forecasts (QEFs)
and long-term growth forecasts (LTGFs) to recommendations or, alternatively, to annual
earnings forecasts (AEFs). This analysis has much less of a clear conceptual motivation
than the main analysis of the main paper. The analysis in the main paper, which relates
forecast optimism to recommendation optimism, is motivated by the different audiences
of the two types of investment advice and, as a result, the different incentives to distort.
LTGFs are, instead, more difficult to categorize in terms of target audience and
incentives. On the one hand, they are more complex than recommendations, suggesting a
sophisticated (large-investor) audience. On the other hand, they are often vague and hard
to verify ex post, allowing for distortions without negative consequences and making
them more similar to recommendations. QEFs are comparable to AEFs in terms of
audience, but their comparison with recommendations has another shortcoming: While
the time frame of AEFs is comparable to that of recommendations (up to one-year
perspective), the same does not hold for QEFs (nor for LTGFs). QEFs follow a shorter,
quarterly schedule, which constrains analysts more, e.g. in their (strategic) timing of
updates. LTGFs, instead, follow a longer and ambiguous schedule. Most often, long-term
growth is defined as the expected annual rate of earnings growth over the next three to
five years (Thomson Financial [2004]); but Sharpe [2005] estimates that the market
prices long-term growth forecasts as if applicable to a five to ten year horizon. As a
result, the comparison of recommendation optimism or of AEF optimism to QEF or
LTGF optimism cannot easily be used to measure strategic distortion. The comparison
with LTGFs is, however, helpful in addressing concerns about recommendations aiming
at a longer-term perspective than AEFs, as discussed in the paper. Hence, we replicate the
analyses with LTGFs to understand the role of different horizons and for completeness.
The latter is also the motivation for analyzing QEFs.

         The QEF and LTGF data come from IBES. Our proxies for distortion mirror those
employed in the main paper for annual earnings forecasts and recommendations: forecast
minus consensus. For quarterly earnings forecasts, the consensus calculation is the
average of the most recent forecasts of each analyst during the quarter, following the
prior quarterly earnings announcement and the earnings-per-share optimism is
normalized by share price. LTGF and LTGF optimism are expressed in percent.
         As reported in Panel A of Appendix-Table OA.1, the sample includes 1,120,420
quarterly earnings forecasts (QEF) and 217,645 long-term growth forecasts (LTGF) with
sufficient data to calculate a consensus. If we restrict the analysis to firms that could
possibly have affiliated analysts (recent issuers) and to analysts who are currently
affiliated for at least one stock and unaffiliated for at least one stock, with simultaneous
forecast/LTGF and recommendation issuance, akin to the Regression Sample in the
paper, the sample size is reduced to 18,970 QEFs and 8,166 LTGFs. In other words,
another limitation of the LTGF analysis is its rather small size, amounting to about 24%
of the size of the Regression Sample in the main paper.
         Table OA.1 shows consensus-adjusted levels of QEFs and LTGFs. The


                                                                                          1
unadjusted level of QEFs corresponds to roughly one quarter of the annual forecasts.
Adjusted QEFs do not differ significantly between affiliated and unaffiliated analysts,
and LTGFs are significantly more pessimistic among affiliated than among unaffiliated
analysts, both for the full and for the Regression Sample (or anything in between, such as
the sample restricted to recent issuers). Among other determinants of analyst behavior,
only bank reputational capital predicts a significant effect, namely, more optimistic
QEFs. All other differences are statistically insignificant. The summary statistics give a
first indication that the concerns about using QEF or LTGF optimism in a similar manner
as we are using the comparison of recommendation and AEF optimism to detect strategic
distortion are justified – the different horizons and mixed audiences and incentives
prevent give rise to a rather different aggregate pattern.
         The differences in the timing of QEF and LTGF updates confirm this impression.
Table OA.2 shows the timing pattern for the subsamples of affiliated and unaffiliated
anlaysts. Similarly to AEFs, there is virtually no difference in the updating of QEFs or
LTGFs between unaffiliated and affiliated analysts. None of the slight (at most one- to
two-day for QEF and four- to twenty-day for LTGF) differences shown in the upper half
of Panel A are significant, as Panel B reveals.

         Turning to investors’ trade reaction to QEFs and LTGFs, Panel B of Table OA.1
shows the summary statistics. Small and large traders increase their buying and selling on
both QEF and LTGF dates. However, as Appendix-Table OA.1 shows, small investors
react positively to “any” updates (significantly positive intercept) but their reaction does
not reflect the direction and magnitude of the update: the slope coefficient (“Update”) is
either insignificant or negative. Large investors, instead, react positively in the direction
of the update, at least if the analyst is unaffiliated. The differences in intercept and slope
between small and large traders are significant for both unaffiliated and affiliated analysts
in the case of QEFs, but not in the case of LTGFs. For LTGFs, only the difference in the
average reaction (intercept) is significant, marginally so in the case of affiliated analysts.
         Relatedly, Panel B, shows that small traders react to whether a firm “meets or
beats” quarterly earnings expectations but not to the magnitude of the earnings surprise,
for quarterly earnings surprises, while large traders also react to the magnitude of analyst-
based earnings surprises (see Columns 4 and 5).
         The trade reactions confirm that QEFs and LTGFs are not a useful measure of
strategic distortion Given that small traders do not react positively to the direction and
amount of QEF and LTGF updates and large traders do not react positively to the updates
of affiliated analysts, affiliated analysts do not have the option to target large investors.
As such, we cannot make predictions regarding unaffiliated versus affiliated QEF and
LTGF behavior, relative to recommendations and annual earnings forecasts.

       We also test whether analysts display a “walk-down” pattern in their quarterly
earnings forecasts. Despite the incentives to bias earnings forecasts downwards when
close to the earnings announcement, particularly given that investors react positively
when firms “meet or beat” earnings expectations, we did not find robust evidence of a
strong walk-down pattern in annual earnings forecasts.
       We test whether affiliated analysts display a stronger walk-down of their quarterly
earnings forecasts than unaffiliated analysts by relating analysts’ first and last forecasts.


                                                                                            2
The results are presented in Table OA.4. We find positive significant coefficients on the
error in the analyst’s first forecast, indicating that unaffiliated analysts who are the most
optimistic at the start of the quarter tend to be the most optimistic at the end of the
quarter. However, the coefficient on the interaction between the affiliation indicator and
the forecast error for the analyst’s first forecast is small, positive, and insignificant. That
is, neither affiliated nor unaffiliated analysts display walk-down behavior in QEFs. The
same holds for analysts subject to (or not subject to) investment-banking pressure. In fact,
none of the proxies reveals a walk-down pattern for any subset of analysts.
         Appendix-Table OA.5 relates quarterly earnings-forecast optimism to
recommendation optimism. The table shows results for all earnings forecasts made by
analysts who are currently affiliated and unaffiliated for stocks with recent equity
issuances, for the set of quarterly earnings forecasts with a simultaneous
recommendation. There is no relation between quarterly earnings forecast optimism and
recommendation optimism in any of the specifications, nor is there a differential relation
for affiliated analysts. Appendix-Table OA.6 relates long-term growth forecast optimism
to recommendation optimism. There is a positive relation between long-term growth
optimism and recommendation optimism when the long-term growth forecast and
recommendation are made simultaneously, and this relation does not differ for affiliated
analysts, or for any of the other incentive measures. In fact, affiliated analysts issue more
negative long-term growth forecasts in general, controlling for their recommendation
optimism, as evidenced by the significantly negative coefficients on affiliation. Hence,
while the analysis does not help to re-estimate two-tongues behavior, given the lack of
differential small/large investor reaction, it does help addressing concerns about timing
differences explaining our results. More positive recommendations and more negative
forecasts are not explained by (nonstrategic) differences in more positive long-term and
more negative short-term views. Rather, the evidence on LGTFs confirms that the long-
term views of affiliated analysts are more negative.


        References
Sharpe, Steven A., “How Does the Market Interpret Analysts’ Long-Term Growth Fore-
casts?” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 20, (2005),147-166.

Thomson Financial, “Thomson Financial Glossary 2004, A Guide to Understanding
Thomson Financial Terms and Conventions for the First Call and IBES Estimates
Databases,” (2004).




                                                                                             3
                               Figure 1. Two-tongues metric

The graphs illustrate the construction of our measure of strategic distortion, Recommendation
Optimism minus scaled Forecast Optimism. The top figure displays the distribution of
Recommendation Optimism, defined as recommendation minus consensus recommendation as of
that day. The middle figure displays Forecast Optimism, defined as earnings-per-share forecast
minus consensus, normalized by prior-day share price and multiplied by 100. The bottom figure
displays the difference between Recommendation Optimism and scaled Forecast Optimism.
                                                       Table 1 Summary statistics
Panel A. Recommendations and earnings forecasts
                                           Recommendation Optimism                                    Forecast Optimism
                                 Sample                       Percentile               Sample                          Percentile
                                  size     Mean St. dev. 25th    50th 75th              size      Mean St. dev. 25th     50th     75th
Full Sample
 All                             459,283 -0.002 0.548 0.000 0.000 0.000 1,623,715 -0.168 11.201 -0.175                        -0.005    0.092
 Unaffiliated                    417,117 -0.004 0.556 -0.100 0.000 0.000 1,491,831 -0.165 8.286 -0.172                        -0.006    0.091
 Affiliated                       42,166 0.010 0.463 0.000 0.000 0.000     131,884 -0.196 27.713 -0.212                       -0.002    0.110
Regression Sample
 All                              34,214 -0.003 0.488        0.000   0.000 0.000         34,214 -0.343 10.124 -0.198          -0.011    0.065
 Unaffiliated                     21,989 -0.013 0.500        0.000   0.000 0.000         21,989 -0.280 7.065 -0.180           -0.010    0.059
 Affiliated                       12,225 0.014 0.466         0.000   0.000 0.000         12,225 -0.457 14.038 -0.236          -0.013    0.076
 Inv.-Banking Pressure = 0        21,926 -0.014 0.499        0.000   0.000 0.000         21,926 -0.249 6.604 -0.181           -0.010    0.059
 Inv.-Banking Pressure > 0        12,288 0.015 0.469         0.000   0.000 0.000         12,288 -0.511 14.406 -0.231          -0.013    0.075
 Bank Rep. Capital = 0            10,594 -0.007 0.501        0.000   0.000 0.000         10,594 -0.383 11.303 -0.191          -0.009    0.069
 Bank Rep. Capital > 0            23,620 -0.002 0.483        0.000   0.000 0.000         23,620 -0.326 9.548 -0.203           -0.012    0.063
 Bank Loyalty Index = 0           10,117 0.001 0.474         0.000   0.000 0.000         10,117 -0.258 6.649 -0.193           -0.011    0.057
 Bank Loyalty Index > 0           24,097 -0.005 0.494        0.000   0.000 0.000         24,097 -0.379 11.268 -0.201          -0.011    0.068
 Instit. Ownership = 0               587 0.028 0.604 -0.375 0.000 0.400                     587 -0.116 2.967 -0.161           0.000     0.163
 Instit. Ownership > 0            33,627 -0.004 0.486 0.000 0.000 0.000                  33,627 -0.347 10.205 -0.199          -0.011    0.064
  All-Star Analyst = 0             31,305 0.000 0.490 0.000 0.000 0.000                 31,305 -0.353 10.512 -0.196 -0.011 0.066
  All-Star Analyst = 1              2,909 -0.035 0.471 -0.200 0.000 0.000                2,909 -0.245 4.044 -0.228 -0.014 0.057
Recommendation Optimism is measured as recommendation minus existing consensus, where recommendations are translated into
numerical values following the scheme 1=strong sell, 2=sell, 3=hold, 4=buy, 5=strong buy. Forecast Optimism is measured as the annual
earnings forecast minus the existing consensus, where annual earnings forecasts are reported in earnings-per-share dollars, normalized by
prior-day stock price. The Full Sample includes all recommendations and forecasts as long as the underlying share price is at least $5 and
at least three analysts covering the firm. An analyst is Unaffiliated if his or her brokerage firm does not belong to a bank that has been
lead or co-underwriter in the stock’s IPO over the past five years or SEO over the past two years; otherwise the analyst is Affiliated. The
Regression Sample reduces heterogeneity between Unaffiliated and Affiliated analysts and the stocks they cover by requiring (i) that the
analyst is simultaneously affiliated (for some stocks) and unaffiliated (for some other stocks); (ii) that affiliation is possible for the stock
receiving the recommendation or forecast (i.e., the firm had at least one IPO in the past five years or SEO in the past two years); (iii) that
the recommendation and the forecast are issued on the same day. Investment-Banking Pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k in
year t is the sum of file amounts from all deals that bank j (and its predecessors in the case of mergers) managed for company k in the
preceding five years, divided by the total file amount of k ’s deals during the same period. Bank Reputation Capital is the underwriting
market share of the analyst’s bank, defined as the amount of equity the bank raised as the lead underwriter for its clients in the prior
calendar year divided by the total amount of equity raised by all issuers in that year. The Bank Loyalty Index applicable to an analyst of
bank j in year t is the ratio of the number of companies that used bank j in both their last and their penultimate deals to the number of
companies that used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on all deals in the last five years. Institutional Ownership is calculated from
quarterly 13(f) SEC filings. All-Star Analysts are the top, “second team,” and “third team” analysts in the most recent October issue of
Institutional Investor magazine. The forecast sample is limited to forecasts pertaining to the closest following annual earnings
announcement, and to earnings announcements that occur during the SEC mandated window of 0–90 days after the end of the relevant
fiscal year. The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2008.
                                                             Table 1 Continued
Panel B. Measures of trade reaction
                                                                   All dates            Recommendation dates              Forecast dates
                                                              Mean Med. St.dev.            Mean Med. St.dev.          Mean      Med. St.dev.
                    Number of small buy-initiated trades      48.27    15    92.12       117.01     47    160.34     102.83      42    144.85
                    Number of large buy-initiated trades      23.52     3    67.74         71.90    21    130.32      69.71      21    128.18
                    Number of small sell-initiated trades     42.07    15    79.23         99.96    43    138.86      86.23      38    123.51
                    Number of large sell-initiated trades     19.44     3    55.77         59.16    18    108.37      56.89      18    105.09
          Total number of small buy/sell-initiated trades     90.34    30    168.61      216.97     91    294.30     189.07      81    263.82
          Total number of large buy/sell-initiated trades     42.97     6    122.63      131.06     39    236.88     126.60      39    231.55
                        Δ(buy-sell) initiated small trades     6.20     1    33.13         17.05     4    58.04       16.60      4     53.61
                        Δ(buy-sell) initiated large trades     4.08 0        18.98        12.74      2    36.70       12.83      2     36.52
                                                N            3,730,866                174,570                         514,535
Trade reaction is measured by abnormal trade imbalance. Large traders represent trades of at least $50,000; small traders represent trades
of less than $20,000. The sample is limited to stocks for which past affiliation is possible (i.e., stocks with an IPO in the past five years or
SEO in the past two years). The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2002.
                     Table 2 Timing of recommendations and forecasts
Panel A. Sample statistics
                         Mean (median) number of days until new recommendation or forecast
                                             Conditional on level of recommendation
Recommendations                                                                    Strong
                         Overall    Strong sell    Sell       Hold         Buy       buy
Unaffiliated              314.8        228.7      254.4       319.8       306.4     333.6
                          (195)        (120)      (144)       (196)       (189)     (212)
Affiliated                341.0        205.1      240.0       331.4       339.4     373.2
                          (213)        (117)      (139)       (203)       (213)     (244)
                                                            Relative to consensus
Earnings forecasts
                         Overall                  Below           Equal to          Above
Unaffiliated              63.4                     61.7            81.3              64.8
                          (54)                     (52)             (71)             (56)
Affiliated                63.3                     61.7            77.8              64.5
                          (55)                     (53)             (69)             (57)

Panel B. Regression analysis
                                        Days until Diff. to                                           Days until
                                          update consensus                                              update
                                            (1)        (2)                                                 (3)
     Strong sell, Sell                  245.52*** -0.6790***    Above consensus                       64.77***
                                          (7.24)     (0.01)                                             (0.38)
                Hold                    319.81*** -.2333***    Equal to consensus                     81.32***
                                          (3.64)     (0.00)                                             (1.92)
    Buy, Strong buy                     318.44*** 0.1860***      Below consensus                      61.66***
                                          (2.78)     (0.00)                                             (0.39)
   (Strong sell, Sell) *(Affiliation)     -13.78 0.1482***     (Above consensus) *(Affiliation)          -0.26
                                          (9.75)     (0.02)                                             (0.38)
               (H ld) *(Affiliation)
               (Hold) *(Affili ti )      11 54** 0.0474***
                                         11.54**   0 0474*** (E
                                                             (Equall tto consensus)) *(Affiliation)
                                                                                     *(Affili ti )       -3.53
                                                                                                          3 53
                                          (4.52)     (0.00)                                             (2.55)
   (Buy, Strong buy) *(Affiliation)      36.11*** -0.0268***   (Below consensus) *(Affiliation)           0.00
                                          (3.50)     (0.00)                                             (0.37)
             Number of observations       94,821     99,020               Number of observations       241,890
                                   R2      0.44           0.25                                  R2      0.53
Panel A presents summary statistics for the number of days until the next recommendation or forecast by the
same analysts for the same stock. Panel B presents results from ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of
the number of days until the next recommendation or forecasts by the same analyst for the same stock
(Columns 1 and 3) and of recommendation level minus consensus (average over the past month, Column 2)
on recommendation or forecast controls and their interactions with affiliation dummies. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-date correlation. ***, **, and * mark
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. For both panels, the sample is limited to analysts
with possible affiliation (i.e., to analysts who have at least one affiliated and at least one unaffiliated
recommendation or forecast outstanding) and to firms with possible affiliation (i.e., to firms with an IPO in
the past five years or an SEO in the past two years, and with at least three analysts covering the stock), and
excludes reiterations. The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2008.
        Table 3 Trade reaction to recommendations, forecasts, and earnings surprises
Panel A. Reaction to analyst updates
                                          Recommendations                         Annual earnings forecasts
                                   Small        Large   Difference             Small        Large     Difference
                                  traders      traders     (S-L)              traders      traders       (S-L)
                                    (1)          (2)        (3)                 (4)          (5)          (6)
Unaffiliated    Update          0.0917*** 0.0875***       0.0042            -0.2808** 0.4527*** -0.7335***
                                 (0.0126)     (0.0106)   (0.0165)            (0.1372)     (0.1279)     (0.1876)
                Constant        0.1590***      -0.0166  0.1756***           0.1509***      -0.0007    0.1516***
                                 (0.0188)     (0.0152)   (0.0242)            (0.0124)     (0.0110)     (0.0166)
         Number of observations                10,970                         51,832       51,832
                               R2 0.0055           0.0068                      0.0001      0.0003
Affiliated        Update        0.1224***        0.0722***     0.0502*        -0.1430    0.4252*** -0.5682***
                                 (0.0209)         (0.0183)     (0.0278)      (0.1307)     (0.1513)   (0.1999)
                Constant        0.1805***          -0.0292    0.2097***     0.1764***      0.0066   0.1698***
                                 (0.0279)         (0.0233)     (0.0363)      (0.0157)     (0.0130)   (0.0204)
         Number of observations    4,033            4,033                      20,295      20,295
                             R2   0.0088          0.0042                      0.0000       0.0003
Panel B. Reaction to earnings surprises
                                      Small         Large     Difference       Small        Large     Difference
                                     traders       traders       (S-L)        traders      traders         (S-L)
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)            (6)
Analyst-based surprise               -1.2078       0.8556     -2.0634***     -1.4103*      0.8700     -2.2803***
                                    (0.7980)      (0.6126)     (1.0060)      (0.7522)     (0.6238)      (0.9772)
Analyst-based "meet or beat"                                                   0.0090      -0.0039        0.0129
   Dummy                                                                     (0.0336)     (0.0328)      (0.0470)
Seasonal Random Walk                 0.0796        0.0076       0.0720        -0.3343      0.0017        -0.3360
   (SRW)-based surprise             (0.2467)      (0.2215)     (0.3315)      (0.2405)     (0.2309)      (0.3334)
SRW-based "meet or beat"                                                    0.1837***      0.0037      0.1800***
   Dummy                                                                     (0.0410)     (0.0362)      (0.0547)
Constant                              0.1425*** 0.0515*** 0.091***             0.0204      0.0515        -0.0311
                                       (0.0232)     (0.0196)      (0.0304)   (0.0395)     (0.0328)      (0.0513)
          Number of observations         7,484        7,483                     7,484       7,483
                                  R2    0.0003       0.0002                    0.0036        0.0002
Panel A shows results from OLS regressions of trade reactions on recommendation and forecast update values.
Panel B shows results from OLS regressions of trade reaction on earnings surprise values. Trade reaction is
measured by abnormal trade imbalance, measured as the sum of days 0 and 1 of the update or earnings
announcement. Large traders represent trades of at least $50,000; small traders represent trades of less than
$20,000. For consistency with the other analyses, the sample is further limited to stocks for which past
affiliation is possible (i.e., stocks with an IPO in the past five years or SEO in the past two years). In Panel A,
Recommendation Update is the difference between a recommendation (1=strong sell, 2=sell, 3=hold, 4=buy and
5=strong buy) and the prior recommendation by the same analyst for the same firm. Forecast Update is the
difference between a forecast and the prior forecast by the same analyst for the same firm, normalized by prior-
day share price (and multiplied by 100). The sample is further limited to stocks for which both small and large
trade is defined (i.e., stock price of at most $200), and with at least three analysts covering the firm. For Panel
B, Analyst-Based Surprise is calculated as the announced value of earnings (from IBES) minus the most recent
consensus forecast, normalized by share price twenty trading days before the earnings announcement. Seasonal
Random Walk (SRW)-Based Surprise is calculated as the fourth-quarter earnings minus the earnings for the
same quarter in the prior year, using earnings data from Compustat, normalized by the share price twenty trading
days before the earnings announcement. We require that the earnings announcement date from Compustat be
within two days of the IBES earnings announcement date. In both panels, standard errors (in parentheses) are
robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-day correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels respectively. The sample period is 2/01/94 to 12/31/02.
                                            Table 4 Analyst forecast walk-down
                                                              All              All          Aff. + Unaff.      Aff. + Unaff.
Affiliated                                                0.0079**                             0.0070*
                                                           (0.0035)                           (0.0036)
Error in analyst's first forecast                        0.3845***         0.4090***           0.1044             0.1637
                                                           (0.0666)         (0.0663)          (0.2556)           (0.2764)
Affiliated*(Error in analyst's first forecast)           -0.3218***                            -0.1313
                                                           (0.1235)                           (0.1880)
Bank Reputation Capital                                     -1.4270           -1.3169          -0.1975            -0.2540
                                                           (0.9319)          (0.9373)         (0.9169)           (0.9714)
Bank Loyalty Index                                          -0.0023           -0.0029          -0.0061            -0.0067
                                                           (0.0044)          (0.0045)         (0.0074)           (0.0075)
Institutional Ownership                                     0.0000            0.0000           -0.0001            0.0000
                                                           (0.0000)          (0.0000)         (0.0001)           (0.0001)
All-Star Status                                             -0.0007           -0.0008          -0.0018            -0.0018
                                                           (0.0010)          (0.0010)         (0.0014)           (0.0013)
(Bank Reputation Capital)*(Error first forecast)           74.9520           56.8367          -17.6631           -19.6856
                                                          (47.9041)         (45.2110)        (44.3529)          (44.1896)
(Bank Loyalty Index)*(Error first forecast)                 0.0338            0.0876           0.2210             0.2487
                                                           (0.2027)          (0.2032)         (0.3652)           (0.3647)
(Institutional Ownership)*(Error first forecast)         0.0047***         0.0032***         0.0078***          0.0062**
                                                           (0.0012)          (0.0011)         (0.0022)           (0.0030)
(All-Star Status)*(Error first forecast)                    0.0186            -0.0093          0.1784             0.1396
                                                           (0.0715)          (0.0470)         (0.1142)           (0.1079)
Investment-Banking Pressure                                                 0.0091**                              0.0085*
                                                                             (0.0043)                            (0.0045)
(Inv.-Banking Pr.)*(Error first forecast)                                  -0.3902***                             -0.2096
                                                                             (0.1437)                            (0.2321)
Time to annual earnings announcement                     0.0308***         0.0314***          0.0284***         0.0288***
                                                          (0.0051)           (0.0050)          (0.0078)          (0.0074)
Constant                                                   -0.0050            -0.0050           -0.0030           -0.0032
                                                          (0.0042)           (0.0041)          (0.0071)          (0.0069)
                              Number of observations      145,052            145,052            90,964            90,964
                                                  R2       0.2345             0.2416            0.1139            0.1171

The table presents results from OLS regression of analysts' errors in their last forecast, defined as the earnings forecast
minus the earnings realization, normalized by the share price before the analyst's first forecast for the firm-year. Affiliated
is a dummy equal to 1 if the analyst is affiliated in the stock at that point in time. Bank Reputation Capital is the
underwriting market share of the analyst’s bank, defined as the amount of equity the bank raised as the lead underwriter
for its clients in the prior calendar year divided by the total amount of equity raised by all issuers in that year. The Bank
Loyalty Index applicable to an analyst of bank j in year t is the ratio of the number of firms that used bank j both in their
last and their penultimate deals to the number of firms that used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on all deals in the
last five years. Institutional Ownership is calculated from quarterly 13(f) SEC filings. All-Star Analysts are the top,
“second team,” and “third team” analysts in the most recent October issue of Institutional Investor magazine. Investment-
Banking Pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k in year t is the sum of file amounts from all deals that bank j
(and its predecessors in the case of mergers) managed for company k in the preceding five years, divided by the total file
amount of k ’s deals during the same period. Time to annual earnings announcements is the number of days between
forecast and announcement, divided by 1000. The sample is limited to stocks for which past affiliation is possible (i.e.,
stocks with an IPO in the past five years or SEO in the past two years, and with at least three analysts covering the firm).
The "All" columns include forecasts by all analysts, while the "Affiliated + Unaffiliated" columns include only analysts
with at least one affiliated and one unaffiliated recommendation or forecast outstanding. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-analyst correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels respectively, using a one-tailed test for "Affiliation*(Forecast error for analyst's first forecast)" and two-
tailed tests for all other coefficients. The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2008.
                                      Table 5 Relationship between Forecast Optimism and Recommendation Optimism
                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)             (7)           (8)
Recommendation Optimism                               0.1733          0.1764          0.1732          0.1728          0.1782            0.1799          0.3765        0.4273
                                                     (0.1103)        (0.1104)        (0.1108)        (0.1104)        (0.1100)         (0.1108)        (0.4046)       (0.3872)
Affiliation                                          -0.5204         -0.5449         -0.5278         -0.5126         -0.5329           -0.5488         -0.5490
                                                     (0.4775)        (0.5370)        (0.4813)        (0.4565)        (0.4887)         (0.5212)        (0.5230)
Affiliation*(Recommendation Optimism)               -0.6270**       -0.6282**       -0.6322**       -0.6252**       -0.6269**        -0.6312**       -0.5994**
                                                     (0.3519)        (0.3537)        (0.3540)        (0.3483)        (0.3519)         (0.3520)        (0.3548)
Bank Reputation Capital                                              51.1550                                                          33.5913         32.7149         52.2259
                                                                   (133.5067)                                                       (118.7794)      (121.0151)      (134.6670)
Bank Loyalty Index                                                                   -1.0289*                                         -1.0455*        -1.0654*        -1.0382*
                                                                                     (0.6139)                                         (0.6323)        (0.6346)        (0.6123)
Institutional Ownership                                                                               0.0013                            0.0014          0.0013          0.0010
                                                                                                     (0.0045)                         (0.0044)        (0.0043)        (0.0041)
All-Star Status                                                                                                       0.2910            0.3043          0.2818          0.2979
                                                                                                                     (0.2915)         (0.2433)        (0.2447)        (0.2563)
(Bank Rep. Cap.)*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                            47.5091         84.0885
                                                                                                                                                    (153.9944)      (173.2109)
(Bank Loyalty Ind.)*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                        -1.2991**       -1.2519**
                                                                                                                                                      (0.6061)        (0.5837)
(Institutional Ownership)*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                     0.0034          0.0026
                                                                                                                                                      (0.0064)        (0.0062)
(All-Star Status)*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                            -0.4175         -0.3887
                                                                                                                                                      (0.3352)        (0.3454)
Investment-Banking Pressure                                                                                                                                            -0.7301
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.6798)
(Investment-Banking Pressure)*(Recommendation Optimism                                                                                                               -0.8639**
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.4921)
Fixed effects for year, month, and day-of-week         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
                        Number of observations        6,269           6,269           6,269           6,269           6,269           6,269           6,269             6,269
                                              2
                                            R         0.0028          0.0028          0.0032          0.0028          0.0028          0.0033          0.0034            0.0036

The table presents results from OLS regressions with Forecast Optimism as the dependent variable. Forecast Optimism is defined as the difference between an annual
earnings forecast and the consensus, divided by the prior-day stock price (and multiplied by 100). Recommendation Optimism is the difference between a recommendation
and the consensus (over the past month) at the time of the earnings forecast. Affiliation is a binary variable and equal to 1 if the analyst’s brokerage house is affiliated with
an investment bank with a past SEO- or IPO- (co- or lead-)underwriting relationship. Bank Reputation Capital is the underwriting market share of the analyst’s bank,
defined as the amount of equity the bank raised as the lead underwriter for its clients in the prior calendar year, divided by the total amount of equity raised by all issuers in
that year. The Bank Loyalty Index applicable to an analyst of bank j in year t is the ratio of the number of companies which used bank j both in their last and in their
penultimate deals to the number of companies which used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on all deals in the last five years. Institutional Ownership is calculated
from quarterly 13(f) SEC filings. Analysts with All-Star Status are the top, “second team,” and “third team” analysts in the most recent October issue of Institutional
Investor magazine. Investment-Banking Pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k in year t is the sum of file amounts from all deals that bank j (and its predecessors
in the case of mergers) managed for company k in the preceding five years, divided by the total file amount of k ’s deals during the same period. The sample is limited to
earnings forecasts within eighty days before the earnings announcement and to stocks with prices of at least $5 and for which past affiliation is possible (i.e., stocks with an
IPO in the past five years or SEO in the past two years), and to cases where the analyst issues a recommendation and forecast simultaneously and analysts with at least one
affiliated and one unaffiliated recommendation or forecast outstanding. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-analyst
correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively, using a one-tailed test for "Affiliated*(Recommendation Optimism)" and
"(Investment-banking pressure)*(Recommendation Optimism)," and two-tailed tests for all other coefficients. The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2008.
                                               Table 6 Two-tongues metric
Panel A. Summary statistics

                                       Obs.       Mean Median St. dev. 25th %ile 50th %ile 75th %ile            % neg. % pos.
Same-day recommendations (Regression Sample)
    All analysts                      33,840       0.34      0.02   10.16 -0.25    0.02      0.47                42.90    55.71
    Unaffiliated analysts             21,800       0.26      0.01    7.07 -0.26    0.01      0.45                43.65    54.99
    Affiliated analysts               12,040       0.47      0.03   14.13 -0.22    0.03      0.50                41.53    57.01
    p -value for difference in means, affiliated vs. unaffiliated: 0.0618
Same-day and outstanding recommendations
    All analysts                     166,106       0.38      0.07    7.49 -0.45    0.07      0.93                43.77    55.57
    Unaffiliated analysts            101,001       0.34      0.05    7.18 -0.49    0.05      0.89                45.11    54.27
    Affiliated analysts               65,105       0.43      0.11    7.95 -0.36    0.11      0.97                41.69    57.59
    p -value for difference in means, affiliated vs. unaffiliated: 0.0116
Panel B. Transition matrices
                                                                                             From
                                                                     Whole sample       Affiliated analysts    Unaffiliated
                   To                                                      Strategically distorted (measure 1 > 0)?
                                                                     Yes      No         Yes         No        Yes      No
Same-day recommendations
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock                     0.62     0.49
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock                0.55     0.51
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock                                         0.63       0.50       0.61    0.50
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock - affiliated                            0.63       0.50       0.50    0.63
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock - unaffiliated                          0.62       0.50       0.61    0.50
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock                                    0.55       0.53       0.56    0.50
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock - affiliated                       0.56       0.54       0.57    0.53
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock - unaffiliated                     0.54       0.52       0.55    0.49
Same-day and outstanding recommendations
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock                     0.75     0.34
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock                0.59     0.51
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock                                         0.75       0.35       0.75    0.34
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock - affiliated                            0.75       0.35       0.78    0.43
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if same stock - unaffiliated                          0.58       0.41       0.75    0.34
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock                                    0.60       0.52       0.58    0.50
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock - affiliated                       0.61       0.53       0.60    0.54
      Same analyst, next forecast/rec if different stock - unaffiliated                     0.58       0.50       0.57    0.49
The table presents statistics for the two-tongues measure of strategic distortion, defined as Recommendation Optimism minus
scaled Forecast Optimism. The sample consists of all recent equity issuers (stocks with an IPO in the past five years or SEO
in the past two years) with at least three analysts covering the firm, for analysts who have at least one affiliated and at least
one unaffiliated forecast or recommendation outstanding. The "same-day recommendations" sample matches forecasts to
recommendation by the same analyst for the same stock issued on the same day. The "same-day and outstanding
recommendations" sample also allows for forecasts to be matched to outstanding recommendations by the same analyst and
for the same stock, if none was made on the same day. Recommendation Optimism is defined as the analysts’
recommendation minus the consensus recommendation as of the forecast date. Scaled forecast optimism is Earnings Forecast
Optimism, defined as earnings per share forecast minus consensus, normalized by share price, multiplied by 100. The top
portion of the table presents summary statistics; the bottom portion presents the rates of strategic distortion for subgroups of
previous strategic (non-)distorters. "Same analyst, next forecast/rec if X" indicates the probability of strategic distortion of
the next forecast/recommendation pair made by the same analyst as the "from" forecast/recommendation, if the next
forecast/recommendation pair is for a stock that meets condition X.
                                 Table 7 Analyst pressures and strategic distortion
                                                              I(Two-tongues metric > 0)
                                      (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)                  (5)            (6)
Affiliation                        0.1285**       0.1023***    0.0802***
                                   (0.0535)        (0.0252)     (0.0207)
Investment-Banking Pressure                                                 0.1851***             0.1284***   0.0996***
                                                                             (0.0589)              (0.0278)    (0.0209)
Bank Reputation Capital             10.2901      -46.2436*** -23.6082***      5.5839             -47.8695*** -25.1606***
                                   (29.1014)      (14.0517)     (8.1221)    (29.0208)             (14.0449)    (8.1188)
Bank Loyalty Index                   -0.1113        0.0327     0.0714***      -0.1181               0.0281    0.0706***
                                    (0.0984)       (0.0448)     (0.0238)     (0.0985)              (0.0448)    (0.0238)
Institutional Ownership              -0.0004        -0.0006      -0.0002      -0.0004               -0.0006     -0.0002
                                    (0.0009)       (0.0004)     (0.0002)     (0.0009)              (0.0004)    (0.0002)
All-Star Analyst                     -0.0903        0.0086       -0.0296      -0.0944               0.0065      -0.0303
                                    (0.0925)       (0.0389)     (0.0261)     (0.0924)              (0.0389)    (0.0261)
Constant                            0.1078*       0.1602***    0.1313***      0.0987              0.1572***   0.1300***
                                    (0.0654)       (0.0316)     (0.0168)     (0.0658)              (0.0316)    (0.0167)
       Number of observations         6,256         33,840      156,739        6,256                33,840     156,739
                            2        8.83           30.85           43.49           12.40          35.43           51.29
                     Pseudo R2       0.0010         0.0007          0.0002          0.0014          0.0008         0.0010
The table presents results from estimation of a logit model for an indicator equal to 1 if the analyst is distorted (Two-
tongues metric > 0), using the measure of strategic distortion defined in Table 6. The sample includes all firms with at
least three analysts covering the firm and, in Columns 1 and 4, the same sample as in Table 5 (recent issuers, affiliated
and unaffiliated analysts, forecasts within eighty days prior to the announcement); in Columns 2 and 5 we consider all
firms, all analysts, and all forecasts. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-
analyst and within-forecast-date correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively,
using two-tailed tests.
                                             TABLE OA1. Summary Statistics

Panel A. Quarterly Earnings Forecasts and Long-Term Growth Forecasts
                                 Quarterly Earnings Forecast Optimism               Long Term Growth Forecast Optimism
                               Sample                      Percentile             Sample                    Percentile
                                size    Mean St. Dev. 25th 50th 75th               size   Mean St. Dev. 25th 50th 75th
Full Sample
 All                          1,120,420 -0.044 1.992 -0.049 -0.001 0.031 217,645 0.76               80.58    -1.81   0.10     2.09
 Unaffiliated                 1,043,029 -0.043 2.011 -0.048 -0.001 0.031 200,775 0.82               83.70    -1.75   0.11     2.08
 Affiliated                      77,391 -0.059 1.722 -0.063 -0.002 0.034 16,870 -0.01               19.86    -2.50   0.00     2.19
Regression Sample
 All                             18,970 -0.119 4.542 -0.054 -0.002 0.024             8,166 0.54     26.87    -2.50   0.00     2.35
 Unaffiliated                    12,426 -0.124 5.426 -0.048 -0.001 0.023             5,519 1.21     30.49    -2.50   0.00     2.67
 Affiliated                       6,544 -0.109 1.976 -0.068 -0.004 0.026             2,647 -0.87    16.93    -2.70   -0.07    1.95
 Inv.-banking pressure = 0       12,364 -0.091 3.803 -0.049 -0.001 0.023             5,437 1.23     30.74    -2.50   0.00     2.67
 Inv.-banking pressure > 0        6,606 -0.170 5.671 -0.066 -0.003 0.027             2,729 -0.83    16.61    -2.73   -0.10    2.00
 Bank rep. capital = 0            5,765 -0.184 4.459 -0.052 -0.001 0.025             2,503 1.03     25.38    -2.52   0.00     2.60
 Bank rep. capital > 0           13,205 -0.090 4.577 -0.055 -0.002 0.024             5,663 0.32     27.50    -2.50   0.00     2.27
 Bank loyalty index = 0           5,215 -0.053 1.011 -0.056 -0.001 0.022             2,457 -0.03    20.18    -2.03   0.00     2.00
 Bank loyalty index > 0          13,755 -0.144 5.297 -0.053 -0.002 0.025             5,709 0.78     29.28    -2.73   0.00     2.50
 Instit. ownership = 0              291 0.023 0.485 -0.062 0.000 0.051                 130 0.56      9.12    -1.33   -0.04    1.00
 Instit. ownership > 0           18,679 -0.121 4.577 -0.054 -0.002 0.024             8,036 0.54     27.06    -2.54   0.00     2.38
  All-star analyst = 0             17,529 -0.125 4.714 -0.054 -0.002 0.024           7,407 0.53 27.87 -2.62 0.00 2.50
  All-star analyst = 1              1,441 -0.037 1.122 -0.054 -0.003 0.025              759 0.60 13.67 -1.83 -0.09 1.67
Quarterly Earnings Forecast Optimism is measured as the value of the quarterly earnings forecast minus the existing consensus,
normalized by prior-day share price, where quarterly earnings forecasts are reported in earnings-per-share dollars. Long-Term
Growth Forecast Optimism is measured as the forecast value minus the existing consensus, where long-term growth forecasts
are reported in percent of expected growth over the next three to five years. The Full Sample includes all recommendations and
forecasts as long as the underlying share price is at least $5 and at least three analysts are covering the firm. An analyst is
Unaffiliated if his or her brokerage firm does not belong to a bank that has been lead or co-underwriter in the stock's IPO over
the past 5 years or SEO over the past 2 years; otherwise the analyst is Affiliated. The Regression Sample reduces heterogeneity
between Unaffiliated and Affiliated analysts and the stocks they cover by requiring (i) that the analyst is simultaneously
affiliated (for some stocks) and unaffiliated (for some other stocks); (ii) that affiliation is possible for the stock receiving the
recommendation or forecast (i.e., the firm had at least one IPO in the past 5 years or SEO in the past 2 years); (iii) that
recommendation and forecast are issued on the same day. Investment-banking pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k
in year t is the sum of file amounts from all deals that bank j (and its predecessors in the case of mergers) managed for
company k in the preceding five years, divided by the total file amount of k ’s deals during the same period. Bank reputation
capital is the underwriting market share of the analyst’s bank, defined as the amount of equity the bank raised as the lead
underwriter for its clients in the prior calendar year divided by the total amount of equity raised by all issuers in that year. The
Bank loyalty index applicable to an analyst of bank j in year t is the ratio of the number of companies which used bank j both
in their last and in their penultimate deals to the number of companies which used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on
all deals in the last five years. Institutional ownership is calculated from quarterly 13(f) SEC filings. All-star analysts are the
top, “second team” and “third team” analysts in the most recent October issue of the Institutional Investor Magazine . The
quarterly earnings forecast sample is limited to forecasts pertaining to the closest following quarterly earnings announcement,
and to earnings announcements that occur during the SEC mandated window of 0-45 days after the end of the relevant fiscal
quarter. The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2008.
                                                  TABLE OA1. (continued )
Panel B. Measures of Trade Reaction
                                                                                Quarterly earnings Long-term growth
                                                              All dates           forecast dates      forecast dates
                                                        Mean Med. St.Dev. Mean Med. St.Dev. Mean Med. St.Dev.
                   Number of small buy-initiated trades 48.27    15     92.12 106.48    44 147.69 98.13     39 140.37
                   Number of large buy-initiated trades 23.52     3     67.74 70.22     21 128.64 69.15     20 127.18
                   Number of small sell-initiated trades 42.07       15     79.23    89.31     39    126.11 84.33       36    121.68
                   Number of large sell-initiated trades 19.44        3     55.77    57.17     18    105.12 57.27       17    106.28
         Total number of small buy/sell-initiated trades 90.34       30    168.61 195.80       84    269.23 182.46      77    257.70
         Total number of large buy/sell-initiated trades 42.97        6    122.63 127.38       40    232.03 126.42      37    231.75
                        Δ(buy-sell) initiated small trades 6.20      1     33.13 17.17          4     54.27 13.80         3     51.07
                        Δ(buy-sell) initiated large trades 4.08      0     18.98 13.05          2     36.87 11.88         2     35.09
                                                N           3,730,866                 412,993                     126,521
Trade reaction is measured as the abnormal trade imbalance. Large traders represent trades of at least $50,000; small traders
represent trades of less than $20,000. The sample is limited to stocks for which past affiliation is possible, i.e., stocks with an
IPO in the past 5 years or SEO in the past 2 years. The sample period is 2/01/1994-12/31/2002.
                       TABLE OA2. Timing
Panel A. Sample Statistics
                   Mean (median) number of days until new forecast (same
                                     stock + analyst)
Quarterly Earnings                      Relative to Consensus
      Forecasts    Overall      Below          Equal to        Above
Unaffiliated         39.6         38.9           45.6           39.7
                     (37)         (36)           (44)           (38)
Affiliated           39.5         38.8           44.8           39.6
                     (37)         (36)           (46)           (38)
Long-Term Growth                        Relative to Consensus
      Forecasts    Overall      Below          Equal to        Above
Unaffiliated        285.7        289.3          336.6          279.6
                    (175)        (179)          (231)          (168)
Affiliated          293.2        297.1          355.0          285.6
                    (174)        (179)          (240)          (164)
Panel B. Regression Analysis
                                                        Quarterly       Long-Term
                                                        Earnings         Growth
                                                        Forecast         Forecast
               Above consensus                          39.74***        279.65***
                                                         (0.33)           (3.56)
             Equal to consensus                         45.56***        336.56***
                                                         (0.91)          (13.27)
               Below consensus                          38.95***        289.31***
                                                         (0.34)           (3.55)
             (Above consensus) *(Affiliation)             -0.15             5.97
                                                         (0.36)           (5.15)
           (Equal to consensus) *(Affiliation)            -0.75            18.44
                                                         (1.13)          (21.74)
             (Below consensus) *(Affiliation)             -0.11             7.75
                                                         (0.35)           (5.02)
                          Number of Observations         52,378           41,562
                                              R2          0.70              0.44

Panel A presents summary statistics for the number of days until the next
quarterly earnings forecast or long-term growth forecast by the same analysts for
the same stock. Panel B presents results from OLS regressions of the number of
days until the next quarterly earnings forecast or long-term growth forecast by
the same analyst for the same stock on forecast controls and their interactions
with affiliation dummies. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity and within-date correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance
at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively. For both panels, the sample is limited
to analysts with possible affiliation, i.e., to analysts who have at least one
affiliated and at least one unaffiliated recommendation or forecast outstanding,
and to firms with possible affiliation, i.e., to firms with an IPO in the past 5 years
or an SEO in the past 2 years, and with at least 3 analysts covering the stock, and
excludes reiterations. The sample period is 2/01/1994 to 12/31/2008.
   TABLE OA3. Trade Reaction to Quarterly Earnings Forecasts, Long-Term Growth
                       Forecasts and Quarterly Earnings Surprises
Panel A. Reaction to Analyst Updates
                                Quarterly Earnings Forecasts                  Long-Term Growth Forecasts
                              Small         Large    Difference             Small        Large   Difference
                            Traders        Traders      (S-L)              Traders     Traders      (S-L)
Unaffiliated   Update        -1.2098      4.0183** -5.2281**                0.0034    0.0046**     -0.0012
                            (1.5670)      (1.6345)    (2.2643)             (0.0023)    (0.0018)   (0.0030)
               Constant    0.1338***       -0.0202   0.1539***            0.1083***     -0.0130  0.1212***
                            (0.0190)      (0.0177)    (0.0260)             (0.0237)    (0.0203)   (0.0312)
    Number of Observations 12,014          12,014                            6,311       6,311
                            R20.0001            0.0010                       0.0004       0.0009
Affiliated        Update    -2.5921**           2.0335       -4.6256*       -0.0018       0.0040        -0.0058
                             (1.1900)          (1.5344)      (1.9417)      (0.0038)      (0.0044)      (0.0058)
                Constant    0.1738***           -0.0366     0.2104***     0.1379***      0.0573*       0.0806*
                             (0.0253)          (0.0222)      (0.0337)      (0.0358)      (0.0324)      (0.0483)
     Number of Observations    5,314             5,314                        2,099        2,099
                          2
                         R    0.0007            0.0005                      0.0001        0.0005
Panel B. Reaction to Quarterly Earnings Surprises
                                   Small        Large   Difference           Small         Large  Difference
                                  Traders      Traders     (S-L)           Traders       Traders     (S-L)
Analyst-Based Surprise           3.5291**     6.7238***   -3.1947            0.7476     3.9861**    -3.2385
                                 (1.5412)      (1.9459)  (2.4823)          (1.6143)      (1.5780)  (2.2574)
Analyst-Based "Meet or Beat"                                              0.0785***     0.1180***   -0.0395
   Dummy                                                                   (0.0219)      (0.0197)  (0.0295)
Seasonal-Random-Walk           0.0654           -0.0800       0.1455        -0.1371       -0.0775   -0.0596
   (SRW)-Based Surprise       (0.0932)         (0.0957)      (0.1336)      (0.1278)      (0.0955)  (0.1595)
SRW-Based "Meet or Beat"                                                  0.1137***       -0.0101 0.1238***
   Dummy                                                                   (0.0222)      (0.0194)  (0.0295)
Constant                     0.1815***        0.0589***     0.1226***     0.0561**        -0.0131 0.0692**
                              (0.0142)         (0.0117)      (0.0184)      (0.0228)      (0.0192)  (0.0299)
    Number of Observations 25,131               25,133                       25,131       25,133
                         R2    0.0002           0.0008                      0.0024        0.0024

Panel A shows results from OLS regressions of trade reaction on quarterly earnings forecast and long-term
growth forecast update values. Panel B shows results from OLS regressions of trade reaction on quarterly
earnings surprise values. Trade reaction is measured by abnormal trade imbalance. Large traders represent
trades of at least $50,000; small traders represent trades of less than $20,000. For consistency with the other
analyses, the sample is further limited to stocks for which past affiliation is possible, i.e., stocks with an IPO
in the past 5 years or SEO in the past 2 years. In Panel A, Quarterly forecast update is the difference between
a forecast and the prior forecast by the same analyst for the same firm, normalized by share price (and
multiplied by 100). Long-term growth forecast update is the difference between the percentage growth
forecast and the prior forecast by the same analyst for the same firm. The sample is further limited to stocks
for which both small and large trade is defined (i.e. stock price of at most $200), and with at least 3 analysts
covering the firm. For Panel B, Analyst-Based Surprise is calculated as the announced value of quarterly
earnings (from IBES) minus the most recent consensus forecast, normalized by share price twenty trading
days before the earnings announcement. (We require that the earnings announcement date from Compustat
be within two days of the IBES earnings announcement date.) In both panels, standard errors (in parentheses)
are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-day correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively. The sample period is 2/01/94-12/31/02.
                   TABLE OA4. Analyst Forecast Walk-Down for Quarterly Earnings Forecasts
                                                                  All                All          Aff. + Unaff.      Aff. + Unaff.
Affiliated                                                      -0.0002                              -0.0001
                                                               (0.0003)                             (0.0003)
Error in analyst's first forecast                             0.6155***          0.5995***          0.4736**           0.4314**
                                                               (0.1648)           (0.1682)          (0.2143)           (0.2157)
Affiliation*(Error for analyst's first forecast)                0.0467                               0.1607
                                                               (0.2209)                             (0.2245)
All-star Analyst                                                0.0001             0.0001            0.0003*            0.0003*
                                                               (0.0002)           (0.0002)          (0.0002)           (0.0002)
Bank Reputation                                                 0.0523             0.0659            0.0704             0.0840
                                                               (0.0789)           (0.0802)          (0.0810)           (0.0811)
Loyalty Index                                                   0.0003             0.0003            0.0000             0.0001
                                                               (0.0005)           (0.0005)          (0.0006)           (0.0006)
Institutional Ownership                                       0.0000***          0.0000***         0.0000***          0.0000***
                                                               (0.0000)           (0.0000)          (0.0000)           (0.0000)
All-star Analyst*(Error first forecast)                       0.2777***          0.3130***         0.4389***          0.4843***
                                                               (0.1076)           (0.1142)          (0.1545)           (0.1508)
Bank Reputation*(Error first forecast)                         -72.2014           -78.0550          -51.5735           -55.4529
                                                              (98.7728)          (101.2482)        (116.0147)         (119.9789)
Loyalty Index*(Forecast error first forecast)                   -0.0081            0.0231            0.2246             0.2931
                                                               (0.3496)           (0.3467)          (0.4035)           (0.3900)
Institutional Ownership*(Error first forecast)                  0.0010             0.0004            0.0000             -0.0008
                                                               (0.0026)           (0.0029)          (0.0038)           (0.0042)
Investment Banking Pressure                                                        -0.0003                              -0.0003
                                                                                  (0.0003)                             (0.0003)
(Inv. Banking Pr.)*(Error first forecast)                                          0.1660                               0.3159
                                                                                  (0.2031)                             (0.1995)
Time to annual earnings announcement                          0.0316***          0.0312***         0.0322***          0.0315***
                                                               (0.0033)           (0.0034)          (0.0034)           (0.0035)
Constant                                                      -0.0039***         -0.0039***        -0.0042***         -0.0042***
                                                               (0.0004)           (0.0004)          (0.0005)           (0.0005)
                                    Number of Observations      207,739            207,739           138,475            138,475
                                                          2
                                                        R       0.5975             0.6026            0.5922             0.6098

Ordinary least squares regression of analysts’ errors in their last forecast for a given firm’s earnings in a given fiscal quarter.
Forecast error is defined as the earnings forecast minus the earnings realization, normalized by share price before the analyst's
first forecast for the firm-quarter. Affiliation is a dummy equal to 1 if the analyst is affiliated in the given stock at the given
point in time. Time to quarterly earnings announcements is the number of days between the forecast and the announcement,
divided by 1000. All-star analysts are the top, “second team” and “third team” analysts in the most recent October issue of
Institutional Investor magazine. Bank reputation capital is the underwriting market share of the analyst’s bank, defined as the
amount of equity the bank raised as the lead underwriter for its clients in the prior calendar year divided by the total amount of
equity raised by all issuers in that year. The Bank loyalty index applicable to an analyst of bank j in year t is the ratio of the
number of companies which used bank j both in their last and in their penultimate deals to the number of companies which
used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on all deals in the last five years. Institutional ownership is calculated from
quarterly 13(f) SEC filings. Investment-banking pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k in year t is the sum of file
amounts from all deals that bank j (and its predecessors in the case of mergers) managed for company k in the preceding five
years, divided by the total file amount of k ’s deals during the same period. The sample is limited to stocks for which past
affiliation is possible, i.e., stocks with an IPO in the past 5 years or SEO in the past 2 years, with at least 3 analysts covering
the firm. The "All Analysts" column includes forecasts made by any analyst, while the "Currently Affiliated and Unaffiliated
Analysts" column includes only analysts with at least one unaffiliated recommendation or forecast outstanding and one
affiliated recommendation or forecast outstanding. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity
and within-analyst correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively, using a 1-tailed
test for "Affiliation*(Forecast error for analyst's first forecast)" and 2-tailed tests for all other coefficients. The sample period
is 2/01/94-12/31/08.
                      TABLE OA5. Relationship between Quarterly Earnings Forecast Optimism and Recommendation Optimism
                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)
Recommendation Optimism                               0.1339          0.1345          0.1367          0.1339          0.1329           0.1353         -0.0868         0.2198
                                                    (0.2312)        (0.2312)        (0.2314)        (0.2312)        (0.2316)         (0.2320)        (0.4240)        (0.4705)
Affiliation                                           0.0358          0.0320          0.0188          0.0335          0.0544           0.0382         0.0059
                                                    (0.0854)        (0.0853)        (0.0846)        (0.0840)        (0.0947)         (0.0946)        (0.0644)
Affiliation*(Recommendation Optimism)                -0.0691         -0.0700         -0.0696         -0.0684         -0.0670          -0.0674         0.1160
                                                    (0.2396)        (0.2396)        (0.2396)        (0.2397)        (0.2403)         (0.2405)        (0.2072)
All-star Analyst                                                    0.0879**                                                           0.0573          0.0551          0.0602
                                                                    (0.0443)                                                         (0.0455)        (0.0422)        (0.0464)
Bank Reputation                                                                    34.2549**                                         22.3764         11.3729        23.4610*
                                                                                   (14.8647)                                        (14.5638)       (12.9286)       (13.6899)
Loyalty Index                                                                                        -0.1032                          -0.0922         -0.1496         -0.0962
                                                                                                    (0.1178)                         (0.1153)        (0.1060)        (0.1167)
Institutional Ownership                                                                                              0.0034*         0.0033*        0.0032**          0.0034*
                                                                                                                    (0.0020)         (0.0020)        (0.0016)        (0.0020)
All-star Analyst*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                            -0.0092         -0.0594
                                                                                                                                                     (0.1234)        (0.1371)
Bank Reputation*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                            -39.5235        -84.4319
                                                                                                                                                    (46.8336)       (51.7837)
Loyalty Index*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                                0.1066          0.9038
                                                                                                                                                     (0.5646)        (0.6513)
Institutional Ownership*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                      0.0007         -0.0048
                                                                                                                                                     (0.0062)        (0.0067)
Investment Banking Pressure                                                                                                                                            0.0024
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.0852)
(Investment Banking Pressure)*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                               -0.1622
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.2529)
Fixed Effects for year, month and day-of-week          Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
                       Number of Observations         14,989          14,989         14,989           14,989         14,989           14,989          25,301          14,989
                                              R2      0.0019          0.0020         0.0020           0.0020         0.0023           0.0023          0.0017          0.0031
The table presents results from OLS regressions. Quarterly earnings forecast optimism is defined as the difference between a quarterly earnings forecast and the consensus,
divided by the stock price on the day prior to the forecast date (and multiplied by 100). Recommendation Optimism is the difference between a recommendation and the
consensus for the same stock (over the past month) at the time of the earnings forecast. Affiliation is a binary variable and equal to 1 if the analyst's brokerage house is
affiliated with an investment bank with a past SEO- or IPO- (co- or lead-)underwriting relationship. All-star analysts are the top, “second team” and “third team” analysts
in the most recent October issue of Institutional Investor magazine. Bank reputation capital is the underwriting market share of the analyst’s bank, defined as the amount of
equity the bank raised as the lead underwriter for its clients in the prior calendar year divided by the total amount of equity raised by all issuers in that year. The Bank
loyalty index applicable to an analyst of bank j in year t is the ratio of the number of companies which used bank j both in their last and in their penultimate deals to the
number of companies which used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on all deals in the last five years. Institutional ownership is calculated from quarterly 13(f) SEC
filings. Investment-banking pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k in year t is the sum of file amounts from all deals that bank j (and its predecessors in the case of
mergers) managed for company k in the preceding five years, divided by the total file amount of k’s deals during the same period. The sample is limited to earnings
forecasts within 80 days before the earnings announcement and to stocks with prices of at least $5 and for which past affiliation is possible, i.e., stocks with an IPO in the
past 5 years or SEO in the past 2 years, and to cases where the analyst issues a recommendation and forecast simultaneously. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to
heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-analyst correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively, using a 1-tailed test for
"Affiliated*(Recommendation Optimism)" and "(Investment Banking Pressure)*(Recommendation Optimism)" and 2-tailed tests for all other coefficients. The sample
period is 2/01/94 to 12/31/08.
                      TABLE OA6. Relationship between Long-term Growth Forecast Optimism and Recommendation Optimism
                                                        (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)           (8)
Recommendation Optimism                              1.5990**        1.6013**        1.6006**        1.5933**        1.5969**         1.5941**          1.5068         1.6623
                                                     (0.6532)        (0.6528)        (0.6537)        (0.6525)        (0.6535)         (0.6528)         (1.6232)       (1.5987)
Affiliation                                         -2.0787***      -2.0896***      -2.1942***      -2.0522***      -2.0538***       -2.1506***      -2.1572***
                                                     (0.5867)        (0.5836)        (0.6234)        (0.5837)        (0.6291)         (0.6635)         (0.6644)
Affiliation*(Recommendation Optimism)                 -0.1505         -0.1482         -0.1636         -0.1619         -0.1572          -0.1816          0.0385
                                                     (0.8355)        (0.8359)        (0.8362)        (0.8363)        (0.8366)         (0.8389)         (0.8739)
All-star Analyst                                                       0.2979                                                           0.1924          0.1784          0.1916
                                                                     (0.5974)                                                         (0.6122)         (0.6004)        (0.6008)
Bank Reputation                                                                      197.6167                                         203.6461        220.0580        233.3426
                                                                                    (246.7340)                                       (254.6704)      (255.4664)      (258.5232)
Loyalty Index                                                                                          1.1882                           1.2546          1.2501          1.2961
                                                                                                      (1.0227)                        (1.0119)         (1.0129)        (1.0152)
Institutional Ownership                                                                                                0.0042           0.0045          0.0047          0.0043
                                                                                                                      (0.0137)        (0.0135)         (0.0136)        (0.0136)
All-star Analyst*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                              -2.1488         -2.1594
                                                                                                                                                       (1.8188)        (1.8208)
Bank Reputation*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                             -349.5584       -308.8471
                                                                                                                                                     (410.9465)      (410.5216)
Loyalty Index*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                                  1.3526          1.3798
                                                                                                                                                       (1.5100)        (1.5120)
Institutional Ownership*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                       -0.0007         -0.0018
                                                                                                                                                       (0.0180)        (0.0179)
Investment Banking Pressure                                                                                                                                          -2.5160***
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.7653)
(Investment Banking Pressure)*(Recommendation Optimism)                                                                                                                 -0.3505
                                                                                                                                                                       (0.9996)
Fixed Effects for year, month and day-of-week          Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
                        Number of Observations        8,166             8,166           8,166           8,166           8,166           8,166          8,166             8,166
                                            R2        0.0145           0.0145          0.0145          0.0146          0.0145          0.0147          0.0149           0.0150

This table presents results from OLS regressions. Long-term growth forecast optimism is defined as the difference between a long-term growth forecast and the consensus.
Recommendation Optimism is the difference between a recommendation and the consensus for the same stock (over the past month) at the time of the earnings forecast.
Affiliation is a binary variable and equal to 1 if the analyst's brokerage house is affiliated with an investment bank with a past SEO- or IPO- (co- or lead-)underwriting
relationship. All-star analysts are the top, “second team” and “third team” analysts in the most recent October issue of Institutional Investor magazine. Bank reputation
capital is the underwriting market share of the analyst’s bank, defined as the amount of equity the bank raised as the lead underwriter for its clients in the prior calendar year
divided by the total amount of equity raised by all issuers in that year. The Bank loyalty index applicable to an analyst of bank j in year t is the ratio of the number of
companies which used bank j both in their last and in their penultimate deals to the number of companies which used bank j in their penultimate deals, based on all deals in
the last five years. Institutional ownership is calculated from quarterly 13(f) SEC filings. Investment-banking pressure for an analyst’s bank j covering firm k in year t is the
sum of file amounts from all deals that bank j (and its predecessors in the case of mergers) managed for company k in the preceding five years, divided by the total file
amount of k’s deals during the same period. The sample is limited to earnings forecasts within 80 days before the earnings announcement and to stocks with prices of at
least $5 and for which past affiliation is possible, i.e., stocks with an IPO in the past 5 years or SEO in the past 2 years ("Analysts with affiliation in some stocks, firms with
possible affiliation"), where those analysts issue a recommendation and forecast simultaneously. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity and
arbitrary within-analyst correlation. ***, **, and * mark significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels respectively, using a 1-tailed test for "Affiliated*(Recommendation
Optimism)" and "(Investment Banking Pressure)*(Recommendation Optimism)", and 2-tailed tests for all other coefficients. The sample period is 2/01/94-12/31/08.
