                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION AND MONEY
             SUPPLY ANNOUNCEMENTS ON INTEREST RATES


                          Thomas Urich
                          Paul   Wachtel




                     Working Paper No. 1313




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 19814




The authors appreciate helpful comments made at a seminar at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and by William Schwert and
express their thanks to Money Market Services for making the data
available. The research reported here is part of' the NBER'S
research program In Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of' the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1313
                                                  March 1984



                   The Effects of Inflation and Money Supply
                        Announcements on Interest Rates


                                    ABSTRACT


        This paper examines the impact of the money supply and inflation rate

announcements on interest rates. Survey data on expectations of the money

supply and consumer and producer price indexes are used to distinguish

anticipated and unanticipated components of the announcements. This distinction

is used to test for the efficiency of the financial market response to the

announcements of new information. The results indicate that the unanticipated

components of the announced changes in the Producers Price Index and in the

money supply have an immediate positive effect on short term interest rates.

The Consumer Price Index announcement has no apparent effect. There is no evi-

dence of a delayed announcement effect. However, there is some indication of a

1icjiidity effect of the money supply change on interest rates. This takes place

when reserves are changing and several weeks prior to the information announcement.




Thomas Urich                                        Paul Wachtel
Baurch College                                      New York University
Economics Department                                Graduate School of Business
17 Lexington Avenue                                 Administration
New York, NY 10010                                  90 Trinity Place
                                                    New York, NI 10006
     The effect of money supply announcements on interest rates has attracted

considerable attention in both the academic literature and the financial

press in the last few years. It has been firmly established that unanti-

cipated increases in the money supply lead to immediate increases in interest

rates. However, there are several competing explanations for this phenomenon

in the literature. In this paper we present some additional empirical

evidence which helps to distinguish between two of these hypotheses -   the olicv

anticipations and inflationary expectations hypotheses - by examining the

effect of money supply and inflation announcements on interest rates.

    The positive effect on interest rates of announcements of unanticipated

changes in the money supply was demonstrated by Urich and Wachtel (1981),

Grossman (1981) and Roley (1982). The announcement effect was interpreted

in our earlier paper as a policy anticipations effect and has been interpreted

by others, e.g. Cornell (1983a), as an inflationary expectations effect.

Since both effects are in the same direction, it is difficult to distinguish

between them without additional evidence. The policy anticipations effect

is simply that an unanticipated increase in the money supply causes financial

market participants to expect that the Federal Reserve will tighten the ronetar7

reins in order to offset the increase. In anticipation of future tghtenr

there is a tendency for interest rates to increase. The inflationary

expectations effect is that an unanticipated increase in the money supply leads

to an upward adjustment of inflationary expectations, which in turn leads to

higher nominal interest rates.1"

    If interest rates respond to the money supply announcements because of

inflationary expectations, then they should also be affected by the announcements

of the inflation rate itself. We examine the effect of the announcements of both
                                    C
                                   —-

the   Consumer Price Index and the Producers Price Index on interest rates.

We find some evidence of inflation announcement effects, although they are

not as strong as the money supply announcement effect. Furthermore, the effect

of price and money supply announcements on the Federal Funds rate is examined.

The overnight Federal Funds rate is determined by the supply and demand for

reserves over the banking week. There is little reason to expect that it

will be affected by a chanqe in inflationary expectations, while it will he

affected by a change in policy anticipations. We find that the Federal Funds

rate responds to the money supplY announcement, but is unaffected by the

inflation announcements.

       An interesting aspect of our results is the comparison of the announcement

effects in the periods before and after the Federal Reserve's change in

operating procedures on October 6, 1979. We find that the money supply

announcement effect was much larger after October 1979. Since the Fed

shifted away from interest rate targeting, the chanae is as expected. However,

the increase in the announcement effect is so large that it suggests that

additional forces are at work as well. An explanation may be found in the

banking system's demand for reserves over the statement week.

       The money supplY announcement effect was related to reserve der,and beca

of the system of lagged reserve accounting in effect until February 1984.

Under that system, required reserves for the current banking week were based

on deposits held two weeks ago. The end of week announcement provided data

on the money supply for the previous week. Thus, the money supply announce-

ment may have conveyed information about the aggregate demand for reserves

during the current week. If the announced money supply was larger than expected

then reserve demand for the remainder of the current week could also be
                                   —3—



larger    than expected. Interest rates increase in anticipation of tighter

reserve demand for the remainder of the week. This bank reserve effect of

the money supply announcement was not impcrtant before October 1979 because

the Federal Reserve would supply whatever reserves that were necessary to
                                           3/
maintain its Federal Funds rate target.

     A final issue explored in this paper is the relation between the

announcement effect on interest rates and the traditional view of money

Supply effects on interest rates. Liquidity preference theory indicates

that an increase in the money supply lowers interest rates, at least as an

initial effect. That is, a money supply increase is a result of an expansion

of the Supply of reserves through open market operations some time earlier.

A negative relationship between interest rates and the subsequently

announced money Supply is evidence of a liquidity effect. Our data indicate

that there is a liquidity effect on interest rates about three or four weeks

prior to the money Supply announcement.

     The data are described in detail in the next section. In Section 2

the announcement effect hypotheses and results are presented. Section 3

uses daily data to investigate delayed announcement effects. Finally, in

Section   4 we examine the effect of changes in      prices   and mone' supply as

they occur, rather than when   information      is anno'nced.

1.    Data
     The effect of money Supply and price index announcements on interest

rates is examined for the period from November 1977 to July 1982.           In this

section the data used in the study   are   described.

     Interest rates. The source of interest rate data is the futures contracts

for three—month Treasury bills traded on the International Money Market. Only

the four nearest contracts are used because trading activity drops off sharply
                                          —4—

on longer maturity contracts. As contracts age, the time to contract maturity

changes. Thus, the price of the first futures contract refers to the interest

rateon three—month Treasury bills that will pertain in zero to three months.

The second contract matures in 3 to 6 months and so on up to about a year.

The daily settlement price is used to calculate yields on a discount rate basis.

    The yields used in the study,               i =   1,...,   4, are the changes in yields

from the previous trading day. Thus, if an information announcement takes place

during the trading day, then          reflects the change in interest rates fror

before the announcement until after the announcement. In the case of the money

supply announcement which takes place after the close of futures market tradinc,

Rit is the change in interest rates from the end of              the   announcement day until

the nect day.

    An additional interest rate variable used is the Federal Funds rate.

For Federal Funds, the effective rate (a transactions weighted average of

trading over the day) is used. The change in the effective Fed Funds rates is

denoted by tRF. The effective rate is used because there is a great deal of

intra—dav variability in the Funds market. The data are taken from quote

sheets prepared h'- Garvin   Guy Butler   Corporatior., a major Fed Funds broker.

    Information Announcements. The Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the

Producers Price Index (PPI) for the prior calendar month are announced on

various days in the middle of each month. For both indexes, the measure that

is used here is the seasonally adjusted percentage change from the previous

month. The series of interest are all goods for the CPI and total finished

goods for the PPI. In both cases the data used are the numbers initially

announced by the Bureau of Labor Statis-ics; the PPI is subject to revision

as new data become available and the seasonals for both series are revised.
                                            —5—


     The money supply data are announced weekly. t the start of the sample

period the announcement took place on Thursday afternoon, but commencing

February 8, 1980 the date was switched to Friday. The information used is

the weekly change in billions of dollars of the seasonally adjusted, narrowly

defined money supply.      P.t   the sta rt of the sample period this was Ml. The
                                                                       4/
definitions were changed i n early 1980, and after that time M1B is used- The weekly

change   in the money supply     is the difference between this weeks announced level and

this week's revision of the level in the previous week.

     Expectations. The expectati ons data are from surveys conducted by Money

Market Services, a San Francisco       based   corporation which has conducted telephone

surveys since late 1977. During the week prior to each information announcement,

financial market participants are asked about their expectations. For the

money supply, the survey was originally conducted on Tuesday and Thursday mornings.

Since the switch in the announcement day in early 1980, the survey is only con-

ducted on Tuesday. For the CP1        and   PPI the surveys are conducted several days

prior to the announcement.        The data available to us are the survey medians.

However, the mean survey data are available for the money supply expectations

for part of t he period.         For the money supply, the Thursday survey resnonses

and the means are used when available. Extensive testing showed that these were

the preferred data, although the differences in results are inconsequential.



2. Effects of Money Supply and Price Index Announcements

     In this section, we test for the effect of the announcements on interest

rates. The equation used for thse tests is:



                           LR =      + 01 U + O- A
                                    —e-



where A is the anticipation (from the survey) of the announcement and U

is the unanticipated component of the information announced (i.e. the actuaJ

less the anticipated). Table 1 shows estimates of this equation for all

three information announcements with the sample divided in two at the time

of the Federal Reserve' change in its operating procedures in October 1979.

 These regressions test for the presence of an immediate (one day) announcement

 effect, since the dependent variable is the change in interest rates from

before to after the announcement.

       The information announcements are decomposed into the anticipated and

unanticipated components because efficient markets theory suggests that only

the unanticipated component should affect rates. Thus, in an efficient market

that responds to the information announeed,we expect that a2 = 0     and a        0.


Both the policy anticipations and inflationary expectations hypotheses discussed

earlier indicate that c will be positive. To repeat, the two hypotheses

are:

       1)   An unanticipated change in the money supply leads market parti—
            cipants to expect that the Federal Reserve will attempt to offset
            the change. For example, an unanticipated increase in the money
            supply leads to an increase in interest rates in anticipation
            of open market operations that will tighten the supply of rescrves.

       ii) When the announced inflation rate is larger (smaller)than anti-
            cipated, market participants revise their inflationary exectatior
            upward (downward). Since the expected rate of inflation is eraedded
            in nominal interest rates, interest rates increase (decrease).


       The results shown in Table     provide strong support for the hypothesis

that money supply announcements affect rates,but only a weak indication of

any relevance of the price index announcements. In addition,the financial

markets appear to be efficient with respect to these information announcements

since the coefficients on the anticipated components are largely insignificant.
                                     —7—




  The effect   on interest rates of unanticipated changes in the mone' supply

is significant in both periods. A one billion dollar unanticipated increase

in the money supply leads to a 2 basis point increase in rates in the first

half of the sample period and almost an 8 basis point increase in the second

half. 6/
      — A larger effect after the change in operating procedures is consistent

with the policy anticipations effect as explained below.

      There is one anomalous coefficient in the results for money supply

announcements. That is, the coefficient on the anticipated component of

the money supply change is significantly different from zero in   the 1979-1982

sample period. For most of this period, there are two factors that could
contribute   to this apparent inefficiency. First, the survey data used are

medians instead of means and second, the expectations could change between

the time of the survey (on Tuesday) and the announcement (on Friday). Roley

(1982) suggests a procedure for correcting the survey by using the information

in the change in interest rates from Tuesday to Friday. For this sample

period, the adjustment reduces but does not eliminate the apparent inefficiency.

      The results for the price indexes provide little indication of

any announcement effects. The unanticipated component of the CPI has no

 affect on interest rates and the unanticipated component of the PPI has

a significant coefficient only in the second half of the sample period. This

result indicates that unanticipated inflation of one per cent (per month)

in the PPI leads to a 38 basis point increase in interest rates. Since the

standard deviation of the unanticipated change in the PPI is .30, an unanti-

cipated increase in the PPI of one standard deviation yields an 11.4 basis

point increase in interest rates.
Table 1
                                          Announcement Effects on 1R1




Time Period
                                           -                 cx                            R2      N


                                           Money Supply Announcement


Nov. 77-Oct. 79                            2.87(2.7)        2.19(3.9)        1.23(1.6)     .143   100
Oct. 79-July 82                            7.84(2.4)        7.66(5.1)        7.26(2.9)     .178   145


                                     Producers Price Index Announcement


Nov. 77-Oct. 79                            -.61 (.1)        5.92 (.9)        2.77 (.3)     .042    24

Oct. 79-July 82                           18. 97(1.2)     37.96(2.0)      —23.96(1.3)      .145    32


                                     Consumer Price Index Announcement


Nov. 77-Oct. 79                             .59 (.1)       -4.96 (.5)       —.78 (.1)      .015
Oct. 79-July 82                            4.73 4\         18. 74(1. 1)   —18.07(1. 2)     .074




Note:     Equations    are of the form


               L.     = cx
                             o
                                 +    U   + cxC   A


          where the dependent variable is the change in interest rates from
          the first futures contract and                t-statistics are in parentheses.

          N is the sample size, the number of announcements for which data
          are available.
         Table 2
                            Announcement Effects on Different Interest Rates




Time Period                     Interest Rate                                          R2


                                        Money Supply Announcement


Nov. 77 -       Oct.   79        A RF                1.85(2.1)          .40( .7)      .006    100
                                 AR1                 1.95(2.2)        2.05(3.7)       .120    100
                                 AR2                 1.06(1.2)        1.90(3.4)       • 104   100
                                 L R3                 .65( .7)        1.78(3.2)        094    100
                                 AR4                  .59( .7)        1.58(3.0)       .081    100

Oct. 79 -       July   82        A RF               —3. 19(2.1)      9.67(3.7)        .086    145

                                 AR1                 6.25(1.9)       6. 99   (4. 6)   .131    145

                                 AR2                 5.51(1.9)       6.04(4.6)        .131    145

                                 AR3                 4.38(1.7)       5.14(4.4)        • 117   145
                                 AR4                 3. 97(1. 6)     4. 72(4. 2)      .109    lAS


                                  Producers Price Index Announcement


Nov. 77 -       Oct.   79        ARF                 1.57(1.3)        .89(.2)         .002

                                 AR1                 1.65(1.0)       6.03(.9)         .03
                                  R                  2.45(1.2)       8.41(1.1)         049     2

                                 AR3                 2.53(1.3)       7.04(1.0)        .040
                                 AR4                 1.25 (.7)      10.85(1.6)         109     2A

Oct.     79 -   July   82       ARF                 16.37(1.6)     —13.77 (.4)        .006    32

                                AR1                   .55 (.1)      33.59(1.8)        .094    32
                                AR2                 -3.90 (.6)      39.48(2.1)        125     32
                                AR3                 —4.06 (.7)      39.49(2.2)        .136    32
                                AR4                 -2.91 (.5)      34.33(2.0)        .118    32

The equation estimated is of the            form:

                        =    +i    U

t   -   statistics     are in parentheses
                                    —8—

    For all three announcements shown in Table 1, an F-test indicates that

the null hypothesis of coefficient homogeneity across the two sample periods

can not be rejected. Furthermore, the coefficients on unanticipated money

or price change are not sensitive to the exclusion of the anticipated variables

(see Table 2 for comparison). Nor do the addition of day of the week dummy

variables lead to any substantive changes.

    It is not surprising that the PPI announcements have a larger effect

on interest rates than do the CPI announcements. The PPI announcements are

generally made early in the month and the CPI announcements follow about

two weeks later. In addition, forecasters use the PPI to forecast future

movements in the CPI. Thus, the PPI announcements may convey more new

information about the overall inflationary situation. Conversations with

financial market participants also indicate that more attention is paid to

the PPI than to the CPI announcements. More puzzling is the difference

between the inflation announcement effects in the two sample periods which may

reflect differences in the inflation process. The unanticipated parts of

the inflation announcements (as well as the money supply announcements) are

more variable in the second half of the data which could be the cause of

the increased financial market responsiveness.

    Results for the announcement effects on different interest rates are shown

in Table 2. These equations show the effect of unanticipated changes in the

money supply and in the PP on the Federal Funds rate and on yields from

the first four futures contracts. There are some interesting differences

among these results, particularly when the Fed Funds rate (a rate on overnight

loans) is compared to the last futures contract (the 3 month bill rate expected
                                 .9-




in approximately a year).

     For the money supply announcements the coefficient for the announcement

effect is at least three tines as large as its standard error for all the

futures contracts. Prior to October 1979 there is no effect of unanticipated

changes in the money supply on the Fed Funds rate. This result is consistent

with the then current monetary policy operating procedure. That is, the

open market desk allowed little variation in the Fed Funds rate and apparently

took action to immediately offset any effects of the announcement.   In the

post-October 1979 period there is a very large effect on Fed Funds; a one

billion dollar unanticipated increase in the money supply leads to almost

a 10 basis point increase in the Funds rate.

    The increased responsiveness to unanticipated changes in the money supply

follows directly from the nature of the policy change in October 1979. The

Federal Reserve announced that it would allow much wider variation in the

Funds rate and would concentrate open market operations on maintaining

targeted growth in non—borrowed reserves and the money supply. With less

emphasis on a narrow trading range for the Federal Funds rate, the prcbabil1t

of a policy reaction to a money supply annnouncement is increased. While

there is considerable controversy as to whether the Federal Reserve actually

changed its policy orientation towards reserves and the monetary aggregates,

the evidence presented here indicates that financial market participants

seem to believe that there has been a change.
                                  -10-

     The effect of unanticipated money supply changes on future interest rates

depends on when the anticipated policy change is likely to take place and how

long it is expected to last. In both sample periods, the effects decline as

the contract maturity gets longer. The effect on AR is a little more than

two-thirds of the effect on R1. These results suggest that the policy

responses are to some extent expected to be temporary, since there is a larger

effect on bill rates expected in about three months than on bill rates expected

in about a year.

     For the PPI announcements, the effects are small and weak in the early

period. In the second half of the data, the coefficients are much laraer

and are marginally significant. The smaller t—statistics in the inflation

announcement equations than in the money supply announcement available from

the monthly data,   ifl a bivariate regression the t—statistic varies directly

with the sample size. There is no PPI announcement effect on the Federal

Funds rate in either period. The PPI announcement effects tend to increase

as we look at interest rates expected to prevail further in the future.

If an unanticipated inflation announcement leads to revisions of expected

inflation rates over some period of time, then an announcement effect o

future interest rates is expected.
     These results do suggest that the money supply announcement effect is

due to policy anticipations rather than inflationary expectations. The first

reason for this is the absence of an inflation announcement effect on the

shorter maturity contracts while the inflation announcement effects tend to

increase with contract maturity. Since a policy response is likely to take

place quickly the money supply announcement effect is likely to be a policy

anticipations effect.
Table 3


                                Delayed Announcement Effects


Delayed Effect                  fj                R2                   F —      Statistics
of:                                                                     Ho:            H: :ali

                                                                        =0


                               Nov. 1977   - Oct. 1979        (N484)


Money Supply                    1.39             .023                    .88              .44

PP I                           -1.70             .022                    • 00            .42




                               Oct. 1979   - July 1982        (N709)


Money Supply                    4.55             .058                   2.46            1.85

PPI                            57.48             .051                   1.77




       Equation estimated is

                                                         5
                 R1t =   +       LTPt +   a2   mi +            Uxt_,
                                                        j=l



where UX is either UP (unanticipated part of PPI announcement) or U1 (unanticipated
part of money supply announcement). N is the sample size; equations are estimated
with daily data.
Table 4


                                    Pre-Announcernent Effects




                                     In format ion Variable,



                                   Money Supply                  PP:
                                           .85   (.9)             -.44    (.3)

                                      22.78(1.8)                 21.26(1.7')
                                       5.99(6.7)                  5.89(6.7)
                                           .35   (.9)             2.89(1.3)
                                           .48(1.3)               3.35(1.5)

82                                     -.15 (.4)                 -2.83(1.2)
                                       -.80(2.2)                  2. 19(1.   0)
                                       —   .54(1.6)

R2                                     .0452                     032
                                       2.11                       2 .32

N                                      1188                       1203




     The equation, estimated is

                                                    J
              AR1 =        TJPPI    +2UMS +              B.
                                                          - A3
                                                   j=0

     Sample period is Nov. 1977 -      July      1982.


     *    F test foi the null hypothesis that all 8s are zero.
                                        -11-

3.      Delayed Market Responses To the Announcements

      The new information in the money supply and price index announcements is

quickly and widely disseminated. Thus, the discussion in the previous sectiofl

concentrates on the immediate announcement effects. However, it is possible

that market responses to the new information are delayed or spread out over

some period of time.

     We test for the existence of delayed mark&t responses by estimating

regressions of the form:
                                            k
                         Rt = °o + 01 U   +j=i
                                                 E
In   this equation tRt    i.s a vector of daily changes in interest rates, and

the vector Ut contains the unanticipated components of announcements

entered on the announcement days and zeros for non-announcement days. If the

entire effect of the information announcement is immediate, then the coefficients

on the lag terms should be zero. Non—zero s indicate market responses

to announcements which are delayed.

     Table 3 summarizes the tests for market responses in the five trading days

after the announcements. The equations include both the immediate money suv

and PPI announcement effects and the dependent variable is the change n
                                                     7/
interest   rates from the first futures contract.—        As ir.dicated by tne F-tests

Table 3, the addition of the five lagged variables (individual coefficients

are not shown) does not increase the explanatory power of the model s±gnificat1v.

In addition, the sums of the lag coefficients are not significantly different

from zero. Nevertheless, in the second period the sums of the lagged effects

are quite large, particularly in the case of the price index. For the PPI, the

effect in the five tradings days after the initial announcement impact is one

ar1 a half times as large as the initial effect. Thus, there is some indicaticn

that inflationary expectations and interest rates respond gradually to an

unanticipated inflation announcement.
                                     —12—

4.     Pre—Announcement Effect

     The information announcements provide information about economic activity

which took place some time earlier. For example, a mid-month price index

announcement summarizes data on prices at least a month earlier. Similarly,

the end of week money supply announcement is a report on the average money

supply for the statement week ending Wednesday of the previous week. To some

extent, market participants are aware of economic phenomena as they transpire

and prior to an official data announcement. A loaical extension of the

investigation of the announcement effects is to examine the effect of the

actual money supply and price phenomena at the time that they occur.

     The actual change in economic activity can occur days, if not weeks,

prior to the measurement of the phenomena and the announcement of information.

Thus, the following propositions regarding pre—announcement effects of new

information are suggested:

          j)     Traditional macroeconomic theory suggests that expansion
                 of the money supply leads to lower interest rates. Such
                 liquidity effects are likely to occur when the money supply
                 expands (the statement week), or even earlier when Federal
                 Reserve open market operations expand the supply of reserves.
                 Thus, the announcement of a money supply increase shoujd
                 be associated with lower interest rates some time earlier.

         ii)     An increase in prices will lead tc adjustrents in inflazionar:
                 expectations and higher nominal interest rates when the poice
                 increase is perceived. This can occur as the price level
                 changes and prior to the announcement. Significantly
                 positive pre—announcement effects would be evidence of such
                 an effect.

     Since these pre—announcement effects can extend over a considerable

period of time, we test for their presence with variables for each week,

rather than each day prior to the announcement. The equation used to test

for weekly pre—announcement effects is:

                                            J
                                 +     +I       Fj
                                          1=0
                                     -13-


The A    variables   are desfgned to represent the pre-announceent effects

of the actual information. Say that there is some information announced

on a particular day, then A     is   that information for all t that are

in the j—th week prior to the particular announcement. Thus, At,

based on the announced information for days in the announcement week but

before the actual announcement. Similarly,         is based on the information

announced for all    t which are in the week prior to the announcement.

The relevant information for these tests are the announced changes in the

money Supply and the price index.

    The actual change in the money supply could affect interest rates well

before the day of the announcement for several reasons. First, financial

market participants gather information about the money supply prior to the

announcement. Second, the information announced is for the money Supply

for the statement week ending 8 days prior to the announcement. Third,

the money supply change is, in part, a response to changes in the avail-

ability of reserves prior to the statement week. The open market operations

which determined the supply of reserves could have affected interest rates

when they occured. To test for the presence of these effects, variables

are entered for the week of the money supply announcement cbut prior to the

announcement) and for four lead:ng weeks.

    Several interesting conclusions can be drawn from the money supply

equation in Table 4 which is estimated for the whole sample period. In the

week prior to the money supply announcement there is a small positive effect

of money supply change on interest rates. This period corresponds apProxi-

mately to the statement week. Financial market participants are likely to

have some notion of the increase in the money supply taking place at that
                                      —14—



time and interest rates may change in anticipation of Federal Reserve policy

action. If we move several weeks prior to the announcement, we find that

the actual money supply change has a significant negative effect on interest

rates. This effect corresponds to a liauidity effect or the standard macro-

economic result that an increase in the money supply leads to lower interest

rates which takes place when open market operation affect reserves and prior

to the actual change in the money supply and its subsequent announcement.

The combined licuidity effect in the second to fourth week implies that a

one billion dollar money supply increase reduces interest rates by about l

basis pointr.

     For the PPI, the actual change can affect the interest rates prior to

the announcement, if financial market participants perceive the price change

as it occurs. That is, interest rates are affected when prices change.

The PPI announced in the third week of the month refers to prices measured

in the middle of the prior calendar month. The results in Table 4 indicate

that there is a weak positive effect between the measurement time and the

announcement, but not prior to that time. That is, the financial markets

do not react to price change between the time it is measured and announced.

The estimated coefficients indicate that a 1% monthly   chanoe in the P
increases   interest rates by about 4 basis points over the four weeks rLoc

to the announcement.



4.     Conclusion

     In the last few years the interests of macroeconomic and financial

theory have begun to converge. This paper explores an area of the con-

vergence——the effect on interest rates of information announcements.

Macroeconomic theory has explored the influence of both the money supply
                                  —15—


and inflation on interest rates and financial theory contributes the concept

of market efficiency to explain how information affects prices. The main

results of the paper are:

°The unanticipated component of the announced change in the Producers

Price Index (PPI) has an immediate positive effect on short-term interest

rates. The Consumer Price Index (CPI) announcerents,however, do not have

any apparent effect on interest rates.

°The policy anticipations effect of the money supply announcement is cuch

greater in the period after the Federal Reserves announced shift in operating

procedures (October 1979).

°Evidence of lagged announcement effects is very weak for both prices and

the money supply. That is, the new information in each announcement is

rapidly incorporated in market interest rates and there is no indication of

delayed impact of the information on interest rates.

°There is some indication of a liquidity effect of the money supply on

interest rates several weeks prior to the announcement. A money supply

announcement is in part the consequence of changes in reserves several

weeks earlier. At that time, there is a negative association of the

subsequently measured and ar.rounced money supnv and interest rares.
                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY



Cornell, B.          "Money Supply Announcements and Interest Rates: Another View. 0
                Journal of Business 56 (January 1983a):l—22.

                     "The Money Supply Announcements Puzzle." American Econoni:
                Review 83(September l983b) :644—57.

Grossman, J.        'The 'Rationality' of Money Supply Expectations and the
                Short—Run Response of Interest Rates to Monetary Surprises.'
                Journal of floney, Credit, and Banking 13(November 198]):409-44.

Huberman, G. and G.W. Schwert. "Inflation and the Returns To Indexed Bonds,"
             November 1982.

Roles', V.V.        "Weekly Money Supply Announcements and the Volatility of
                Short—Term Interest Rates.' Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
                Economic Review (April 1982):3—l5.

                and R. Troll. "The Impact of New Economic Information on The
                Volatility of Short—Term Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank
                of Kansas City, Economic Review (February l983):3-15

Schwert, G.W.        "The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Information About Inflation.'
                Journal of Finance 36(March 198l):15—28.

Urich, T.           "The Informational Content of Weekly Money Supply Annoncerets.
                Journal of Monetary Economics, 1O(l98). 3-88.

               and P. Wachtel. "Market Response to the Weekly Money Supply
               Announcements in the l970's." Journal of Finance 36(DeceriTher 29E.):
               1063—1072.

               and    .  "The Structure of Expectations of the cee: .cne: Su
                Announcement.' Journal of onetar\' Economics (ach

Walsh, Carl.        "The Effects of Alternative Operating Procedures on Econor.o
                and Financial Relationships," July 1982.
                                      -17-




                                   FOOTNOTES



1/   lJrich(1982) provides a theoretical model of the policy anticipations effect
     and Cornell (l983b) provides a taxonomy of hypotheses concerning the mane';
     supply announcement. He includes the two considered here - the policy
     anticipations and inflationary expectations effects — and adds real
     activity and risk—aversion hypotheses.

2/ Schwert (1981) investigated the effect of the OPI announcement on stock
    prices and found some evidence that unanticipated inflation depresses
    stock returns. Foley (1983) did not find any significant effects of
    unanticipated inflation announcements on Treasury bill yields.

3/ Walsh (1982) provides a model of the effect of the money supply announcement
    on the demand for reserves and intra—week variation in interest rates.

4/ There have been changes in the announcement procedures and data definitions
    since the end of our sample period. In particular, the narrowly defined
    money supply has been revised slightly and renamed Ml, and the announcement
    day returned to Thursday when the lag in reserve accounting was reduced.
    The examination of announcement effects was restricted to Ml because of
    the availability of expectations data (see below). Survey data on expec-
    tations of reserves, the monetary base or broader definitions of the money
    supply are not available.

5/ These data are analyzed in Urich and Wachtel's (1984) analysis of    individual
    expectations.

6/ To place these responses in perspective note that the standard deviatcn
    in the unanticipated money supply change for the whole sample is abcst
     82 billion.   (Uric)', and Wachtel 2981), and elsewhere.

2/   Tne   results are the same when the money supply and price announcerent
     are tested separately. Also the coefficients on the immedcate announcement
     effect (the oj,'s) which are not shown in Table 3 are virtually the same as
     the corresponding results in Table 2.

8/ Schwert (1981) found that the stock market reacts to the CPI arround the
    time of the announcement and not when the price change occurs. Huberman
    and Schwert (1981) find that the prices of Israeli indexed bonds respond
    to inflation as it occurs and prior to the announcement. We did not
    find any evidence of CPI effects on interest rates when the price change
     occurs.
