                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 GOOD JOBS, BAD JOBS, AND TRADE LIBERALIZATION

                                          Donald R. Davis
                                          James Harrigan

                                        Working Paper 13139
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13139


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2007




Much of this paper was written while Davis was visiting, and Harrigan was employed by, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
The authors are grateful to Elhanan Helpman and Oleg Itskhoki for very helpful comments on an early
version of this paper, and to seminar participants at Columbia, Fordham, Harvard, Princeton, Yale
and the NBER.

© 2007 by Donald R. Davis and James Harrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization
Donald R. Davis and James Harrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 13139
May 2007, Revised July 2010
JEL No. F1,F16,J2,J31

                                             ABSTRACT

How do labor markets adjust to trade liberalization? Leading models of intraindustry trade (Krugman
(1981), Melitz (2003)) assume homogeneous workers and full employment, and thus predict that all
workers win from trade liberalization, a conclusion at odds with the public debate. Our paper develops
a new model that merges Melitz (2003) with Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), so also links product market
churning to labor market churning. Workers care about their jobs because the model features aggregate
unemployment and jobs that pay different wages to identical workers. Simulations show that, for reasonable
parameter values, as many as one-fourth of existing "good jobs" (those with above average wage)
may be destroyed in a liberalization. This is true even as the model shows minimal impact on aggregate
unemployment and quite substantial aggregate gains from trade.


Donald R. Davis
Columbia University, Department of Economics
1038 Intl. Affairs Building
420 West 118th St.
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
drd28@columbia.edu

James Harrigan
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
harrigan@nber.org
                                         I. Introduction
       How do labor markets adjust to trade liberalization? Three points motivate our approach
to this question. The first is empirical. Most of trade is intra-industry trade and recent experience
of large liberalizations suggests that the greater part of adjustment is likewise reallocation within
rather than between industries. The second is a point of analysis. Recent theoretical advances that
emphasize the role of firm heterogeneity and product market churning also underscore the
importance of considering labor market churning in trade liberalization episodes. The third
motivation is again empirical. While job rents appear to be more modest than they appeared in
some early studies, they remain substantial for some workers and this could be a source of
resistance to trade reform.
       We develop a model that integrates these elements. Building on Melitz (2003), our model
is focused on within industry reallocation, and so is relevant for the bulk of trade and the nature
of the most significant trade reforms. Linking this with Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) efficiency
wages at the firm level, there is equilibrium unemployment and jobs have firm specific rents
attached, the latter implying that workers distinguish between good and bad jobs. Selection
effects now depend both on firm physical productivities and firm wages. Since our model also
features the product market churning of Melitz, it likewise features labor market churning.
However, unlike in Melitz, job rents and the existence of unemployment mean that workers care
about job loss, particularly the loss of good jobs.
       We go on to develop a simulation of this economy, with key parameters chosen where
possible to match existing empirical estimates, and study liberalization episodes that constitute
transitions to Anderson and Van Wincoop’s (2003) preferred estimate of actual level of trade
integration as well as the case corresponding to the removal of all trade barriers. Trade raises
aggregate real income substantially, and the level of unemployment is at plausible magnitudes
and is little affected by liberalization. However there is considerable product and labor market
churning. With the removal of all border barriers, trade leads to the gross destruction of up to
one-fourth of all “good” (above average wage) jobs.
       Our approach builds on a sustained dialogue about the consequences of trade
liberalization for labor markets. Traditional comparative advantage models highlight the
potential disruptiveness of trade liberalization, which would require inter-industry reallocation of
labor. Krugman-Dixit-Stiglitz type models, by contrast, emphasized that the gains from
international exchange of varieties could exist with literally zero re-allocation of labor. The
empirical literature is at odds with both hypotheses. Instead, actual trade liberalizations are
associated with considerable labor re-allocation, but this takes place primarily within rather than
between industries.
          This observation accords well with the heterogeneous firm paradigm of Melitz, in which
product market churning of firms has as a consequence labor market churning of jobs. However,
the Melitz model fares less well in another dimension. Key characteristics of the labor market in
Melitz include the homogeneity of workers and jobs. All workers are the same, all jobs are the
same, and there is full employment. Hence, while there is a churning of jobs, workers do not care
about the churning per se, but just enjoy the gains available to all workers. This would be a world
in which trade liberalization is uncontroversial, quite unlike the world in which we actually
reside.
          Our paper is one among a set that aim to reconsider the labor market side of trade
liberalization. Related papers include Egger and Kreickemeier (2009), Helpman and Itskhoki
(2010), Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010), and Felbermayr, et al. (2008).
          The central message of our paper is simple. The new heterogeneous firm models place
essentially all of the weight of gains from trade on the efficiency effects of firm selection. The
consequent product market churning has a counterpart in labor market churning. If there is
unemployment and if, in addition, some jobs carry empirically relevant rents, then the presence
of aggregate gains does not preclude the existence of distributional conflicts between the
employed and the unemployed and between workers with good and bad jobs. In contrast to the
first generation models of intra-industry exchange, in the new models such distributional conflict
is to be expected.
                   II. Unemployment, Efficiency Wages, and the Firm
 A. Shapiro-Stiglitz with Heterogeneous Firm Level Monitoring and Iceberg Effort Costs
          In considering employment relations, we follow the efficiency wage model of Shapiro
and Stiglitz (1984), amending this as needed to mesh with the firm-based model of Melitz
(2003).
          In the Shapiro and Stiglitz model, firms can monitor worker effort only imperfectly.
Workers’ distaste for effort tempts them to shirk, and they are deterred in equilibrium by the
possibility that their shirking will be discovered and they will be fired. Unemployment persists in


                                                  2
equilibrium because the wage that firms offer is too high to clear the labor market.
Unemployment is bad news for workers, and truly involuntary, in the sense that employed
workers are ex ante identical to the unemployed yet have higher utility. The market failure is that
workers cannot credibly commit to effort at less than the going wage. Our model has all these
features, with the crucial difference that firms differ in their ability to detect shirking.
         There is a large literature that tests various aspects of the Shapiro-Stiglitz and other
efficiency wage models, but there is no paper that directly tests the prediction that monitoring
ability and high wages are substitute means to elicit effort. There are a number of papers,
including Groshen and Krueger (1990), Rebitzer (1995), and Nagin, Rebitzer, Sanders and
Taylor (2002) that use exogenous variation in monitoring intensity to confirm that effort does
indeed increase in monitoring intensity.2 There is also a literature that documents industry wage
differentials (for example, Krueger and Summers (1988)). Such differentials have no direct
connection to efficiency wage theory, but they are consistent with labor rents of the sort that
obtain in the equilibrium of the Shapiro-Stiglitz model.
         Workers are infinitely lived, risk neutral, and discount the future at rate r . Subject to an
intertemporal budget constraint, they maximize:
                                                                       
(1)                                  E   U  wt , et  exp   rt  dt 
                                       0                                
                                                     Wi
The real wage for a worker at firm i is wi             , where Wi is the nominal wage at firm i and P
                                                     P
is the aggregate price index (developed below).
         Depending on the employment and effort status of a worker, utility takes the following
forms:
         U  w, e   w                     if the worker shirks

                        w
         U  w, e       , e 1            if the worker exerts effort.
                        e
         U=0                                if the worker is unemployed



2
 We have also observed a positive relationship between monitoring intensity and homework effort by resident
adolescents. We believe that such an effect is well-known to other parents.




                                                           3
Here the cost of effort e is modeled as an “iceberg” cost that shrinks the perceived real wage of
the worker, although of course not shrinking the nominal wage paid by firms and received by
workers (both of which treat the aggregate price index P as given).3
         Workers lose their job only if the firm dies or they are caught shirking. Firm death
happens at an exogenous rate . We assume that no firm monitors effort perfectly. If workers at

                                                               
firm i were to shirk, they would face a hazard mi  0, m  of detection, where m reflects the

monitoring ability of the firm most proficient at monitoring. If detected shirking, workers face
the penalty of being fired and spending time in unemployment before finding a new job.
         Workers at firm i have fundamental asset equations that reflect their status as shirkers or
non-shirkers. Let VEiS and VEiN be the expected lifetime utility respectively of shirkers and non-

shirkers currently employed at firm i . Let VU be the expected lifetime utility of a worker currently

unemployed (noting that this is independent of any firm because unemployed workers are
unattached).
         Then the fundamental asset equations for employed non-shirkers and shirkers
respectively are:

(2)      rVEiN 
                   wi
                   e
                          
                        VU  VEiN   
(3)                              
         rVEiS  wi    mi  VU  VEiS   
         These consist of the flow real wage benefits,  wi / e  or wi respectively, plus an expected

capital loss in case of a shift to unemployment, where the instantaneous probabilities differ
because shirkers face a higher likelihood of a move to unemployment due to firm i's monitoring
mi for shirking. This departs from the conventional Shapiro-Stiglitz framework in allowing for

firm specificity in monitoring ability, the wage, and the value of employment at a particular firm.




3
  The iceberg cost of effort, U=w/e, departs from the traditional Shapiro-Stiglitz formulation of the cost of effort as
U=w-e. This responds to the critique by David Romer (2006) that the conventional formulation would give rise to a
secular trend in unemployment. A consequence is that the aggregate price index P is simply a scale variable in
Equation (1). Moreover, changes in P, for example due to trade liberalization, will not directly affect the balance of
incentives to work or shirk, since it affects them proportionately (cf. Steven Matusz (1996)). The new formulation
also has the important consequence for us, developed below, that the ranking of firms by marginal cost is a function
only of firm-specific parameters, hence invariant to the liberalization episodes we consider.


                                                           4
           Firm i recognizes the incentive to shirk. Hence in light of these incentives and its own
monitoring ability, it chooses a wage sufficient to induce employees to work rather than shirk.
This requires:
(4)   VEiN  VEiS

           The firm chooses to meet this non-shirking constraint with equality (so VEiN  VEiS  VEi ).
We can solve this for the firm-level equivalent of the Shapiro-Stiglitz no-shirking constraint:
                  rVU                              mi   e  1 (r   )         mˆ i
(5)        wi                where       mˆ i                             and          0.
                   mˆ i                                    emi                    mi

Since VU is independent of firm identity, wages will vary across firms only due to monitoring
ability and equilibrium wages decline with improvements in monitoring. Note as well that this is
a notional wage. That is, this is the wage required of a firm with monitoring ability mi if it is to

elicit effort, and is well defined although in equilibrium not all firms will survive.4
           These allow us to have a precise definition of the utility cost of job loss for a worker at
firm i :

(6)        VEi  VU 
                          Wi / mi   e  1 
                                      e 
                              P         
This is always positive, which means job loss is costly to workers and that unemployment is
truly involuntary. Moreover, the utility cost of job loss varies across firms, being high where the
wage distortion Wi / mi  is high.

           We can also return to the firm-specific real wages in Equation (5) and consider it for any
two firms A and B. Taking ratios, we find that:
                                                    wA mˆ B WA
(7)                                                       
                                                    wB mˆ A WB
That is, the firm-specific real and nominal wages are in a constant ratio that depends inversely on
the firm-level relative monitoring abilities as well as common parameters. With firm level
physical marginal productivities also constant (as developed below), we arrive at the conclusion


4
 Equation (5) requires the parameter restriction: mi / (r   )   e  1 . The left-hand side is the hazard rate of
detection relative to the discounted hazard of losing your job anyway. This must exceed the utility penalty of effort.
As long as workers are patient, exogenous job loss isn’t too likely, or effort isn’t too costly, this restriction will be
satisfied.


                                                                 5
that relative marginal costs across firms will be constant. That is, firms can be ordered according
to their marginal costs even before we have developed other elements of the equilibrium.
       Assume that there is some firm type with the best available monitoring technology, given
by m1  m   . We will choose the wage paid at the best monitoring firm as our numéraire, so

that the nominal wage W1  1 . Using Equation (7), this gives rise to a notional nominal wage

schedule

                                       mi  m   e  1 (r   ) 
(8)                            Wi 
                                       m  mi   e  1 (r   ) 

                                    
which is greater than one for mi  0, m and decreasing in mi . Firms pay a wage premium

relative to that of the firm with the best monitoring technology, a premium that decreases as their
monitoring improves. Although the nominal wage schedule is fixed, real wages of course are free
to move with changes in the aggregate price index P . This nominal wage schedule will play a
central role when we turn to the Melitz side of our model.


B. Aggregation
       The next step is to connect wages to unemployment. For this we need an equilibrium
density of the wages paid by active firms f(W), to be derived later, and which will be common
knowledge in the economy. Given this equilibrium density, we can calculate

                    e  1  1  Wi 
        E VEi           P E    VU
                    e         mi 
or, establishing notation,

                      e  1  1  W                                    Wi 
                                       *                                *
                                                                W 
(9)        VE  VU          P       , where V   E V    ,     E  
                      e 
                                                 E       Ei
                                  m                           m       mi 
                                   *
                            W 
The average wage distortion   will play a crucial role in what follows.
                            m
       We are now ready to consider the flow benefits of being unemployed. Since unemployed
workers receive no income, the flow benefits consist entirely of the expected capital gain from
re-employment. Let b be the instantaneous probability of re-employment of an unemployed
worker. Then the fundamental asset equation for an unemployed worker is:



                                                      6
(10)                                     rVU  b VE  VU 

We can substitute (9) into (10) to get
                                             e  1  1  W * 
(11)                               rVU  b          P   
                                             e         m  
                                           
       The hazard rate of re-employment of an unemployed worker, b , can be examined in
terms of the steady state, which requires that flows into and out of unemployment be equal. Let L
be the total size of the labor force and let U be the total number of unemployed. In equilibrium
separations happen at rate  . Then the steady state imposes that:
        bU    L  U 

or, defining the unemployment rate u  U / L ,
                                                 1 u 
(12)                                       b        
                                                 u 
Substituting (12) into (11) gives

                                        1  u    e  1  1  W           
                                                                           *

(13)                           rVU                     P                
                                        u    e          m             


Substituting (13) into the individual firm’s no-shirking constraint (5). we find:

                                         e  1   1  u   W 
                                                                       *

(14)                             Wi                       
                                       emˆ i   u   m 

This no-shirking constraint is a key link between the macro variables u and W / m  .
                                                                                       *



       We now focus on Equation (14) for the best monitoring firm 1, whose nominal wage
serves as numéraire. Setting W1  1 and inserting m̂1 with m1  m , this implies:

                     W  
                          *

                 A1                                    e  1 
             u      m                   where A1  
(15)                                                                  is a constant
                       W  
                            *

                                                        emˆ 1 
                 1   A1   
                       m 
so the unemployment rate is strictly between 0 and 1, as required.
       Equation (15) is central to the macro side of our model. Consider this first for a given

wage distortion W / m  . Unemployment is then increasing in both the death rate of jobs  as
                           *




                                                      7
well as the utility cost of effort e . Each shifts the balance of benefits against effort, the first
because expected job tenure declines and the second because the utility derived from non-
shirking employment declines.

        We can also look at (15) for given A1 , so focusing on W / m  . From the Shapiro-
                                                                             *



Stiglitz side of our model, the average wage distortion must be computed across all active jobs.
As in Helpman, Itskhokhi, Redding (2010), we abstract from wage distortions in the fixed costs,
here by assuming that monitoring costs in these activities are common at all firms and for
simplicity setting this equal to those of the best monitoring activity, i.e. m , so the associated
wage is unity. Looking inside any single firm, all fixed cost activities have a wage distortion of

1/ m  , while marginal cost activities have a wage distortion of W / m  . As we show in the
                                                                         i       i


next section, in response to trade liberalization there will be two sources of changes in the
average wage distortion. The first is within the firm, due to the fact that the mix of fixed and
marginal activities changes. The second is the redistribution of these activities across firms, as
some expand output to reach new markets, others contract and serve only the domestic market,
while others exit, in addition to the fact that the steady state mass of entry will adjust. From
Equation (9), the capital gain associated with moving out of unemployment rises with the

average wage distortion W / m  . In this case, unemployment becomes less daunting and effort
                                   *



will be forthcoming only if there is a higher unemployment rate u , which explains the positive
association of these variables in Equation (15).
        The development to this point has assumed that workers discount the future at rate r > 0.
When we turn to integrating our labor market model with the Melitz model, we will take the
limiting case where r  0, to be consistent with his assumption that firms do not discount the
future. By inspection of Equations (8) and (15), focusing on this limiting case has no
implications for the key results of this section.
        In summary, we have developed a Shapiro-Stiglitz model with heterogeneity in firm
monitoring and iceberg costs of effort. This model yields two key relations that carry over to the
Melitz side of our model. The first is a schedule of nominal wages relative to that paid by the
most proficient monitoring firm. This pins down firm marginal costs. A second key macro
relation is between the no-shirking unemployment rate and the average firm distortion, defined
as the employment-weighted average ratio of the nominal firm wage to its monitoring ability.


                                                    8
That ratio emerges endogenously from the Melitz side of the model and so determines the
equilibrium unemployment rate.


                                         III. The Product Market
        A. The Consumer’s Problem
        Preferences over goods are identical and homothetic. The representative consumer
allocates expenditures to:

        Min E   p(i )q(i )di
                                 1

        s.t.   q  i  di   = V
                        
                           
                                           1
We also have 0    1, and                  . These deliver demand curves for product i of the
                                          1 
form:
                            
                 p(i ) 
        q(i )                  Q
                 P 
where Q  V and P is an aggregate price index given by
                                     1

(16)    P    p(i )1 di  1
                           
The associated revenues for the producer of an individual variety from this consumer are:
(17)    r (i )  RP 1 p(i )1

These revenues depend both on aggregate values, RP 1 , as well as the firm choice of p(i ) .


        B. The Producer’s Problem
        Firms face a sequence of problems. There is an unbounded mass of potential firms. In
the first stage, a mass M e of firms will enter, pay a fixed entry cost of f e , and receive

information about their type. Here a firm’s type is represented by the pair i , mi  covering both

productivity and monitoring ability in variable costs. We saw above in Equation (8) that there is
a simple relation between equilibrium no-shirking wages and monitoring. This means that the
firm can immediately translate the productivity-monitoring draw i , mi  to a productivity-




                                                      9
nominal-wage draw i , Wi  . In Melitz (2003), it is productivity  that determines firm

performance. We show below that the determinant of performance in our model is productivity
adjusted for the firm-specific wage, which we denote as zi  i Wi . Here zi can be thought of

equivalently as the inverse marginal cost for firm i .
        We consider now the problem of an individual firm that has already sunk the cost f e to

learn its inverse marginal cost zi . Having learned its zi , firm i will produce if its variable profits

cover its per period fixed costs f ; otherwise it will exit before producing. Physical labor
requirements in firm zi follow Melitz:

                                q( zi )
(18)     ( zi , i )  f 
                                 i
Note that firm level physical labor demand requires knowledge of i (not only zi ), so must be
recovered to establish labor market equilibrium once the structure of the economy (including the
wage bill for a firm of type zi ) is determined.
        Costs also depend on the wages paid to workers in fixed cost activities. Our focus on the
Melitz approach requires that the only locus of firm level variation is in marginal costs. Hence
we assume that the firm pays a wage W f  1 for labor employed in any of its fixed costs and a

wage Wi for labor employed in its variable costs5.

        For given macro variables, a particular firm i thus faces a demand curve as defined in the
consumer’s problem above and chooses output to maximize profits,
                                 qi                      qi      r z 
(19)      i  pi  qi  Wi             f  pi  qi       f  i i f
                                 i                      zi        
The first order conditions yield the familiar price as a markup on marginal cost:
                      Wi         1
         p ( zi )          
                      i        zi
Prices and maximized profits vary across firms only because of variation in zi . That is, firms
with a common inverse marginal cost z may be paying different nominal wages, and employing

5
 This asymmetry between wages paid in fixed and marginal costs is for analytical convenience only, and is directly
analagous to Melitz’s assumption that firms differ only in their marginal and not their fixed costs. An alternative
modeling choice would be to specify a second, constant returns sector, and have fixed costs paid in units of that
sector, as for example in Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2008a).


                                                              10
different amounts of labor, but they charge the same price, will produce the same quantity, and
have the same revenue, wage bill, and profits. Hence we will drop the subscript i henceforth
except as necessary to clarify limits of integration or when it is necessary to specify physical
labor demand.


        C. The Marginal Firm and Equilibrium Structure of the Economy
        The combination of a primitive distribution on  , m  and the equilibrium nominal wage

from the labor market in Equation (8) allows us to derive the joint distribution for  ,W  .

Knowledge of this joint distribution allows us as well to calculate the distribution of inverse
marginal costs z with cumulative distribution function G ( z )  Pr  Z  z  and density g ( z ) . The

full equilibrium will feature a cutoff level of inverse marginal cost, z * , such that firms with
z  z * exit immediately upon learning of their draw.
        Given g ( z ) , we can also define the equilibrium density of active firms:

                      g  z
          z                         ,   z   z  ,   .
                   1 G  z     
                                    
        Equilibrium structure in an autarkic Melitz economy is determined by the solution of two
relations between average profits  and the wage-adjusted productivity of the marginal entrant
z * . The first of these two relations is a free entry condition (FE), which asserts that from an
unbounded set of ex ante identical firms, a sufficient mass enters so that the average profits from
entry equal the fixed cost of entry. The FE condition is essentially identical to that of Melitz:
                         fe
          z *                           (ZCP)                                                   (FE)
                     1  G  z *

        The second key relation is the Zero Cutoff Productivity (ZCP), which defines the
marginal active firm:
                     r  z *
          z *                f 0                                                            (ZCP)
                       
As in Melitz, the intersection of the FE and the ZCP curves determines the equilibrium marginal
entrant z * . The equilibrium exists and is unique under the same conditions.




                                                                 11
                                             IV. General Equilibrium
           The equilibrium z * completely determines the structure of the economy, including
output, revenue, employment, and profit for each firm. We now need to go on to recover the
average wage distortion, determine the associated unemployment rate consistent with no-
shirking, and thus determine the mass of firms that provides for equilibrium in the labor market.
           A. Unemployment and Labor Market Equilibrium
           We showed in Equation (15) that the unemployment rate is an increasing function of the
                                         *
                        W 
average wage distortion   . In computing the average wage distortion, we account for the
                        m
fact that workers in fixed cost activities are paid a wage of 1, while workers in variable cost
activities are paid a wage given by (8). Employment in active firms is given by (18). Let
  i | z   denote the density of active firms, where i   ,W  identifies a firm type. This density

depends on the primitive joint density of  ,W  as well as the cutoff z  determined in the

previous section. The employment-weighted average wage distortion in the economy per unit
mass of active firms is then

                                       q (i ) W  i 
                  *
            W 
(20)                      fe  f                    i | z   di
             
             m    1  G  
                         z *
                                          
                                           i   m  i

Plugging (20) into (15) delivers the equilibrium unemployment rate. With the unemployment
rate determined, the equilibrium mass of firms M is determined by setting employed labor equal
to labor demand,
                                                                           
(21)        (1  u ) L  M              f    f 
                                                     q (i )
                                                     i    i | z 
                                                                         di 
                           1  G  z 
                                           e
                                                                             
                                      *



           The mass of active firms plus their prices allow us to establish the aggregate price index
P as in Melitz. Aggregate income equals total wages and likewise equals total spending6. This
completes the specification of our model.
           B. Trade and Selection Effects
In this section, we describe elements of the trading equilibrium that will be relevant for the
discussions in subsequent sections. As before, key elements of equilibrium will be determined by

6
    Unlike in Melitz, nominal national income is not simply equal to the size of the labor force.


                                                                12
the intersection of two curves. The first is the Free Entry curve, which is defined so that ex ante
profits are zero, hence ties each potential cutoff z with an expected profit level  . This curve is
entirely unchanged in a move from autarky to costly trade. The second is the Zero Cutoff
Productivity (ZCP) curve which lies above the autarky ZCP curve for the same reasons as in
Melitz. This implies that the equilibrium cutoff z * must rise. That is, our model will feature
the same kind of selection effects as in Melitz and for exactly the same reason – i.e. the new
opportunities available to exporters and the new pressures from import competition. Given z * ,
the cutoff for exporting z x is also found as in Melitz. With these cutoffs, we can calculate the

new W / m  * , hence also determine the unemployment rate. With these in hand, we can return

to recover all other variables in the trading equilibrium.
       C. Monitoring, Productivity, and the Size-Wage Correlation
       Unlike Melitz (2003), our model features two dimensions of random heterogeneity across
firms, productivity and monitoring ability m, and so far we have made no assumptions about
the ex ante correlation between them. Heterogeneity in m delivers heterogeneity in wages W
through equation (8), which determines each firm’s inverse marginal cost z   W . Firm size
(measured by sales) in our model is a monotonic function of z, which implies that for a given 
that high-wage firms will be smaller. This is at variance with the data, which instead shows a
positive correlation between wages and firm size (see Brown and Medoff (1989), Idson and Oi
(1999) and Manning (2003), among others). Since the size-wage correlation is an important
empirical aspect of firm heterogeneity, here we provide some discussion of how it fits into our
framework.
       In our model, even if the ex ante correlation between  and m is zero, the Melitz-style
selection effects will tend to induce an ex post positive correlation between  and W. This is
because competition will force the exit of high marginal cost firms, i.e. those with high W but
low . Thus a positive size-wage correlation is possible in our model even with no ex ante




                                                 13
correlation between  and m. However, in our numerical simulations below it turns out that a
small negative ex ante correlation between productivity and monitoring ability is needed to get
the simulated size-wage correlation to match the empirical evidence. Thus while we do not
model the determinants of monitoring at the firm level, it is worth looking more closely at the
issue.
         Mehta (1998) provides an account of the size-wage distribution that, while not developed
in the context of the Melitz model, nonetheless meshes quite naturally with it. Mehta
emphasizes the crucial role of hierarchy in production, so he distinguishes managers from
workers. Managers have two tasks. One is to monitor the effort of workers and the other is to
engage in coordination of workers in ways that raise productivity. Large firms pair managers
with increasing numbers of workers. This increased span of control for the manager leads the
manager to substitute higher wages for monitoring as a way to elicit effort. While modeling of
this trade-off is beyond the scope of our paper, we can easily think of the manager in the Melitz
context as the residual claimant to profits at the firm. Thus, in reduced form, the approach of
Mehta is captured in the assumption in some of the numerical exercises below that monitoring
efficiency is inversely related to productivity.
         Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010) also provide a model of heterogeneous firms that
in equilibrium has a positive firm size-wage correlation. While their labor market mechanism is
quite different from ours, the motivation of their production structure that gives rise to the firm
size-wage correlation is quite similar to Mehta’s and ours: managerial time is a fixed factor, so
managers supervise each worker less intensively in larger organizations.


                                    V. Trade Liberalization
         This section will consider the consequences for firms and workers of trade liberalization
in our model. We divide our discussion of a move from autarky to freer trade into two pieces.
The first will consider the case of a liberalization that affects the structure of the economy, i.e.

the equilibrium marginal cost cutoff, but not its scale, i.e. the average wage distortion, W / m  ,
                                                                                                       *



which determines the equilibrium unemployment rate. Depending on the primitive distribution
of productivity and monitoring  , m  , our model is consistent with either a rise or fall in this

average wage distortion with liberalization. As a base case, we begin by assuming that



                                                   14
liberalization has no impact on this average wage distortion. This implies that the structure of the
economy will change, but not its scale. Once the analysis of a change in structure is complete,
we go on to consider how we would need to amend the conclusions of that analysis once we
allow for changes in scale as well.
        The analysis in this section, in formal terms, is comparative steady state analysis. A
complete analysis of the time path of adjustment would be required to make definitive statements
about welfare and political economy. That is beyond the scope of this paper. Nonetheless, the
basic nature of the adjustments required along the path to the new steady state does emerge from
our model. We believe that this provides a powerful heuristic for understanding the forces at
work in identifying winners and losers, hence also in understanding the political economy of
liberalization.
        A. Changes in Structure Only
        We consider here the special case in which our economies move from autarky to freer
trade, but in which the average wage distortion, hence also aggregate employment, is unchanged.
This implies that the analysis of the structure of firms’ price and output decisions in the product
market, as well as profit, entry and exit, will be precisely as in Melitz, so long as we use our own
measure of inverse marginal cost, given by z. Here, though, workers have attachments to specific
firms because of rents created by differences at the firm level in wages.
        We can use Figure 1 to think about the comparison of autarky and freer trade as it affects
profits of firms and employment of workers. The lowest feasible wage is that associated with the
best monitoring firm and equals one by choice of numéraire. A ray from the origin is also a
constant marginal cost curve. The ray labeled mca* indicates the highest level of marginal cost

consistent with zero post-entry profits in autarky, and thus defines the cutoff for active firms.
Firms with lower marginal costs are to the southeast of the mca* ray, and firm size is
monotonically decreasing in marginal cost.
        The impact of the shift in comparative steady states from autarky to trade gives rise to
three additional critical values in inverse marginal costs. The first is mc* , the marginal entrant
under freer trade. Next is mcx , the marginal exporter. Finally is mc , the highest marginal cost


12
  Unfortunately even knowledge of movements in the average nominal wage would not suffice to determine the
qualitative change in the average wage distortion, as they need not be monotonically related.


                                                     15
for which a firm sees its profits rise with freer trade. Accordingly, these boundaries define
Regions I to IV in the figure.
       The impact of trade on firms’ profits and output is straightforward. All firms in Region I
exit with trade, so their profits and output fall to zero. Firms in Regions II and III also see a
decline in profits. For firms in Region II, the entry of foreign firms into their home market
reduces their domestic demand and profits, yet leaves them incapable of finding a sufficient
foreign market to justify the fixed costs of exporting. Output for these firms declines. It is
notable that firms in Region III suffer a decline in profits in spite of the fact that they not only
survive in the domestic market but also find a foreign market for their products; the losses in the
home market are not fully compensated by the new profits in the export market. Total output for
these firms expands and so the decline in profits is attached to the fixed cost of entering the
export market. Only the largest firms, those in Region IV, find that their profits rise with trade.
Notably, firms can find their way into Region IV either by their inherent productivity or by
effective monitoring of workers, which allows them to elicit effort at low wages.
       The analysis of the impact on workers is only slightly more complex. We have set aside
until the next subsection any impact of trade on the average wage distortion and equilibrium
unemployment. The nominal wage of a worker who maintains employment at a specific firm is
determined by the firm specific monitoring technology and parameters of the model, so is
unaffected by trade liberalization.
       This leaves only two channels for trade to affect workers. The first, as in Melitz, is that
liberalization lowers the typical price and may raise total variety of products available to workers
qua consumers. This benefits all workers and should be considered as a potential offset to losses
incurred by some workers.
       The second channel for trade to affect workers here is via changes in employment, which
is most directly related to the fate of firms in the output market. We have already seen that firms
in Region I exit the market, hence all workers at these firms lose their jobs. Firms in Region II
contract their output, hence workers at these firms may be seen as facing a probability of job loss
related to the degree of contraction. Firms in Regions III and IV expand employment sufficiently
in the new steady state to provide precisely the same number of new jobs as those lost via firings
among firms in Regions I and II.




                                                  16
       Workers at firms in Regions III and IV should expect to be unambiguously better off with
the move from autarky to freer trade. The firms there are expanding output, so should have no
unusual layoffs. They also enjoy gains from lower average prices and possibly increased variety.
       The situation is more intricate for workers initially with firms in Regions I and II. As
noted, on one side are the common price index gains from liberalization. On the other side is the
certainty (Region I) or probability (Region II) of job loss. In the model workers must pass
through a period of unemployment before finding new employment. Since workers always prefer
to be employed rather than unemployed, this is a cost. The magnitude of the cost of a job loss is
higher the higher the initial wage. While we don’t have an explicit model of the transition
between steady states, trade liberalization creates a great deal of turnover while costing zero net
jobs. This should be good news for those currently unemployed, who are happy to accept any job
on offer and suddenly find a lot of hiring going on, even though the transition would require
more people to pass through unemployment.
       This analysis also provides a window on the debate over whether trade liberalization
threatens “good jobs”. A precise way to state the consequences for jobs here is that liberalization
destroys jobs with high marginal costs of production. Sometimes these are low wage jobs with
very low productivity; sometimes they are high wage jobs with productivity that may be high but
is not quite high enough to secure the jobs.
       However, there is another – from a worker’s perspective, quite natural – way to interpret
the consequences of the shocks. This is to hold fixed the type of firm, indexed by its productivity
, and compare what happens to different types of jobs at comparable firms defined in this way.
Figure 2 provides a simple window on this way of looking at the world. To the previous diagram,
Figure 2 adds the average wage in autarky, Wa , and a specific productivity level 0 , which for
illustrative purposes was chosen to intersect the average wage line at the boundary of Regions II
and III. Perhaps the simplest definition of a “good job” in autarky is one that pays a wage above
the average, i.e. Wa  Wa . Holding productivity fixed at 0 , we see that trade threatens all and

only good jobs. Controlling for firm productivity 0 , the highest paying jobs are those in Region
I – all of which are lost in the opening to trade. The next highest paying jobs are those in Region
II – some but not all of which will be lost to trade. Controlling for productivity, only the lowest




                                                 17
paying jobs survive the opening to trade. Indeed, trade leads to an expansion of these jobs and
most sharply among the lowest paying of these (those along 0 in Region IV).
        We see that the public perception that trade destroys good jobs at good wages does have
foundation in the context of this model. Some workers who in autarky would enjoy high wages
will find that a move to freer trade eliminates their jobs. Indeed, if we condition on productivity,
trade always destroys the best jobs.
        Having acknowledged this, it is also crucial to understand the limits of this way of
thinking. Yes, trade will eliminate some of what workers perceive as good jobs, and conditioning
on productivity, trade always destroys the best jobs. Yet this is perfectly consistent with the
possibility that trade will simultaneously expand the number of high wage jobs sufficiently that
the average wage will rise. Indeed, we will argue below why we think this is the normal case.
The net gain for specific workers and for workers as a whole will then need to account for
changes in prices and variety, which will typically be additional sources of gain, as well as for
changes in aggregate unemployment. Moreover, in this model, all income accrues to labor. Good
jobs are naturally very attractive to those who have them; however, the associated inefficiencies
cost labor as a whole.
        B. Changes in Structure and Scale
        In the previous section, we abstracted from the possibility that liberalization may affect
the average wage distortion, hence unemployment, so we turn to this now. The firm level wage
distortion, Wi / mi  , is a constant, and so unaffected by liberalization. The average wage

distortion across all firms is affected by the redistribution of output (including exit) across firm
types that may have different levels of distortions. At any marginal cost, indexed by z , there
exist firms with different wage distortions. While we can make specific predictions about which
firms will exit according to the ordering by z , it is not possible to say whether the average wage
distortion will rise or fall with liberalization without knowledge of the full joint distribution of

 , m  .12 In short, W / m 
                              *
                                  is a function of z * , but it need not be monotonic.

        1. The Average Wage Distortion, Macro Effects, and the New Steady State
        The macro implications of changes in the average wage distortion come directly from our
heterogeneous firm model of efficiency wages: a rise in the average wage distortion raises




                                                      18
                                                                    W          W  
                                                                         *             *

equilibrium unemployment. From Equation (15), we recall that u  A1   / 1  A1    . As
                                                                     m         m  

discussed in Section II.B., a rise in the average wage distortion, through firm selection effects,
raises the expected capital gain from moving between unemployment and employment, so makes
unemployment less daunting, requiring a rise in the structural unemployment rate to maintain the
balance of incentives to elicit effort.
         This rise in unemployment relative to the case of no change in the average wage
distortion changes the scale of the economy, but not its structure. Because of the general second
best nature of the economy, we cannot rule out that with a sufficient rise in the unemployment
rate, total real income may decline with liberalization, although we would consider this an
unusual case. Similarly, even as the average price of products declines, there can be a rise in the
economy’s price index because the rise in unemployment causes a decline in the total mass of
varieties available in the market. The fact that the possibility of absolute losses might arise in a
model with factor market distortions would not be surprising, although such an outcome in the
world seems unlikely.
         The rise in unemployment anticipated with the move from autarky to freer trade reduces
the steady state mass of firms of each type relative to the previous case in which employment
was unchanged. In principle, a sufficiently sharp rise in the average wage distortion,
accompanied with a sharp rise in the required unemployment rate, could lead to a reduction of
the presence even of the most productive export firm types in the new steady state and a loss in
total employment there.13




13
   While the present paper develops only comparative steady states, it would be interesting to study transition
dynamics for the case in which the rise in the average wage distortion, hence also the unemployment rate, in the new
steady state requires a smaller mass even of the highly productive firm types. We conjecture that in this case the
transition will feature overshooting of both the average wage and the unemployment rate along the path to the new
steady state. The logic is simple. Apart from exogenous firm deaths, firm exits only arise when expected present
discounted profits are negative. But firm profits are monotonically decreasing in marginal costs. Hence if the
“crowding” of the market by the excess prevalence of low marginal cost firms during the transition relative to the
steady state leads to exit, this exit will be among the highest marginal cost (small) firms. But if indeed these small
firms are on average also the low wage distortion firms, then this change in composition will lead the average wage
distortion to be higher in the transition than in the steady state. All else equal, the rise in the average wage distortion
also requires a higher unemployment rate to insure effort, since the no-shirking constraints have to hold at all times.
Our conjecture, then, is that both the average wage distortion and unemployment will overshoot in the transition to
the new steady state. Confirming this conjecture is beyond the scope of the present paper.


                                                            19
       2. Political Economy
       The main thrust of the political economy for comparative steady states from the view of
firms can be understood through examination of Figure 1. As before, the move from autarky to
freer trade divides the space into four key regions in terms of marginal costs. All firms with
mc  mc , i.e. those in Regions I, II, and III, lose profits as a result of the move of comparative

steady states from autarky to freer trade. Only the largest firms, those with mc  mc gain.
Hence a move from autarky to freer trade should be supported only by the largest firms.
       Turning to workers, we start with several general observations. Trade always serves to
lower the typical price and may raise the total (local and imported) number of varieties available
in the market to consumers. Hence typically the price index will fall in the move from autarky to
freer trade, which is a gain to all workers.
       Selection effects from liberalization may also alter the distribution of types of jobs in the
economy. We have to treat distinctly three separate concepts, namely the average wage

distortion, W / m  , the average nominal wage, W * , and the general equilibrium impact on the
                    *



average real income of workers. As we have noted, the unemployment rate is linked directly to
the average wage distortion. We have seen at the firm level that a “good job”, i.e. one that pays a
high wage (relatively) is one where this distortion is high. Yet when the average rises,
unemployment rises, which is costly directly due to lost output and also due to associated loss of
variety. While the average nominal wage in the economy seems likely to be positively associated
with the average wage distortion, close examination reveals that this connection is not a

necessary one. Still, we may expect that W / m  and W * may typically move together, which
                                                   *



would in such cases suggest a tradeoff between high unemployment and high average wages in
the typical job. It is worth keeping in mind, though, that “good jobs” come at a price. Here all
income accrues to workers, so that average real income to workers is maximized exactly when
total real income is maximized. The distortions that give rise to “good jobs” here lower aggregate
real income and so also lower the average real income of workers.
       There are also important distributional effects – job loss will fall particularly heavily on
some. Since firms in Region I exit and those in Region II contract output, all workers in Region I
firms lose their jobs and some in Region II firms lose their jobs as well. It is interesting to




                                                  20
observe that although firms in Region III lose profits with the liberalization, workers there do not
lose jobs, and so should have no reason to oppose liberalization on this basis.
                                          VI. Numerical Analysis
           Our model offers a rich set of predictions for how labor markets adjust to trade
liberalization. In this section we simulate the model, using a calibration approach that identifies
key parameters from the data and from previous estimates. The simulations establish the
magnitude of effects identified in the model.15
           Previewing our numerical results, trade liberalization leads to little change in the
unemployment rate, a rise in aggregate real income, and tremendous churning in the labor
market, with the gross loss of as many as one-fourth of good jobs.
           The numerical version of our model requires specification of the ex ante joint distribution
of productivity and wages, as well as values for the other model parameters such as fixed and
variable trade costs, fixed and sunk entry costs, and the elasticity of substitution. The following
sections explain our choices for these parameters in detail
           A. The wage distribution
           In specifying the distribution of productivity and wages, we are guided by the large
empirical literature on the firm size and wage distributions. This literature almost invariably
models wages as log normal, and the firm size distribution as Pareto, so we do the same.
           A key parameter in our model is the dispersion of wage rents. As discussed in our
introduction, Krueger and Summers (1988), among others, argued that large measured industry
wage differentials were evidence of labor rents, while Murphy and Topel (1987) and others
argued that unobserved heterogeneity in workers’ marginal products was responsible for industry
wage differentials. A similar dispute arises in interpreting the well-documented correlation
between firm size and wages (e.g. Brown and Medoff (1989), Idson and Oi (1999), Manning
(2003, Chapter 4)). To resolve this dispute requires information on worker and firm
characteristics, as well as enough “job switchers” to be able to reliably identify what component
of a worker’s wage is due to her inherent productivity and what component is due to the firm
where she works. Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) assembled data (a panel of French



15
     All calculations were performed in Mathematica, and the programs are available on request.



                                                          21
workers and firms from 1976 to 1987) that can answer this question. Their conclusion is that the
“person” effect is much more important than the “firm effect”:
        Virtually all of the inter-industry wage differential is explained by the variation in
        average individual heterogeneity across sectors. Person effects, and not firm effects, form
        the basis for most of the inter-industrial salary structure. (Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis,
        1999, pg. 253)

While this result can reasonably be interpreted as vindication for the view that labor rents are
smaller than Krueger and Summers may have thought, “virtually all” does not mean all. In their
Table IV, middle panel, Abowd et al report their estimate of the standard deviation of the firm
effect on log French wages as 0.06.16 In our model the “firm effect” corresponds to wage
variation due to variation in monitoring ability across firms, so we parameterize the marginal
distribution of wages Fw  w  as being log normal with a standard deviation of 0.06.

        B. The productivity distribution and elasticity of substitution
        Following many authors, we model the ex ante marginal distribution of unit labor
requirements a (where a = -1) as a Pareto distribution with shape parameter  and upper bound
. The Melitz (2003) model can be solved analytically with this distribution (Baldwin 2005), a
set of results that we will refer to here as the “Pareto-Melitz” model. Although our model has no
analytic solution, the Pareto-Melitz model proves very useful in guiding our choices for five
parameters: the Pareto shape parameter , the elasticity of substitution , the sunk cost of entry
fe, the fixed cost of production f, and the fixed cost of exporting fx.
        Solution of the Pareto-Melitz model requires that  >  - 1 >0. In choosing  and  to
satisfy these restrictions, we follow two strategies. The first relies on the literature on the firm
size distribution, which generally finds values for  that are not much bigger than one. For
example, Corcos, Del Gatto, Mion, and Ottaviano (2009) estimate that  ranges between 1.8 and
2.5 across industries and European countries in 2000, with the larger industries having values
close to 2.17 Taking this value for  constrains us to a very low value of  = 2, despite the fact




16
   We are referring here to Abowd et al’s parameter . The estimate is 0.0685 for men, 0.0566 for women. The
sample standard deviation of log wages is 0.519 and 0.480 for men and women respectively, so the ratio of the
standard deviation of the firm effect to the standard deviation of log wage is 0.13 and 0.12 for men and women
respectively.
17
   These numbers come from Table 7 in Corcos et al (2007).


                                                        22
that most estimates of  exceed 2 (for example, Harrigan (1993) estimates  to be between 5
and 12, while Broda and Weinstein (2006) find median values of  greater than 2 ).
        Our second approach to choosing  and  follows Ghironi and Melitz (2005). They use
the analysis of 1992 U.S. plant level data by Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003) to
calibrate their version of the Pareto-Melitz model, which implies  = 3.4,  = 3.8 (see Ghironi
and Melitz (2005) for details). This choice of parameters allows for a more realistic choice of  ,
although  = 3.4 is substantially higher than what is found by Corcos et al. Thus there is an
uncomfortable tension between the mathematical requirements of the model and the empirical
evidence, regardless of the choice of  and . We report results using both cases below.
        The Pareto upper bound parameter  is a normalization, set to 10 for numerical reasons.
        C. Variable and fixed trade costs
        Our measures of variable trade costs come from the influential survey by Anderson and
van Wincoop (2004). Using U.S. and other data sources, the authors report that ad valorem
equivalent trade costs are about 74 percent, which reflects the combined influence of border
costs of 44 percent and transport costs (including the time cost of goods in transit) of 21 percent.
Thus in our simulations, we take  = 1.74 as our measure of variable trade costs in the move
from autarky to trade. We also report simulations that set all border barriers to zero, which
implies  = 1.21. The difference between  = 1.74 and  = 1.21 is thus a measure of the effect of
the removal of all border barriers.
        Turning to the choice of fixed costs, in the Pareto-Melitz model the entry and export
choices depend respectively on the fixed cost ratios f f e and f x f . To calibrate f x f , we use
                                                              
the result that the share of exporting plants is    f x f 1 . This share was 0.21 for U.S. plants

in 1992, and the corresponding share for French firms in 2000 was 0.22 (see Bernard et al and
Corcos et al respectively for these numbers). Setting  = 1.74, we back out f x f to match 0.215

        The Pareto-Melitz model also delivers an expression for the share of firms that enter once
they have paid the sunk cost f e , and this share depends on f f e . However, there is no
empirical counterpart to firms that do not enter, so there is no moment which we can use to back




                                                   23
out an estimate of f f e . We rather uncomfortably choose f f e = 0.2, which guarantees an
interior solution given all of our other parameter values. Fortunately, wide variation in the
choice of f f e has almost no effect on our results.

       D. Parameters of the efficiency wage model
       With wages given by draws from the distribution Fw  w  , the associated values of

monitoring costs are given by inverting equation (8). To guide our choice of the remaining
parameters of the efficiency wage model, we work with equation (15), which gives the
equilibrium unemployment rate. Along with the average distortion, the determinants of the
equilibrium unemployment rate are the exogenous firm death rate , the utility cost of effort e,
and the upper bound on monitoring efficiency m . Following Bernard et al and Corcos et al , we
set  = 0.1 to match the annual hazard rate for U.S. plant exit. We choose e and m together so
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is reasonable for an OECD country, which leads us to e
= 1.0001 and m = 2000.
       E. Joint distribution of wages and productivity
       With the marginal distributions for wages and productivity fixed by the considerations
described above, it remains to model the joint distribution. We do so using the Ali-Mikhail-Haq
copula, which specifies the joint cdf of wages w and unit labor requirements a as a function of
the marginal cdfs and a parameter ,
                                 Fw  w  Fa  a 
        F  w, a                                             ,    1,1
                       1   1  Fw  w   1  Fa  a  

       The degree of association between w and a is governed by , with independence
corresponding to  = 0. We set  = -0.9, which implies a small ex ante correlation between
productivity and wages of 0.144, and an ex post positive correlation between firm size and wages
in equilibrium which is in line with the evidence discussed in section V.C above. For more on
copulas and sampling from the above joint cdf, see Nelsen (2006). We also simulate our model
for a zero ex ante correlation between wages and productivity,  = 0.
       F. Numerical Results
       Table 1 provides the results of our numerical simulations. Each column compares
autarky to restricted trade, covering both high (   1.74 ) and low (   1.21 ) trade cost cases. The
top panel has  =  = 2, and the bottom top panel has  =3.8,  = 3.4.


                                                                24
         Focusing on the first column of numbers, the movement from autarky to current levels of
trade costs (   1.74 ) raises real GDP by 12 percent, an effect which combines an 18 percent
improvement in aggregate productivity with a decline in variety of 6 percent. The number of
active firms is only 78 percent of the autarky level, an illustration of the powerful “survival of
the fittest” mechanism in the Melitz model. Turning to the elements that are new to our model,
the unemployment rate of 7 percent doesn’t budge when the economy opens up. Workers who
maintain their old jobs see their real wages increase by 11 percent due to the fall in the price
level, but many workers do lose their jobs: 15 percent of “good jobs” (jobs with above average
wages in autarky) are lost, while 19 percent of “bad jobs” are eliminated. Thus while the
average worker is much better off than under autarky, there is a substantial reallocation of job
rents. The effects of further reductions in trade costs are even larger: real GDP is 24 percent
higher than under autarky, but more than a fifth of autarky good jobs are eliminated.
         Our baseline parameterization includes a small ex ante correlation of 0.144 between
wages and productivity, which leads to a size-wage correlation of 0.05 with current levels of
trade costs, in line with the evidence reported in Manning (2003) discussed above.19 We modify
this assumption in the second two columns of Panel A, and with the exception of the size wage
correlation which is now very small and negative, our results about the aggregate and
distributional effects of trade liberalization are virtually unchanged. The only notable difference
is that job losses are now a bit more heavily concentrated in “good jobs”, since these high-wage
jobs are less likely to be at highly productive firms than in the baseline parameterization.
         The second panel of the table tells much the same story, except that all the effects of
liberalization are quite a bit smaller. For example, in the move from autarky to current levels of
trade costs, only 5 percent of “good jobs” are lost as opposed to 15 percent in our baseline.
Unemployment in this panel is 10 or 11 percent, which is somewhat high by U.S. standards but
very much in line with levels in France and elsewhere in Europe (recall that many of our
parameters are drawn from French and other European data). The intuition for why larger values
of  and  lead to smaller effects of liberalization is that firms have both less market power
(larger ) and a more skewed productivity distribution (larger ) than when  and  are small, so



19
  We refer here to Manning’s Table 4.2, pg.87, which reports that the estimated elasticity of wages with respect to
employer size is anywhere between 0.013 and 0.145. An estimate of 0.04 seems to be preferred.


                                                         25
that there are fewer small, inefficient firms in autarky. Thus the selection effects of trade
liberalization that are at the heart of the Melitz model are less powerful.
        Figure 3 illustrates the employment effects of liberalization in our simulation. For the
purpose of understanding Figure 3 it is useful to think of each dot as representing an active firm
in autarky, although strictly speaking the dots are draws from a continuous joint distribution.21
The firms that expand employment are exporters, and the dispersion of this cloud reflects the
long, thin upper tail of the Pareto productivity distribution. The cluster of firms just to the left of
the vertical axis are firms that survive the opening to trade but do not export: instead, they shed
workers in the face of import competition. Finally, the cluster of firms to the far left shut down
and layoff their labor force when trade opens up. The key message illustrated by the figure is that
workers with the same wages can suffer very dissimilar fates: their firm can shut down, contract,
or expand (possibly a lot) when the economy opens to trade. A related message is that among the
three categories of firms (those that exit, import competing, and exporters) there is great
heterogeneity in wages.


                                              VI. Conclusions


        How do labor markets adjust to trade liberalization? The experience of major trade
liberalizations underscores the importance of intra-industry reallocations. First generation models
of intra-industry liberalization, based on Krugman (1981), emphasize that such integration will
be smooth: no firm goes out of business, no worker loses a job, and welfare rises for everyone as
the price index falls owing to variety gains. In such a world, liberalization should command
universal approval. Of course, trade liberalization in reality remains highly controversial, with
overwhelming majorities in the United States saying that it costs jobs and lowers wages.
        A new generation of intra-industry trade models, based on Melitz (2003), provides an
opening to make sense of these facts. In a benchmark case for the new models, the Krugman
variety gains disappear entirely, even though consumers value variety. All of the gains come

21
  For aesthetic reasons, Figure 3 is constructed by drawing 5,000 times from F(w,a), rather than the more
numerically accurate sample of 20,000 draws used to construct Table 1. Parameters are those used in the first
column in Table 1.




                                                        26
through the product market churning that expands output at high productivity firms and leads
low productivity firms to contract or exit.
       Our innovation is to link this product market churning to labor market churning, while
giving workers a reason to care about their jobs. We do this by merging the Melitz model with a
variant of the Shapiro-Stiglitz model of efficiency wages. In this model, workers care about job
loss for two reasons. First, and in contrast to Melitz, there is involuntary unemployment, so job
loss may give rise to a spell without work or wages. Second, different jobs pay different wages to
identical workers, so that a worker with a particularly good job (high wage) may reasonably fear
that displacement from that job will result in eventual re-employment only at a lower wage. Of
course, idiosyncratically high wages at a job, all else equal, also make that job more vulnerable
in the face of liberalization. Hence this also helps us to make sense of public concerns of trade
costing jobs and lowering wages.
       We develop a simulation of our model based on the best available parameter estimates.
We find quite substantial aggregate gains in our simulations. While unemployment exists in our
model, it is little affected by liberalization. However, there is a tremendous amount of labor
market churning. In one experiment, up to one-fourth of all “good” (above average wage) jobs
are destroyed. Given best estimates of the magnitude of the firm-specific component of wages,
this could lead many to lose as a result of liberalization.
       In short, we have developed a model of intra-industry exchange in which the combination
of labor market churning and job specific rents can make sense of public concerns that trade
costs jobs and lowers wages. The model explains this in a context that continues to feature large
aggregate gains common in intra-industry models.




                                                  27
                                        References
Abowd , JM, Kramarz, F, Margolis, DN, , 1999 “High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms,”
        Econometrica 67 (March): 251-333.
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop, 2004, “Trade Costs” Journal of Economic
        Literature XLII (September): 691-751.
Baldwin, Richard E., "Heterogeneous Firms and Trade: Testable and Untestable Properties of the
        Melitz Model" (July 2005). NBER Working Paper No. W11471.
Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, 2003, Plants and
        Productivity in International Trade, American Economic Review 93, 1268-1290.
Broda, Christian, and David Weinstein, 2006, “Globalization and the Gains From Variety”, The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics (May): 541-585.
Brown, C, and Medoff, J, 1989, “The Employer Size-Wage Effect,” Journal of Political
        Economy 97: 1027-1059.
Corcos, Gregory, Massimo Del Gatto, Giordano Mion, and Gianmarco I.P Ottaviano, 2009,
        "Productivity and Firm Selection: Quantifying the ‘New’ Gains from Trade", FEEM
        Working Paper 379 and KITeS Working Paper 02/2009, dated March 27 2009.
Egger, Hartmut and Kreickemeier, Udo, 2009, “Firm Heterogeneity and the Labour Market
        Effects of Trade Liberalisation,” International Economic Review,.
Felbermayr, G., J. Prat and H-J Schmerer, 2008. “Globalization and Labor Market Outcomes:
        Wage Bargaining, Search Frictions, and Firm Heterogeneity”, IZA Discussion Paper No.
        3363 (February).
Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc Melitz, 2005, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
        Heterogeneous Firms”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 865--915.
Groshen, Erica, and Alan B. Krueger, 1990, “The Structure of Supervision and Pay in
        Hospitals”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43: 134S-146S.
Harrigan, James, 1993, "OECD Imports and Trade Barriers in 1983" Journal of International
        Economics 35: 91-112.
Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki, 2010, “Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and
        Unemployment” Review of Economic Studies.
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding, 2010, “Inequality and Unemployment
        in a Global Economy”, Econometrica.
Idson, Todd L., and Walter Oi, 1999, “Workers Are More Productive in Large Firms”, American
        Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 89 (2): 104-108.
Krueger, Alan, and Lawrence Summers, 1988, “Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage
        structure”, Econometrica 56(2) pp. 259-293.
Krugman, Paul R, 1981, “Intraindustry Specialization and the Gains from Trade,” Journal of
        Political Economy 89: 959-973.
Manning, Alan, 2003, Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets,
        Princeton: Princeton U. Press.
Matusz, Steven J., 1996, “International Trade, the Division of Labor, and Unemployment,”
        International Economic Review 37: 71-84.
Mehta, Shailendra Raj, 1998. “The Law of One Price and a Theory of the Firm: A Ricardian
        Perspective on Interindustry Wages,” RAND Journal of Economics 29: 137-156.
Melitz, Marc J, 2003,“The Impact Of Trade On Intra-Industry Reallocations And Aggregate
        Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71 (6): 1695-1725.



                                             28
Murphy, Kevin M., and Topel, Robert H. , 1987 “Unemployment, Risk, and Earnings: Testing
       for Equalizing Wage Differences in the Labor Market.” In Unemployment and the
       Structure of Labor Markets, edited by Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard. London:
       Basil Blackwell.
Nagin, Daniel S.; Rebitzer, James B.; Sanders, Seth; Taylor, Lowell J., 2002, “Monitoring,
       Motivation, and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field
       Experiment “The American Economic Review 92, No. 4. (Sept): 850-873.
Nelsen, Roger B., An Introduction to Copulas, 2nd Edition, New York: Springer, 2006.
Rebitzer, James, 1995, “Is there a trade-off between supervision and wages? An empirical test of
       efficiency wage theory”, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 28: 107-129.
Romer, David, 2006, Advanced Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw Hill.
Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1984, “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
       Device,” American Economic Review 74 (3): 433-444.




                                               29
                                              Figure 1
                                        Autarky to Freer Trade




                   Wi
                                                           mca*
                                                                   mc*
                                                       Exit
                                                                                 mcx
                                                  I
                                                                Contract

                                                           II              Export        mc
                                                                   III
                                                                                    Profit
                                                                            IV

               1




               0
                                                                                         i



The move from autarky to free trade changes the marginal firms from those with marginal costs mca* to
 mc * . This leads to exit of the high marginal cost firms in Region I; contraction of the next highest
marginal cost firms in Region II; and expansion of low marginal cost firms in Regions III and IV as they
enter new export markets. Profits drop to zero in Region I firms and decline for firms in Regions II and
III. The Region III firms experience the profit decline in spite of their success in exporting – the loss of
local market share and the fixed costs of exporting are not compensated by the new profits in the foreign
market. Only the super-exporting firms in Region IV experience higher profits. Job loss occurs wherever
output contracts, namely in Regions I and II.




                                                      30
                                            Figure 2
                      A Conditional Threat to “Good Jobs at Good Wages”



                    Wi


                                                             Exit

                                                         I           Contract

                                                                II            Export
                                                                        III
        Good                                                                         Profit
        Jobs         Wa                                                         IV
        Bad
        Jobs
                     1



                0
                                                                                         i
                                                  0

A good job may be defined as one that pays more than the average wage in autarky. For illustrative
purposes, consider a productivity level 0 that corresponds to the point at which the average autarky
wage curve crosses the boundary between Regions II and III. Conditional on productivity level 0 , the
highest wages on offer are at jobs in Region I firms; all of these good jobs are destroyed in the move from
autarky to free trade. The next highest wages are on offer at jobs in Region II firms; some of these jobs
are lost as output contracts. The Region III jobs expand, but these are bad jobs. The sharpest expansion of
jobs occurs at the Region IV firms offering the worst jobs. These Region IV firms offering the worst jobs
are also the only ones who increase profits in the move from autarky to free trade. Conditional on this
productivity level, trade destroys only good jobs and expands only bad jobs.




                                                    31
                                         Table 1

          Simulations of the Model for High and Low Trade Costs
Panel A:  = 2,  = 2
                            high trade       low trade        high trade       low trade
                              costs             costs           costs             costs
                          ex ante (productivity,wage) >0   ex ante (productivity,wage) =0
Trade relative to autarky values
Real GDP                       1.12              1.24            1.12            1.24
Productivity                   1.18              1.34            1.17            1.34
Active Local Firms             0.78              0.64            0.79            0.64
Price Index                    0.89              0.81            0.89            0.80
Unemployment Rate              1.00              1.01            1.00            1.00
Levels
Share of exporters             0.21              0.43           0.21             0.44
Autarky Unemploy.              0.07              0.07            0.07             0.07
Trade Unemployment             0.07              0.07            0.07             0.07
Autarky (Size,Wage)           0.07              0.07            0.00             0.00
Trade (Size,Wage)             0.05              0.03           -0.02            -0.02
Share of jobs lost in move to trade
Good Jobs                      0.15              0.22            0.16            0.25
Bad Jobs                       0.19              0.29            0.17            0.26

Panel B:  = 3.8,  = 3.4
                            high trade       low trade        high trade       low trade
                              costs             costs           costs             costs
                          ex ante (productivity,wage) >0   ex ante (productivity,wage) =0
Trade relative to autarky values
Real GDP                       1.04              1.13            1.04            1.13
Productivity                   1.01              1.07            1.01            1.07
Active Local Firms             0.88              0.67            0.88            0.66
Price Index                    0.96              0.89            0.96            0.89
Unemployment Rate              1.01              1.01            1.01            1.01
Levels
Share of exporters             0.22              0.75            0.23            0.75
Autarky Unemploy.              0.11              0.11            0.10             0.10
Trade Unemployment             0.11              0.11            0.10             0.10
Autarky (Size,Wage)           0.00              0.00           -0.02            -0.02
Trade (Size,Wage)             0.00              0.01           -0.01            -0.01
Share of jobs lost in move to trade
Good Jobs                      0.05              0.10            0.05            0.10
Bad Jobs                       0.06              0.11            0.06            0.11




                                            32
Notes to Table 1: The high and low trade costs respectively are  = 1.74 and  = 1.21. The
notation (.,.) indicates the correlation coefficient. The ex ante correlation between productivity
and the wage is 0.144 in columns 1 and 2 (the two cases correspond to  = -0.9 and  = 0
respectively). All other parameters identical across cases, with the exception of the export fixed
cost fX ,which is chosen to generate a share of exporters = 0.215 when  = 1.74 (resulting in fX =
1.24 in Panel A and fX = 0.75 in Panel B). Simulation computed using 20,000 draws from ex
ante joint distribution of wages and productivity. Common parameter values are
        ex ante standard deviation of log wages             W         0.06
        scale parameter on Pareto distribution                         10
        utility cost of effort                               e       1.0001
        upper bound monitoring hazard rate                   m        2000
        exogenous firm death hazard rate                              0.1
        fixed entry cost                                     fe         5
        fixed production cost                                f          1




                                                 33
                                                Figure 3
                             wages vs. change in employment
             wage
           1.5




           1.4




           1.3




           1.2




           1.1




                                                                                       Demployment
 -1              0       1            2            3          4         5          6


Notes to Figure 3: Each dot represents a firm active in autarky, its’ wage, and the employment
response when trade costs fall from  =  to  =1.74 for  =  = 2,  = -0.09 (the case
corresponding to the first column of Panel A in Table 1). The set of points to the far left are
firms that shut down when trade opens up, the set of firms just left of the vertical axis are firms
that survive but do not export, while the dots to the right represent exporters. The scale on the
horizontal axis is arbitrary, but the relative magnitudes are meaningful.




                                                       34
