                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PATENTS AND THE SURVIVAL OF INTERNET-RELATED IPOS

                                         Iain M. Cockburn
                                           Stefan Wagner

                                       Working Paper 13146
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13146


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2007




Financial support from the German Academic Exchange Service DAAD is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Baruch Lev, INNO-tec, and participants in seminars at Melbourne Business School, Nanyang
Technological University, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, INSEAD, ZEW, and the NBER Entrepreneurship
Working Group for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Iain M. Cockburn and Stefan Wagner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Patents and the Survival of Internet-related IPOs
Iain M. Cockburn and Stefan Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 13146
June 2007
JEL No. L0,L26,L86,O34

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the effect of patenting on the survival prospects of 356 internet-related firms that IPO'd
at the height of the stock market bubble of the late 1990s. By March 2005, nearly 2/3 of these firms
had delisted from the NASDAQ exchange. Although changes in the legal environment in the US in
the 1990s made it much easier to obtain patents on software and, ultimately, on business methods,
less than half of the firms in this sample obtained, or attempted to obtain, patents. For those that did,
we hypothesize that patents conferred competitive advantages that translate into higher probability
of survival, though they may also simply be a signal of firm quality. Controlling for age, venture-capital
backing, financial characteristics, and stock market conditions, patenting is positively associated with
survival. Quite different processes appear to govern exit via acquisition compared to exit via delisting
from the exchange due to business failure. Firms that applied for more patents were less likely to be
acquired, though obtaining unusually highly cited patents may make them more attractive acquisition
target. These findings do not hold for business method patents, which do not appear to confer a survival
advantage.

Iain M. Cockburn
School of Management
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cockburn@bu.edu

Stefan Wagner
INNO-tec
Ludwig Maximilien University
Kaulbachstrasse
80539 Munich
Germany
swagner@bwl.uni-muenchen.de
1     Introduction
Invention, entrepreneurship, and entry are very significant factors driving growth and compe-
tition. Patents are tightly linked to these fundamental economic processes, providing signals
of quality to investors, some measure of protection from rapid imitation, and a basis for many
types of commercial transactions in the market for knowledge (see Arora et al. (2001), Gans
et al. (2002), or Scotchmer (2005)). This paper explores the role played by patents in shaping
industry dynamics and firm survival during the rapid and unconstrained real time experiment
provided by the dot-com boom of the late 1990s. During these “bubble years” new firms had
unusually easy access to capital to fund their exploration of commercial opportunities opened
up by the explosive growth of the internet. Entrepreneurs rapidly devised and implemented
new business models and developed new products, with new firms appearing apparently from
nowhere to become household names in financial services, retailing, and many other sec-
tors. Unfortunately, it equally quickly became clear that many of these new businesses were
intrinsically unprofitable and the boom years of unrestricted entry, easy access to capital,
and extraordinary valuations of untested new companies were quickly followed by an equally
dramatic period of collapsing stock prices, exit and bankruptcies.
    This remarkable episode took place against a backdrop of a worldwide surge in filing
and granting of patents, and the extension of the patent system, particularly in the United
States, into new subject matter areas such as software and business methods. Patentability
of software per se was firmly established in the US by the mid-1990s, and decisions in the
US courts in the late 1990s such as AT&T v. Excel Communications and State Street v.
Signature Financial Services were widely interpreted as opening the door to a flood of patents
on methods of doing business, particularly those implemented in computers and networks.
    The new dot-com companies therefore had the option of seeking patent protection for
their products and business processes — and many inventors and entrepreneurs apparently
took advantage of this opportunity, with thousands of “business method” patent applications
filed with the USPTO between 1999 and 2002. These patents generated considerable con-
troversy, with many industry participants, legal scholars, and economists concerned about
the potential adverse consequences of allowing large numbers of low-quality patents to issue
(Hall (2003), Merges (1999), Meurer (2003), Cockburn (2001), Hunt (2001) and many oth-
ers). Many of these concerns parallel those expressed about the consequences of software
patents for innovation and competition. Critics argued that the flood of business method
patents would “choke” innovation by blocking new technological developments, making it
prohibitively expensive for new firms to enter these markets, or allowing patentees to con-
trol entire markets by obtaining patents with inappropriately broad claims, and/or trivial
inventive steps over the existing technology. Apparently concerned about the opportunistic
assertion of patents on business methods against incumbent firms, the US Congress took
the unusual step of singling out business methods for special treatment, creating a limited
“earlier inventor” defense against patent infringement (or prior user right) for “a method of


                                              2
doing or conducting business”.1 However the impact of these patents on the profitability and
growth of the companies that obtained them, or on the pace of innovation in the industries
in which they compete is far from clear.
      Quantitative research on patents for software and business methods is limited and often
contradictory. Lerner (2002) found no clear evidence on the impact of patents on innova-
tion in finance. Lerner & Zhu (2005) found, if anything, a positive impact of strengthened
patent protection on software firms. On the other hand, Bessen & Hunt (2004) suggest that
increasing numbers of software patents are associated with a decrease in R&D by large soft-
ware companies. Gambardella & Giarratana (2006) find an important role for patents in the
security software industry, where the commercial success of small firms appears to have been
driven by their ability to license technology to established downstream competitors. Noel
& Schankermann (2006) find evidence for a negative impact of strategic patenting on entry,
R&D, and market value of software firms, while Cockburn & MacGarvie (2006) find that
while incumbent patents deter entry in software markets, higher numbers of patents held by
entrants stimulate entry. Hall & MacGarvie (2006) find mixed effects of changes in legal doc-
trine on the market value and stock returns of software firms, with a initially negative impact
of the strengthening software patent protection on the valuation of incumbent software firms
followed by an increase in the market valuation of software patents after 1995. There is,
therefore, considerable uncertainty about the economic value and impact of these patents.2
      Rather than attempt to directly assess the monetary value of these patents, or relate
them to technological indicators of the pace of innovation, this paper examines the impact
of patenting on a much more basic measure of economic impact — the survival of a sample
of internet-based and software firms that went public during the boom phase of the dot-com
bubble, and then faced high probabilities of business failure during the bust period that
followed. To the extent that patents obtained by these firms improved their competitive
position, through mechanisms such as excluding competitors, supporting higher margins,
raising rivals’ costs, or signaling quality, we hypothesize that they should have conferred a
substantial survival advantage. Estimates of the size and significance of such an effect may
provide useful insight into the economic impact of these types of patents.
      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 of the paper we briefly
summarize previous findings on firm turn-over and review existing literature scrutinizing
software and business method patents. Section 3 contains a short description of the dataset
used for the analysis, which combines financial data and patent data for 356 firms that made
an IPO on the NASDAQ at the height of the stock market bubble between 1998 and 2001.
In Section 4, results are presented from estimating multivariate hazard models relating firm
survival to patenting, financing, and economic performance. Finally, Section 5 concludes and
offers some implications of our findings.
  1
   35 USC Sec. 273.
  2
   It is even unclear whether claims about the poor quality of business method patents are
generally true. Hunter (2003) and Allison & Tiller (2003) argue that business method patents
compare well to patents in other technologies in terms of citation of prior art, etc.

                                               3
2         Patents and the Turn-over of Internet Firms
In 1998 the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit removed the last obstacles to obtaining
patents on business methods per se in the United States with its famous State Street Bank
and Trust Co. vs Signature Financial Group decision involving US patent No. 5,193,056 in
1998 (Hunt 2001, Conley 2003).3 As a consequence large numbers of applications for business
method patents were filed in the USPTO, and many of the patents that subsequently issued
protect inventions closely related to internet business models and software used in various
e-business applications. The rapid increase in application and grant figures as well as some
widely publicized patent infringement cases initiated a broad debate on the legal and economic
consequences of allowing these patents.4 Concerns expressed by many scholars about the
potentially low quality of granted business method and software patents as a consequence
of inadequate examination procedures of the USPTO by numerous authors (Dreyfuss 2000,
Hunt 2001, Merges 1999, Wagner forthcoming 2007) were accompanied by strong objections
and criticism from practitioners and policymakers. In response to this, the USPTO moved
to tighten the examination procedures and standards for patents filed in USPTO Class 705,
the principal classification for business method patents (USPTO 1999).5
        Despite the debate on the consequences of granting large numbers of poor quality business
method and software patents, their impact on economic outcomes — such as incentives to
innovate and the pace of technical change — in affected industries has received little attention.
These outcomes are very difficult to measure directly, but some insight into the economic
significance of these patents may be gained from looking at whether or not they haev an
impact on the economic performance of firms that obtain them.
        Much of the literature on the value of patents has focused on indirect measures of their
impact on profitability, such as stock market value of the firm. Relatively little systematic
    3
     “As an alternative ground for invalidating the ’056 patent under Section 101, the [district]
court relied on the judicially-created, so-called ”business method” exception to statutory
subject matter. We take this opportunity to lay this ill-conceived exception to rest.” State
Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group, Inc. 149 F.3d 1368. (Fed. Cir.
1998).
   4
     Outcomes of these cases have been mixed. In the Priceline.com vs. Microsoft/Expedia
case, Priceline.com obtained an undisclosed settlement payment from Microsoft leading to
a 30% increase in its stock market capitalization. But in another widely followed dispute,
Amazon.com attempted to enforce a patent on “one-click” on-line purchasing against Bar-
nesandnoble.com with only limited success: though Amazon.com succeeded in obtaining a
preliminary injunction enjoining Barnesandnoble.com from using the Express Lane feature
on its website during the busy Christmas buying season, this was quite quickly vacated on
appeal in the face of persuasive evidence questioning the validity of Amazon.com’s patent.
Amazon.com v. Barnesandnoble.com, et al. Civ. Act. No. 00-1109, 239 F.3d 1343 (Fed.
Cir., February 14, 2001).
   5
     While tighter scrutiny of applications through “second pair of eyes” procedures, recruit-
ment of appropriately qualified examiners, and improved access to relevant prior art may
have raised the quality of granted patents in this class, it is not clear whether the rate at
which business method patents are being issued has fallen. Applicants are likely to have
reacted to this tightened scrutiny of applications in class 705 by framing the content of the
application in a way that increases the likelihood of it being directed to a different part of
the Patent Office.

                                                  4
evidence has been gathered on relationships between patenting and more basic indicators of
firm performance such as growth and survival. These may be particularly useful for small or
new firms, where the signal conveyed by market valuation of intangibles may be particularly
difficult to identify against the noise generated by high levels of uncertainty about future
growth prospects, thin trading and very volatile asset prices.
       One notable exception can be found in recent paper by Mann & Sager (2005). Here
the authors combine data on the venture capital financing of software start-ups with data
on the patents held by those firms in order to analyze the relation between patenting and
their ability to obtain venture financing, as well as and their progress through the venture
cycle. They find some correlation between patenting and different proxies for success but also
acknowledge that the private value of holding software patents varies greatly between firms
even within the same industrial subsegment.6
       Here we tackle a similar question — is there a private benefit from patenting business
methods and software? — with a somewhat different research strategy. Analyzing a set
of dot-com firms pursuing business models closely tied to internet services and software, we
relate patent holdings to the survival of these firms as publicly traded companies. The survival
analysis framework we employ for this purpose has been widely used in previous empirical
studies of firm failure and industry dynamics. Compared to a relatively sparse theoretical
literature7 , IO economics is rich in empirical evidence on entry and exit, and there is a well-
established set of ‘stylized facts’ on firm survival. Geroski (1995), Sutton (1997) and Caves
(1998) provide comprehensive surveys. Considering firm characteristics, the most common
result is that survival is positively related to firm size and to firm age. Most studies find that
small firms (who are more likely to operate below the minimum efficient scale) exhibit higher
failure rates. Moreover, younger firms have higher failure probabilities and Audretsch (1995)
argues that firm age is a proxy for the accumulation of information about technology, markets
and a firm’s own cost function. A greater stock of accumulated information should lead to
higher survival chances. In addition to these firm characteristics, industry characteristics and
the competitive environment have also been studied in depth. In particular, the point in the
technology or industry life cycle at which a firm operates has been found to be an important
determinant of firm survival (Agarwal & Gort 1996, 2002, Suarez & Utterback 1993, 1995).
Further, failure is positively related to overall rates of entry in an industry (Mata et al. 1995,
Honjo 2000) and also to average price-cost margins (Audretsch 1991, Audretsch & Mahmood
1995).
       A different strand of literature, predominantly from the fields of accounting and finance,
relates the occurrence of bankruptcy and M&A-activity to financial ratios based on capital
   6
     In a comment on a closely related paper by Mann, Bessen (2005) points out that some of
these findings have to be interpreted with caution.
   7
     Among the few theoretical treatments of firm turn-over are Jovanovic (1982) and Hopen-
hayn (1992) who suggest that in a theory of learning and noisy selection, firm age and size are
important determinants of survival. In a recent paper, Cooley & Quadrini (2001) introduce
financial markets to this model and analyze the effect of market frictions on firm survival.


                                                 5
market data and accounting information derived from firms’ financial statements. In a com-
prehensive study, Fama & French (2004) document a strong increase in the number of new
lists at the NASDAQ in the period between 1973 and 2001 which is accompanied by a sharp
decline in survival rates over time. Fama & French (2004) find that surviving firms exhibit
higher profitability and growth rates. Logit models have been used in this context to predict
take-over targets (Palepu 1986) or to analyze delistings from stock markets (Seguin & Smoller
1997). Seguin & Smoller (1997) find a higher mortality rate for lower priced stocks than for
higher priced issues while mortality in their sample is not influenced by market capitalization.
Recently, Shumway (2001) emphasizes the advantages of hazard models compared to static
models in predicting bankruptcy using financial and accounting ratios. Applying this type
of model to bankruptcy data, Chava & Jarrow (2004) find that accounting variables add
little predictive power when market based measures are already included in the model while
Beaver et al. (2005) identify additional explanatory power of information based on financial
reporting.
      A number of recent papers have focused on the cohort of young high-tech firms that
went public during the stock market bubble of 1998-2001. These studies seek to characterize
both the extraordinary conditions of the equity markets at that time as well as the innovative
activities of the new firms, relating these to firm survival after the IPO. Audretsch & Lehmann
(2004), for example, analyze the survival times of a sample of 341 firms from various industries
listed on the German Neuer Markt 8 as a function of firms’ human capital and intellectual
property assets. Modelling the length of time a firm was listed on the stock market before
it was delisted, the authors find that the likelihood of survival is positively related to firm
size, the human capital accumulated in the board of directors, and the number of German
patents held by a firm. Moreover, Audretsch & Lehmann (2004) find that failure rates are
negatively affected by the investment share of venture capital firms prior to IPO. In a related
study, Jain & Kini (2000) find that the presence of venture capitalists prior to going public
improves the survival prospects of IPO firms.
      Other studies have focused on the survival of firms that are based on a business model
that relies on the internet to perform transactions, distribute products or provide services,
and interact with customers. For instance, Kauffman & Wang (2003) analyzed survival times
of 103 such “internet firms” listed on the NASDAQ.9 Employing a competing risks specifi-
cation they found that firms which distribute physical goods via the internet (as opposed to
firms provided digital services) and firms which target both consumer and business markets
have longer survival times until either a merger or a delisting occurs. Botman et al. (2004)
analyzed survival of 326 internet firms listed on the NASDAQ between 1996 and 2001, as a
  8
     Neuer Markt was launched as market segment for high-tech and internet start-ups by
the German Stock Exchange on March, 10th , 1997. Six years later on June, 5th , 2003 Neuer
Markt was closed in a re-segmentation of the German Stock Exchange — most likely due to
dramatic losses in market capitalization and loss of investor interest.
   9
     The authors are not completely clear on whether their sample consists exclusively of
NASDAQ-listed firms, but given the US context this seems highly likely.


                                                6
function of variables intended to characterize market conditions at the time the IPO took
place, the reputation of the management and the investment bank leading the IPO as well
as firm characteristics such as financial condition and age. Their results show that surviving
firms are associated with lower risk indications in the IPO prospectus, higher underwriter
reputation, higher investor demand for the shares issued at the IPO, lower valuation un-
certainty, higher insider ownership retention, a lower NASDAQ market level, and a higher
offer-to-book ratio compared to non-survivors. Comparing survivors versus acquired firms,
they find that acquired firms are smaller in size and have a longer operating history.
       Our study focuses on the relevance of patents for the success of dot-com companies.
In particular, we examine the extent to which these firms took advantage of the changing
legal landscape with regard to the patentability of business methods, and the impact of these
decisions on competitive outcomes. Our study therefore combines data on firm characteristics
like age, financial condition, and market environment with detailed information on their
patent holdings. The patent portfolios of firms in our sample are characterized not just by
counting the number of patents held, but also by measures of patent quality based on citations
and international filing patterns.



3        Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1       Data
To address these questions, we gathered data on 356 firms that made an Initial Public Of-
fering of shares on the NASDAQ stock exchange between February 1998 and August 2001.
These firms were characterized by IPO.com, a then popular but now defunct financial re-
search service, as operating in the Internet Services, Internet Software and Computer Soft-
ware Segments. We were able to obtain comprehensive data on these firms including listing
information, financial information, firm age and a variety of measures with regard to their
patent holdings. The data were obtained from different sources including the Delphion,
USPTO, Compustat, CRSP and Venture-Xpert databases as well as firms’ 10K filings and
IPO prospectuses. In this subsection we briefly comment on the variables contained in our
dataset before presenting descriptive statistics in the subsequent subsection.


Listing Information. For each firm we obtained detailed information on its listing on the
NASDAQ stock exchange from the Center for Research on Security Prices CRSP -database.
This data contains not only the date of the IPO (ipodatei ) for each firm i but also informa-
tion whether or not a firm is still listed on the NASDAQ. If trading in a firm’s stock was
discontinued, we are able to distinguish between firms which were delisted due to business
failure10 and firms which merged with other companies. In both cases, we compute the total
  10
   This category comprises firms which were delisted due to bankruptcy and firms which
have been delisted for trading persistently below the minimum price of $1 per share required


                                              7
Table 1: Breakdown of firms by segment. Table includes selected examples of firms in
each segment.

 Segment                   Firms      Examples
 Internet Services          210       1-800-Flowers.com, 24/7 Real Media, Autobytel.com,
                                      Buy.com, Drugstore.com, eBay, E-loan, Freemarkets,
                                      Genuity, MP3.com, Priceline.com, Razorfish, Vertical-
                                      net
 Internet Software           82       Critical Path, Entrust, Portal Software, WebMethods
 Computer Software           64       Inktomi, Manhattan Associates, Onyx Software, Perot
                                      Systems, Quest Software, Red Hat
 Total                      356


length of the listing period on the NASDAQ as the time between the date of delisting and
the date of the IPO. This “length of listing period” is used as the duration measure in the
survival analyses.


Industrial Classification. Based on the classification used by IPO.com we distinguish be-
tween three different industrial segments: Internet Services, Internet Software and Computer
Software. Dummy variables for these industry segments are included in the multivariate sur-
vival analyses, with firms assigned to Computer Software used as the reference group. These
categories are far from precise, assignment of firms to segments may be questionable, and
some firms may in fact be operating in more than one industry segment. Table 1 shows the
breakdown of firms by segment, and lists some high profile examples of firms operating in
each segment.


Financial Data. We obtained financial data on a quarterly basis from the Compustat
North America database. Compustat provides information on operating income and sales for
each firm i in quarter t. The cash “burn rate” is often identified as a critical indicator of the
financial health of startup firms. Unfortunately we do not directly observe cash outlays by the
firms in our sample, nor do we have access to information about unused bank credit lines or
other sources of liquidity. However we are able to construct a measure of the financial status
or liquidity, cashburnit , that captures some aspects of these firms’ financial status. cashburnit
is calculated as the negative of the ratio of operating income for the current quarter to the
sum of cash and short term investments in the previous quarter. This variable measures the
rate at which the firm is accumulating or depleting financial reserves, with positive values
indicating consumption of the existing stock of cash and shortterm investments and negative
values indicating further accumulation of liquid assets. op incomeit , salesit and cashburnit
are treated as time-varying coefficients in the multivariate survival analysis of Section 4.11
by NASDAQ regulations.
  11
     In rare cases, these variables are not available for occasional single quarters. We interpo-
late missing values by averaging the preceding and subsequent quarters’ value.


                                                8
IPO Characteristics. Our dataset contains information on a firm’s age when going
public (age ipoi ). It is measured as the difference between its ipodatei and the date of legal
incorporation which was obtained from the Venture-Xpert database. If the date of incorpora-
tion was not available from Venture-Xpert it was obtained from publicly available documents
such as 10K reports and IPO prospectuses filed with the SEC. Information in the Venture-
Xpert and SDC New Issues databases we used to determine whether or not each firm was
venture capital backed before its IPO. Further, we obtained firms’ total assets reported in the
quarter when going public (assets tot ipoi ) from the Compustat North America-database and
include this variable as a measure of a firm’s capital endowment ”at birth” in our multivariate
analysis. Since we are able to identify the levels of Cash & Short Term Investments as well
as Property, Plant and Equipment reported in a firm’s balance sheet, we further include the
shares of these position when going public (as a fraction of total assets) in the regressions.


Market Environment. Capital markets in general, and the market for technology re-
lated IPOs in particular, were characterized by quite extraordinary “bubble” conditions
throughout the period of this study. Investor “exuberance” during this period is widely
believe to have created market conditions in which large amounts of capital could be raised
at remarkably low prices, and with relatively little scrutiny. In order to control for these
conditions, we include the average value of the NASDAQ Composite Index in the quarter
prior to quarter in which a firm’s IPO took place (nasdaq ipo lagi ) as a control variable in
our regressions.


Patent Information. Various variables that describe a firm’s patent portfolio such as
number of patents, international scope of filings, and proxies for patent value were collected
from USPTO and other data maintained by Delphion Inc. For each firm in the dataset, Del-
phion’s databases on issued patents and published applications were searched by hand using
the company name, along with word stems, common abbreviations, and obvious variations
in spelling of companies’ names. “Weak” matches were verified by inspecting the inventor
names, address information, citations to other patents, and the content of abstracts. In
principle, this procedure captured all patent applications and issued patents for which the
firm in question was the assignee. Nonetheless is likely that some patents controlled by the
firms in this sample were not captured in this search. The search process relies heavily on
USPTO’s coding of assignee names, and does not capture patents re-assigned to a firm after
issuance, exclusively licensed from the inventor, or held in subsidiaries that we were not able
to recognize. It is also possible that a significant number of pending applications have been
missed in the search, either because the applicant chose to forfeit filing rights outside the US,
thus avoiding publication of the application entirely, or because the 18-month period before
publication was still in force at the time the search was performed.
   Interestingly, notwithstanding many contemporary commentators’ beliefs that business
method and software patents were trivially easy to obtain during this period, no issued


                                               9
patents or applications could be found for more than half of the firms in this sample. Dummy
variables were coded to indicate whether firms in a particular segment did apply for or hold
any patents.
       Various measures of the size and characteristics of each firms’ patent portfolio were com-
puted. These include the number of USPTO patent applications and grants, as well as counts
of applications and grants at the European and Japanese Patent Offices, plus variables which
are correlates to patent value: the average family size of a firm’s USPTO patents, the average
number of forward citations received per grant or application, and the number of forward
citations per claim.12
       It is well-known that the value distribution of patents is highly skewed (Harhoff et al.
1999, 2003) and value measures that average the number of cites per claim over the entire
portfolio of patents held by a firm largely obscures this phenomenon. We therefore attempt
to capture some aspects of the skewness of the value distribution by counting the the number
of patents in a firm’s patent portfolio which received 7 or more forward citations (which is
approximately the upper quartile of the distribution of number of forward citations in this
sample.)


3.2        Descriptive Statistics
Before advancing to our multivariate analysis of firm survival in Section 4 we briefly present
major descriptive statistics of the sample. In total, our sample contains 356 firms that
went public between February, 25th , 1998 and August, 6th , 2001. These 356 firms make up
about 74% of the total number of IPOs reported by IPO.com in the three industry segments
considered. (The remainder are firms for which reliable matches to the databases on NASDAQ
trading, venture funding, or financial information could not be made.) The distribution of
the IPO dates of these firms (Figure 1) shows that most of them went public in the years
1999 and 2000. Strikingly, this distribution tracks the movement of the NASDAQ composite
index during this period (see Figure 2).
       In total, NASDAQ trading in more than 60% of the firms in our sample had been discon-
tinued by March 1st 2005, the end of the observational period. Table 2 clearly shows that
firms from the Internet Services segment exhibit the highest exit rates with 69.5% leaving
the sample before August 2005, compared to 59.7% for Internet Software and only 46.9% for
Computer software firms. The average time elapsed until trading was discontinued is also
presented in Table 2. Note that the average time until firms exited as a result of merger
is significantly shorter than the time until delisting due to business failure. Moreover, this
difference is much more pronounced for firms from the Computer Software segment compared
to firms with a business model related to the internet.    13

  12
     Lanjouw & Schankerman (2001) argue that this measure is superior to simple counts of
forward citations. Note that this measure is computed using only granted patents since the
number of claims is not reported for patent applications.
  13
     Table 11 tracks the financial status of exiting firms for the five quarters preceeding exit.


                                                10
         Figure 1: Distribution of the IPO dates of the 356 firms in our sample.




                            80
                            60
                     Number of IPOs
                          4020
                            0




                                      1/98        3/98      1/99     3/99     1/00     3/00       1/01   3/01
                                                                      Quarter/ Year




           Figure 2: NASDAQ composite index for the period 1998 to 2001.
                            5000
                            4000
                     CLOSE
                      3000  2000
                            1000




                                      01 Jan 98          01 Jan 99    01 Jan 00       01 Jan 01      01 Jan 02
                                                                          DATE




Table 2: Crosstabulation of industrial classification and the listing information for
the firms contained in our sample. The second line of each row contains the average
listing duration. Note: In a Pearson χ2 -test the differences between firms of different
industrial classifications turned out to be significant at the 5% level (χ2 (4) = 11.57).

                                                        Listing Information
 Classification                                Still trading           Merged                              Delisted    Total
 Internet Services                             64    (30.48%)       87    (41.42%)                       59 (28.10%)    210
                                                      .                2.0 Yrs                              2.3 Yrs
 Internet Software                             33    (40.24%)       31    (37.81%)                       18 (29.95%)    82
                                                      .                2.1 Yrs                              2.4 Yrs
 Computer Software                             34    (53.13%)       18    (28.12%)                       12 (18.75%)    64
                                                      .                2.2 Yrs                              3.1 Yrs
 Total                                        131 (36.8%)          136 (38.2%)                           89 (25.0%)    356
                                                      .                2.1 Yrs                              2.4 Yrs


                                                                        11
Figure 3: Kaplan-Meier Survivor Curves for the firms in the sample. (—) Internet
Services, (- - -) Internet Software, (· · ·) Computer Software.

                          Kaplan−Meier Survivor Curves



                   1.00
                   0.75
                   0.50
                   0.25
                   0.00




                          0            1            2            3   4    5
                                                         Years




   Moving beyond the information in average survival times, Figure 3 presents Kaplan-Meier
product-limit estimates of the survivor functions of the firms in our sample i (Kaplan & Meier
1958). The survivor curves again show that firms with internet-based business models drop
out much earlier than Computer Software firms. Moreover, once past the one year mark,
the survival curves for the three groups do not intersect, indicating that the proportionality
assumption of Cox’s Proportional Hazard model is likely to hold with regard to the different
classifications of our firms (Kalbfleisch & Prentice 2002).
   Table 3 summarizes some of the important observable characteristics of the firms at the
time of their IPO. First, consider the age of the firm. (Recall that age is measured as time
elapsed from the date of incorporation until the date of the IPO.) While the average firm is
5.91 years old when the IPO takes place, firms from the Internet Services segment have a prior
firm history of only 4.72 years, while firms from the other industry segments are significantly
older: firms in the Internet Software segment averaged 6.78 years since incorporation, and
those in Computer Software averaged 8.69 years. There are also differences across segments
in the extent to which the IPOs of these firms were backed by venture capital firms. In
particular, IPOs in the Internet Software segment were more frequently venture-backed (64%)
than Internet Services firms (55%) or Computer Software firms (56%). Differences across
industry segments are also apparent in the sales and operating profits reported by the firms
for the quarter in which their IPO took place. On average, firms in the Computer Software
segment realized the highest sales (US$17.45 million) and made only minor operating losses of
US$0.5. Internet Services firms achieved somewhat lower sales, averaging US$12.95 million,
and Internet Software firms averaged even less, at US$7.55 million in their first quarter as

Acquired or merging firms had relatively stable sales, improving operating income, and a
moderate decline in cash and short term investments. By contrast, delisted firms had falling
sales, signficantly higher losses, and a rapidly deteriorating cash position.

                                                         12
Table 3: Mean values of major firm characteristics for the quarter when their IPO took
place.

 Firm                                         Internet    Internet     Computer
 Characteristics                              Services    Software     Software           Total
                                               (n=210)     (n=82)       (n=64)           (n=356)
 Age (Years)                                      4.72       6.78         8.69             5.91
 Venture-backed                                   0.55       0.64         0.56             0.58
 Sales ($MM)                                     12.95       7.55        17.45             12.51
 Operating Income ($MM)                          -9.50      -5.56         -0.49            -6.97
 Proceeds from IPO ($MM)                        149.49     150.58        112.33           143.06
 Assets ($MM)                                   164.09      84.49        84.89            131.52
 Property, Plant and Equipment                  22.84       4.27          6.49            15.82
 ($MM)
 Cash and Short-term Investment                 88.88        64.62         51.19          76.62
 ($MM)
 Cash burn rate                                  0.45        0.26          0.44            0.41


a public company. Moreover, when going public these internet-related firms were highly
unprofitable with operating losses averaging US$9.5 million per quarter in Internet Services
and US$5.6 million per quarter in Internet software (see Table 3). These differences in
profitability are also reflected by our cashburn measure of liquidity, defined as the negative
of the ratio of operating profits divided by cash and shortterm investments in the previous
period. In the quarter of their IPO, firms from the Internet Services segment had on average
operating losses equalling about 45% of their cash and shortterm investments while this
measure is only about 26% for Internet Software firms Computer Software firms had on
average operating losses of 44% of their cash on short term investments (see Table 3).
       Turning to information on the patenting activities of the firms in the sample, Table 4
reports the distribution of patent applications across technology classes, using the US Patent
Classification scheme, and classifying patents based on the primary USPC code. Not surpris-
ingly, classes that are relevant to the e-commerce and the internet (networking, databases,
cryptography etc.) are well represented. Interestingly Class 705 (in which most business
method patents should be classified) accounts for only 11.4% of the 1198 applications in our
dataset.14
       As noted above, a substantial fraction (53.8%) of the firms in our sample did not patent
at all prior to March 2005, with significant differences across industry segments: 65.2% of the
Internet Services, 51.2% of the Internet Software firms and 45.3% of the Computer Software
firms had not filed a published patent application at the USPTO, the EPO, or the JPO.             15

       Table 5 gives summary statistics of the patenting activities of firms that did file at least
  14
     These patents are held by 14 firms classified to Internet Services, two firms from Internet
Software and only one firm from Computer Software.
  15
     Though there were (and are) significant differences in principle across USPTO, EPO,
and JPO as regards patentability of software and business methods, this has not in practice
prevented firms from obtaining patents on these types of inventions in all of these jurisdictions.


                                                 13
Table 4: Classification of the USPTO patent applications of the firms in the sample.

Class     Description                                                    Patents   Share


 709      Electrical computers and digital processing systems: multi-      188     15.69%
          computer data transferring

 705      Data processing: financial, business practice, management,       137     11.44%
          or cost/ price determination

 345      Computer graphics processing and selective visual display        134     11.19%
          systems

 707      Data processing: database and file management or data            122     10.18%
          structures

 713      Electrical computers and digital processing systems: support     111     9.27%

 704      Data processing: speech signal processing, linguistics, lan-     42      3.51%
          guage translation, and audio compression

 380      Cryptography                                                     38      3.18%

 370      Multiplex communications                                         37      3.09%

 434      Education and demonstration                                      37      3.09%

 375      Pulse or digital communications                                  35      2.92%

 379      Telephonic communications                                        33      2.75%

 725      Interactive video distribution systems                           26      2.17%

  .       Other classes with less than 20 applications (2% of total)       258     21.54%

Total                                                                     1198     100%




                                              14
one published patent application. Firms from the Computer Software segment are most
active patentees, averaging 12.29 USPTO applications per patenting firm, compared to 9.62
for Internet Software patenting firms, and only 4.92 USPTO applications for patenting firms
in Internet Services.16 Table 5 also reports the extent of international patenting activity by
the sample firms. On average, EPO and JPO applications and grants are significantly lower
than at USPTO, with smaller differences across industry segments. Curiously, despite being
the least active patentees in terms of the average size of their patent portfolio, the share of
international patentees is highest in the group of Internet Services firms, with the opposite
effect visible for Computer Software firms.
       In addition to the patent counts, Table 5 also reports measures of the value or quality
of these firms’ patent portfolios. The average number of claims for the patents held by the
firms in our sample is 23.43 with small differences across groups. The average patent family
size is 5.24. However measures which are correlates to patent value are of highest interest.
Interestingly, we observe significant differences in the average number of forward citations
per patent, which are highest for Computer Software firms with 7.32 compared to 5.14 for
Internet Services and 4.60 for Internet Software firms. Similarly, the average proportion of
firms’ portfolios that is made up of highly cited patents (7 or more citations received) is
highest in Computer Software, as is the average across portfolios of the number of citations
received per claim. While it is tempting to interpret these as evidence of higher average
quality or value of patents in the Computer Software segment compared to Internet Services
or Internet Software, it is important to recognize that some of this variation may simply
reflect differences across segments in the nature of technology or citation practices, and most
importantly, in the size of the population of potentially citing patents.17
       Finally, Table 6 summarizes our dependent variable in the multivariate analysis of Section
4 (the time between the IPO and the delisting of a firm) within different categorizations of
important independent variables at the IPO date. Comparing the average duration for firms
which filed at least one patent (opposed to firms which did not apply for a patent in the
US) we find that patenting is associated with longer survival times. The same is true when
distinguishing firms which obtained venture capital funding prior to their IPO with firms
which did not. Having obtained venture capital financing is also positively related to the
duration of the listing period on the NASDAQ. Finally, we report financial characteristics
like operating income and total assets when going public. We categorize these variables in the
quartiles of their respective distribution and find that both influence survival chances. The
relation between operating income and survival time is straightforward: Firms generating
  16
     It is possible that these differences are a consequence of differences in firm age. However,
the correlation coefficient between the number of USPTO patent applications and the firm
age when going public is 0.06 and not significant.
  17
     Interestingly, though, these differences do not appear to be driven by the age of firms and
the age of their patents. Since older patents can be cited for a longer period of time than
younger patents, they ought on average to receive more citations. However, the correlation
coefficient between the number of citations received and firm age when going public is 0.03
and not significant.


                                                15
Table 5: Mean values of major patent characteristics of firms who applied for at least
one published patent application at the USPTO, EPO, or JPO. Firms without any
patenting activities are excluded from the computation of average values. (+ indicates
that statistics are computed only for issued USPTO patents since the number of claims
is not reported for published applications.)

 Patent                                  Internet     Internet     Computer
 Characteristics                         Services     Software     Software          Total
                                          (n=74)       (n=42)       (n=35)          (n=151)
 Share of firms with 0 applications         0.65         0.51         0.45            0.58
 USPTO applications                         4.92         9.62        12.29            7.93
 USPTO grants                               4.28         9.14        10.91            7.17
 EPO applications                           2.86         3.00         2.94            2.92
 EPO grants                                 1.79         2.19         1.23            1.79
 JPO applications                           0.28         0.60         0.31            0.38
 JPO grants                                 0.23         0.30         0.23            0.25
 Share of international patentees           0.64         0.57         0.54            0.60
 Family size at USPTO                       4.89         5.36         5.86            5.24
 USPTO claims+                             22.42        23.91        25.00           23.43
 Cites per patent                           4.60         5.14         7.32            5.39
 Share of patents with ≥ 7 cites            0.21         0.27         0.35            0.26
 Cites per claim+                          0.50         0.56          0.64            0.55


income in the top quartiles tend to exhibit longer survival times than firms from lower quar-
tiles. The relation between assets reported when going public and survival is more complex.
On average, we observe a U-shaped relation with firms belonging to the top and the lowest
quartiles having longer survival times than firms from the middle quartiles. However, firms
which delisted their shares due to bankruptcy exhibit longer survival times if their reported
assets lie in the 2nd quartile. In order to disentangle the effects of the different independent
variables we conduct a multivariate survival analysis based on the Cox Proportional Hazards
model in the following Section.




                                              16
Table 6: Mean time until delisting. Table entries are the mean time (in years) until
delisting broken down by different characteristics of firms. Categories are defined by
the values of independent variables as of the IPO date. Note that the table is based
only on the 225 firms which were delisted from the NASDAQ within the sample period.

 Variable                       Merged Firms      Delisted Firms          Total
                                Duration  Obs     Duration   Obs      Duration  Obs
 Patents
 At least one patent applica-    2.14      48        2.59     33        2.32     81
 tion
 No patent application           2.01      88        2.32     56        2.13     144

 Venture Capital
 VC funding obtained             2.25      46        2.54     40        2.39      86
 No VC funding obtained          1.95      90        2.32     49        2.08     139

 Operating Income
 1st Quartile                    1.74      40        2.11     29        1.89     69
 2nd Quartile                    1.94      36        2.31     25        2.09     61
 3rd Quartile                    2.27      27        2.77     28        2.52     55
 4th Quartile                    2.37      33        2.67      7        2.43     40

 Total Assets at IPO
 1st Quartile                    2.25      36        2.44     24        2.33     60
 2nd Quartile                    1.92      36        2.56     23        2.17     59
 3rd Quartile                    1.91      38        2.33     17        2.04     55
 4th Quartile                    2.17      26        2.33     25        2.25     51

 Cash and Short-Term In-
 vestments at IPO
 1st Quartile                    2.02      25        2.56     21        2.26     46
 2nd Quartile                    2.05      33        2.41     26        2.21     59
 3rd Quartile                    2.05      59        2.39     22        2.14     81
 4th Quartile                    2.10      19        2.32     20        2.21     39




                                         17
4        Multivariate Survival Analysis
We now proceed to analyze the influence of various firm characteristics, specifically financial
data and patent holdings, on firm survival.


4.1         Methodology
In order to analyze the determinants of firm survival we employ a simple hazard model where
we consider survival time as a nonnegative random variable T .18 A basic concept for the
analysis of survival times is the hazard function λ(t), which is defined as the limit

                                             P (t ≤ T < t + ∆t | T ≥ t)
                              λ(t) = lim
                                      ∆t→0              ∆t


       and measures the instantaneous failure rate at time t given that the individual survives
until t. In the following, different survival models are estimated where the hazard function
depends on a set of covariates x0 = (x1 , . . . , xp ) that influence the survival time T .
       The reference model for multivariate survival analysis is Cox’s proportional hazard (PH)
model (Cox 1972) where the hazard rate is assumed to be the product

                     λ(t, x) = λ0 (t) exp(x1 β1 + . . . + xp βp ) = λ0 (t) exp(x0 β).



    In this model the baseline hazard rate λ0 (t) remains unspecified and, through the ex-
ponential link function, the covariates x act multiplicatively on the hazard rate. We use
a specification which includes both time-variant regressors xit like the quarterly operating
income or sales and also time-invariant regressors like firm characteristics at the IPO and the
patent characteristics xj . Hence, the specification we have to estimate is of the form

                                  λ(t, x) = λ0 (t) exp(xj βj + xit βi ).



       As noted above, we are able to observe different modes of exit from the sample: firms
can either be delisted as a result of bankruptcy or minimal market value, or cease trading
as a result of a merger or takeover. We therefore report estimation results from both a
pooled model that does not distinguish between different outcomes, as well as a competing
risks model that explicitly takes into account the different modes of exit.19 Schary (1991)
emphasizes important economic differences between different forms of exit and argues for a
  18
     Recall that the survival time is the defined as the time between the first listing of a firm
and the discontinuation of share-trading at the NASDAQ.
  19
     Results from alternative parametric estimations are similar to the results from our Cox
PH models. Results from log-logistic specifications of the competing risks survival models
are not reported but can be obtained from the authors upon request.


                                                   18
separation of exit types when studying firm survival.


4.2      Results
The results of our multivariate estimations are reported in Tables 8 through 10 at the end of
the paper. Table 7 gives descriptive statistics for the regressors.
   In Table 8 results are reported for pooled and competing risks models for two different
sets of explanatory variables. The first specification (left part of Table 8) contains only firm-
specific characteristics, the level of the NASDAQ composite index in the quarter preceding
the IPO, and the dummy variables indicating whether a firms from the different segments
have filed at least one patent application or not. In the second specification (right part of
Table 8) we control for characteristics of firms’ patent portfolios using the variables described
above.
   Column (1) of Table 8 contains the estimation results from the pooled model, which
does not distinguish between different exit modes. Large and strongly significant effects are
estimated for sales, total assets, cash burn rate, the level of the NASDAQ composite index
and the no-patent dummies. Unsurprisingly, firms with higher sales exhibit higher survival
probabilities. An additional $10MM per quarter in sales (sample average of $21.96MM)
increases the probability of survival by about 2%. Moreover, we find that our cash burn
rate measure is a strongly significant determinant of firm survival with high cash burn rates
associated with a substantially increased hazard rate. Curiously, the small but strongly
significant effect of total assets at the time of IPO indicates that firms that were able to raise
larger amounts of capital were somewhat more likely to exit.
   Older firms have a lower risk of failure, with an additional year of pre-IPO existence
increasing the probability of survival by about 3%, though the estimated coefficient is not
significant. The results for level of the NASDAQ composite index are also interesting, and
confirm previous findings. Firms that went public during periods of higher market valua-
tions for high-tech firms have markedly lower survival chances. The estimated coefficient
implies that an additional 1000 points on the NASDAQ at the time of IPO would reduce the
probability of survival by almost 30%. Not having applied for any patents is also a strong
determinant of failure. Firms that filed at least one patent application have a 34% lower
probability of exit relative to baseline.
   Controls for industry segment show very large (and for Internet Services firms, highly
significant) differences in the hazard rates. Firms in Internet Services are twice as likely to
exit via a merger as firms in Computer Software. However, we find no significant effect for
firms in Internet Software compared to the reference group.
   The results from our pooled model conceal some interesting differences across modes of
exit from the sample. Results from the competing risks model which distinguishes between
delistings due to acquisition or merger of the firm and delistings due to business failure




                                               19
(Columns (2) and (3) of Table 8) are revealing.20
       While the effect of the operating profits was — somewhat surprisingly — not statistically
significant in the pooled risks specification, the competing risks specification clearly shows
that this result is due to two offsetting effects. The estimated effect of operating profits is
positive and significant for firms that have merged or been acquired since their IPO, but
negative and significant for firms whose shares have been delisted due to business failure.
Moreover, we also observe different effects for the dummy variable indicating whether firms
were venture capital backed prior to their IPO. While venture-backed firms are much more
likely to exit via merger/acquisition (Column 2), they exhibit lower (albeit insignificantly
different from baseline) hazard rates with regard to a delisting due to business failure (Column
3). Firms that were older at the time of their IPO have a marginally significantly lower
hazard rate for being delisted due to business failure, with no effect on the hazard of exiting
via merger/acquisition. Turning to the effect of the total assets and the share of tangible
assets of the total assets reported by a firm at the time of IPO, very substantial differences
are apparent in the hazards for different modes of exit. No statistically significant effect
is found on the hazard of exit via merger/acquisition, however a significant effect of small
magnitude is found for the hazard of delisting due to business failure. Similarly, the cash burn
rate variable has markedly different effects for different modes of exit: there is no significant
impact on the hazard for exit via merger/acquisition, but a very strong effect on the hazard
for exit via delisting. Puzzlingly, the effect of total assets is positive: having another $100MM
at the time of IPO (compared to the sample average of $126MM raises the likelihood of exit
through business failure by 0.1%). However, firms reporting higher shares of tangibles assets
compared to the total amount of assets reported at the IPO have a significantly lower risk of
failure due to bankruptcy.
       The effects described above remain largely unchanged once the variables characterizing
the patent portfolios held by these firms are introduced (see right part of Table 8). In the
pooled risks model (Column 4) estimated hazard ratios on most of the firm characteristics
are very similar in magnitude. Firms which were younger, were not venture-backed, were less
profitable, had higher assets, and IPO’d when the NASDAQ was at a higher level were less
likely to survive. Very similar differences between firms that exited as a result of business
failure and firms that were merged/acquired are also apparent. Introducing the patent port-
folio characteristics has only a small effect on the “no patents” coefficients, which become
somewhat smaller in magnitude.
       Among the patent portfolio variables, only the total number of patent applications filed
at the USPTO is a significant determinant of firm survival. Applying for one more patent
lowers the probability of exit by almost 5% in the pooled risks model. A marked difference
in this effect is seen in the competing risks model: firms with more patent applications had
  20
    A formal test of whether exits to different states are behaviorally distinct is presented
in the Appendix. The null hypothesis of proportionality of cause-specific hazards is strongly
rejected χ2 (11) = 327.26 for the models in columns (1) through (3), and χ2 (16) = 344.07 for
the models in columns (4) through (6).

                                                20
a 10% lower hazard of exiting via merger/acquisition, but no significant effect is seen on the
hazard of exiting via delisting.21
       Disappointingly in the light of evidence on correlation between patent quality measures
and patent value in other contexts, no significant effects for the variables describing char-
acteristics of the patent portfolios beyond the number of applications were found in the
pooled risks model. The same is true for the competing risks model (Columns 5 and 6 of
Table 8) with one interesting exception. Having a portfolio with a higher fraction of highly
cited patents had a positive and marginally significant effect on the probability of exiting via
merger/acquisition. We (cautiously) interpret this as evidence that highly cited patents are
a particularly valuable asset, or a signal that the exiting firm’s technology/business model
is high quality. (Though the inverse effect is found on the hazard of being delisted due to
business failure, this effect was not significant.)
       Turning to the issue of Business Method Patents (defined as patents filed in USPTO
Class 705), Tables 9 and 10 present results from re-estimating the models of Table 8 columns
(4) to (6) with a distinction drawn between “705” patents and “non-705” patents. Patents
held or applied for by the firms in the sample were divided into two groups, those with
USPC class 705 (“Data Processing: financial, business practice, management, or cost/price
determination”) appearing anywhere in the list of patent classes, and those where 705 ap-
peared nowhere.22 Panel I of Table 9 repeats the estimation, but with the patent portfolio
characteristics computed only from the non-705 patents; in Panel II the patent variables are
constructed only from the Class 705 patents.
       The estimated hazard ratios in Panel I are almost identical to those obtained in Table 8.
The new “no patents” dummy has statistically significant coefficients reflecting the findings
from Table 8. In Panel II, where the non-705 patents have been removed from consideration,
the “no patents” dummy loses significance, and the estimated effect of number of patent
applications falls essentially to zero. We conclude, therefore, that the Class 705 patents seem
to have very little effect on the survival of firms, with the possible exception of patents with
a high number of citations received per claim. The coefficient on this variable implies a
a large, positive, and strongly significant estimated effect on the probability of exiting via
merger/acquisition: raising citations per claim by one unit (compared to a sample average of
0.23) increases the hazard of exit via merger by almost 80%. Note that there is no significant
effect of this variable on the hazard of exiting via delisting.
       Table 10 evaluates differences between Class 705 and non-705 patents somewhat differ-
ently. Here the specification of the model is expanded to include two sets of patent portfolio
  21
     In their analysis of 429 Finnish M&A-transactions, Hyytinen et al. (2005) find that the
probability of being acquired by a domestic firm decreases with the number of European
patents held by the target. However, the probability of an acquisition by a foreign firm
increases with the number of patents.
  22
     This is slightly more expansive definition of a Business Method Patent, capturing an
additional 55 patents beyond the 137 that have 705 as their primary USPC class. It does
not, however, capture any patents that have been carefully worded to avoid the extra scrutiny
applied by the USPTO to business methods applications since 2000.


                                                21
characteristics: those computed from the applications in the Class 705 category, and those
computed from the applications outside class 705. Again, separating out the Class 705 patents
has little effect on the results. Estimated hazard ratios on all the firm characteristics are very
similar to those obtained previously, and as in Table 9, the only strongly significant impact
of Class 705 patents is the large positive coefficient on citations per claim in the competing
risks model.



5     Conclusion
Many new enterprises were created in the 1990s based on innovation in internet-enabled
business models and supporting software technologies. Some of these firms took advantage of
the option opened up by changing legal doctrine to protect their competitive position by filing
patent applications on their inventions. The 356 newly-listed firms studied here collectively
filed at least 1198 US patent applications, however these applications were generated by
only 42% of the firms in the sample. Our results suggest that the firms that were unable or
unwilling to seek patent protection were much less likely to survive the collapse of the dot.com
bubble after 2001. After controlling for age of the enterprise, sales, assets, profitability and
liquidity, as well as stock market valuations and venture capital backing prior to their IPO, we
find that firms with no patent applications had a much higher hazard of exiting the sample.
This is true both for the firms that exited as a result of being delisted from the NASDAQ
due to apparent business failure, and for those that exited as a consequence of a merger or
acquisition (which presumably reflects higher value of the firm’s assets in a different corporate
context.)
    Of course, these estimated effects may not just represent the value of patents as a compet-
itive asset in these markets. The estimated positive association between patenting and firm
survival may also reflect a correlation between patenting and the underlying quality of the
firm’s products, business model, management, and other intangible assets. But it suggests
a significant role for patents in driving industry dynamics in these technologies, especially
within Internet Software. Puzzlingly, though applying for additional patents is associated
with lower probability of exit, conventional measures of the quality or value of the patents
held by a firm have little explanatory power in our regressions, though we find a hint that
that highly cited patents may be an attractive asset for acquirers.
    Interestingly for the debate about business method patents, we find that they have very
little impact on survival compared to patents classified in other classes. There is one intriguing
exception to this general result: firms which hold business method patents that attract more
forward citations per claim appear to be more attractive targets for merger or acquisition.
    Our estimates also point to some serious problems with adverse selection and the func-
tioning of the US capital markets in the late 1990s. Firms that raised greater amounts of
money before and during their IPO were significantly more likely to exit, particularly through
delisting due to business failure. We also find a very large and significant effect of prevail-

                                               22
ing stock market valuations preceding the IPO: firms that went public at the height of the
dot-com bubble faced much higher probabilities of being subsequently delisted.




                                            23
References
Agarwal, R. & Gort, M. (1996), ‘The Evolution of Markets and Entry, Exit and Survival of
  Firms’, Review of Economics and Statistics 78(3), 489–498.

Agarwal, R. & Gort, M. (2002), ‘Firm and Product Life Cycles and Firm Survival’, American
  Economic Review 92(2), 184–190.

Allison, J. R. & Tiller, E. H. (2003), ‘The business method patent myth’, Berkeley Technology
  Law Journal 18, 5.

Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. & Gambardella, A. (2001), Markets for Technology, MIT Press, Cam-
  bridge.

Audretsch, D. B. (1991), ‘New-Firm Survival and the Technical Regime’, Review of Economics
  and Statistics 72(3), 441–450.

Audretsch, D. B. (1995), Innovation and Industry Evolution, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Audretsch, D. B. & Lehmann, E. E. (2004), The Effects of Experience, Ownership, and
  Knowledge on IPO Survival: Evidence from the Neuer Markt, Discussion Paper 04/10,
  Diskussionspapier der Forschergruppe (Nr. 3468269275) ’Heterogene Arbeit: Positive und
  Normative Aspekte der Qualifikationsstruktur der Arbeit’, Konstanz.

Audretsch, D. B. & Mahmood, T. (1995), ‘New Firm Survival: New Results using a Hazard
  Function’, Review of Economics and Statistics 77(1), 97–103.

Beaver, W. H., McNichols, M. F. & Rhie, J.-W. (2005), ‘Have Financial Statements Become
  Less Informative? Evidence from the Abilitiy of Financial Ratios to Predict Bankruptcy’,
  Review of Accounting Studies 10, 93–122.

Bessen, J. (2005), A comment on ”Do Patents Facilitate Financing in the Software Industry?”,
  Working paper. Available on http://www.researchoninnovation.org, latest visit on
  September, 27th , 2004.

Bessen, J. & Hunt, R. M. (2004), An Empirical Look at Software Patents, Working Paper
  03-17/R, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia.

Botman, M., van der Goot, T. & van Giersbergen, N. (2004), What Determines the Survival
  of Internet IPOs?, Discussion Paper 2004/09, Department of Economics, Unversity of
  Amsterdam, Amsterdam.

Caves, R. E. (1998), ‘Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and Mobility
  of Firms’, Journal of Economic Literature 36(4), 1947–1982.

Chava, S. & Jarrow, R. A. (2004), ‘Bankruptcy Prediction with Industry Effects, Market
  versus Accounting Variables, and Reduced Form Credit Risk Models’, Review of Finance
  8(4), 537–569.


                                             24
Cockburn, I. (2001), Issues in Business Method Patents, Conference Paper, Franco-American
  Conference on Economics, Law and History of Intellectual Property Rights 2004/09, UC
  Berkeley.

Cockburn, I. & MacGarvie, M. (2006), Entry, Exit and Patenting in the Software Industry,
  Working paper no. 12563, NBER.

Conley, J. M. (2003), ‘The International Law of Business Method Patens’, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Atlanta Economic Review pp. 15–33.

Cooley, T. F. & Quadrini, V. (2001), ‘Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics’, American
  Economic Review 91(5), 1286–1310.

Cox, D. R. (1972), ‘Regression Models and Life Tables (with Discussion)’, Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 34(4), 187–220.

Dreyfuss, R. C. D. (2000), ‘Are Business Method Patents Bad for Business’, Santa Clara
  Computer and High Technology Law Journal 16, 263–278.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R. (2004), ‘New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates’, Journal
  of Financial Economics 73, 229–269.

Gambardella, A. & Giarratana, M. S. (2006), Innovations for Products, Innovations for Li-
  censing: Patents and Downstream Assets in the Software Security Industry, Working paper.
  Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=935210.

Gans, J., Hsu, D. & Stern, S. (2002), ‘When Does Start-Up Innovation Spur the Gale of
  Creative Destruction?’, RAND Journal of Economics 33(4), 571–586.

Geroski, P. A. (1995), ‘What Do We Know about Entry’, International Journal of Industrial
  Organization 14(4), 421–440.

Hall, B. (2003), Business Method Patents, Innovation and Policy, Working paper no. 9717,
  NBER.

Hall, B. & MacGarvie, M. (2006), The Private Value of Software Patents, Working paper no.
  12195, NBER.

Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F. & Vopel, K. (1999), ‘Citation Frequency and the Value of
  Patented Innovation’, Review of Economics and Statistics 81(3), 511–515.

Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. & Vopel, K. (2003), ‘Citations, Family Size, Opposition and the of
  Value of Patent Rights’, Research Policy 32(8), 1343–1363.

Honjo, Y. (2000), ‘Business Failure of New Firms: An Empirical Analysis using Multiplicative
  Hazards Model’, International Journal of Industrial Organization 18(4), 557–574.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992), ‘Entry, Exits, and Firm Dynamics in the Long Run Equilibrium’,
  Econometrica 60(5), 1127–1150.

                                            25
Hunt, R. (2001), ‘You can patent that? Are patents on computer programs and business
  methods good for the new economy’, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review
  pp. 5–15.

Hunter, S. (2003), Have business method patents gotten a bum rap? Some empirical evidence,
  Working Paper 182, Center for eBusiness@MIT.

Hyytinen, A., Pajarinen, M. & Ali-Yrkko, J. (2005), ‘Does patenting increase the proba-
  bility of being acquired? evidence from cross-border and domestic acquisitions’, Applied
  Financial Economics 15(14), 1007–1017.

Jain, B. A. & Kini, O. (2000), ‘Does the Presence of Venture Capitalists Improve the Survival
  Profile of IPO Firms?’, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 27(9-10), 1139–1183.

Jovanovic, B. (1982), ‘Selection and the Evolution of Industry’, Econometrica 50(3), 649–670.

Kalbfleisch, J. D. & Prentice, R. L. (2002), The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data, 2
  edn, Wiley, New York.

Kaplan, E. & Meier, P. (1958), ‘Nonparametric Estimation from Incomplete Observations’,
  Journal of the American Statistical Association 53, 457–481.

Kauffman, R. & Wang, B. (2003), Duration in the digital economy, in R. Sprague, ed., ‘Pro-
  ceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science’, IEEE Comput-
  ing Society.

Lanjouw, J. O. & Schankerman, M. (2001), ‘Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A Window
  on Competition’, RAND Journal of Economics 32(1), 129–151.

Lerner, J. (2002), ‘Where does State Street Lead? A First Look at Finance Patents, 1971-
  2000’, Journal of Finance 57(4), 901–930.

Lerner, J. & Zhu, F. (2005), What is the Impact of Software Patent Shifts?: Evidence from
  Lotus vs. Borland, Working paper no. 11168, NBER.

Mann, R. J. & Sager, T. W. (2005), Patents, venture capital, and software start-ups, Law
 and Economics Working Paper 057, The University of Texas School of Law.

Mata, J., Portugal, P. & Guimaraes, P. (1995), ‘The Survival of New Plants: Start-Up
 Conditions and Post-Entry Evolution’, International Journal of Industrial Organization
 13(4), 459–481.

Merges, R. P. (1999), ‘As many as six impossible patents before breakfast: Property rights for
 business concepts and patent system reform’, Berkeley Technology Law Journal 14, 577–
 615.

Meurer, M. (2003), ‘Business method patents and patent floods’, Washington University
 Journal of Law and Policy 8, 309–340.


                                             26
Narendranathan, W. & Stewart, M. (1991), ‘Testing the Proportionality of Cause-Specific
  Hazards in Competing Risk Models’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 53, 331–
  340.

Noel, M. D. & Schankermann, M. A. (2006), ”strategic patenting and software innovation,
  Cepr discussion paper no. 5701, CEPR.

Palepu, K. G. (1986), ‘Predicting Takeover Targets: A Methodological and Empirical Anal-
  ysis’, Journal of Accounting and Economics 8, 3–35.

Schary, M. A. (1991), ‘The Probability of Exit’, RAND Journal of Economics 22, 339–353.

Scotchmer, S. (2005), Innovation and Incentives, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Seguin, P. J. & Smoller, M. M. (1997), ‘Share price and mortality: An empirical evaluation
  of newly listed Nasdaq stocks’, Journal of Financial Economics 45, 333–363.

Shumway, T. (2001), ‘Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple Hazard Model’,
  Journal of Business 74, 101–124.

Suarez, F. F. & Utterback, J. (1993), ‘Innovation, Competition, and Industry Structure’,
  Research Policy 22, 1–21.

Suarez, F. F. & Utterback, J. (1995), ‘Dominant Designs and the Survival of Firms’, Strategic
  Management Journal 16, 415–430.

Sutton, J. (1997), ‘Gibrat’s Legacy’, Journal of Economic Literature 35(1), 40–59.

USPTO (1999), Automated Financial or Management Data Processing Methods (Business
  Methods), White paper. Also available as http://www.uspto.gov/web/menu/busmethp/
  whitepaper.pdf, latest visit on September, 27th , 2004.

Wagner, S. (forthcoming 2007), ‘Business Methods Patents in Europe and their Strategic
 Use – Evidence from Franking Device Manufacturers’, Economics of Innovation and New
 Technology 16(6).




                                             27
A      Test of Proportionality of Competing Risk Spec-
       ification
Narendranathan & Stewart (1991) provide a test of whether exits to different states are
behaviorally distinct (rather than simply incidental) for continuous time proportional hazards
models. This is a test of the hypothesis that the cause-specific hazards are all proportional
to one another (i.e. that all parameters except the intercepts are equal across the hazards).
The test statistic T S proposed by Narendranathan & Stewart (1991) is given by

                                                          X
                          T S = 2[ln(LCR ) − ln(LSR ) −        nj ln(pj )]                    (1)
                                                           j

    where ln(LRC ) is the maximised log-likelihood from the competing risk model (the sum
of those from the component risk models), ln(LSR ) is the maximised log-likelihood from the
                                                                            P
single-risk model, nj is the number of exits to state j and pj = nj / j nj , where there are
j = 1, . . . , J destination states. The test-statistic is distributed Chi-squared with degrees of
freedom equal to the number of restrictions.

    For our basic models reported in Table 8, we can reject the null hypothesis of risk pro-
portionality at 1% of significance both for the models not including patent characteristics
(T S = 327.27) as well as for the model containing patent characteristics (T S = 344.07).
Hence, we reject the hypothesis that the different forms of exit are behaviorally equal.

    For our models containing only the set of no-705-patents and the set of 705-patent (as
reported in Table 9), we can reject the null hypothesis of risk proportionality at 1% of sig-
nificance for both specifications (T S = 343.01 and T S = 342.07). Hence, we reject that the
different the hypothesis that the different forms of exit are behaviorally equal.

    For our models distinguishing between no-705-patents and 705-patent (as reported in
Table 10), we can reject the null hypothesis of risk proportionality at 1% of significance
(T S = 349.09). Hence, we reject that the different the hypothesis that the different forms of
exit are behaviorally equal.




                                               28
                          Table 7: Descriptive statistics on variables used in the regressions.
     Variable                                                          Obs Mean Std. Dev.          Min       Max
     Age at IPO (years)                                               3671 6.013          4.481      0      29.351
     Dummy for Venture-backed                                         3671 0.615            .        0         1
     Operating Income ($10MM)                                         3671 -0.832         3.244   -50.659   10.729
     Sales ($10MM)                                                    3671 2.196          3.841      0      36.476
     Total Assets at IPO ($100MM)                                     3671 1.260          3.015    0.032    46.666
     Share of Cash and Short-Term Investments in total assets         3671 0.641          0.280      0       0.987
     Share of Property, Plant and Equipment in total assets           3671 0.073          0.090      0       0.672
     Level of the NASDAQ index prior to IPO                           3671 2.687          0.721    1.691     4.428

     Dummy for zero patent applications                             3671   0.537         .          0         1
     Dummy for any international applications                       3671   0.276         .          0         1

     No. of applications                                            3671   3.984      11.438        0        152




29
     No. of applications outside class 705                          3671   3.302      10.928        0        152
     No. of applications in class 705                               3671   0.682       2.573        0        25

     Average forward citations per claim                            3671   0.234      0.736         0       7.382
     Average forward citations per claim (non-705)                  3671   0.205      0.741         0       8.292
     Average forward citations per claim (class 705)                3671   0.086      0.351         0       5.820

     No. of patents with 7 or more forward citations                3671   1.079      3.888         0        56
     No. of patents with 7 or more forward citations (non-705)      3671   0.873      3.674         0        56
     No. of patents with 7 or more forward citations (class 705)    3671   0.206      1.096         0        16

     Average family size                                            3671   2.508      5.037         0       45.257
     Average family size (non-705)                                  3671   2.048      4.407         0       45.257
     Average family size (class 705)                                3671   1.310      4.026         0       34.929
     Internet Services                                              3671   0.553        .           0         1
     Internet Software                                              3671   0.235        .           0         1
     Computer Software                                              3671   0.213        .           0         1
Table 8: Results from Cox Proportional Hazards Regression. Estimates from pooled
and Competing Risks Specification are presented. Z-Values in parentheses. ** 1%, *
5%, + 10% significant.


                                 Pooled      Competing Risks       Pooled     Competing Risks
                                   (1)         (2)     (3)           (4)       (5)      (6)
 Variables                                   Merged  Delisted                 Merged  Delisted

 Age at IPO                       0.9735      0.9832     0.9388     0.9753     0.9867    0.9344
                                   (1.46)     (0.75)    (1.89)+     (1.37)     (0.60)    (1.99)*
 Venture backed                   1.0890      1.4421     0.7853     1.0866     1.4082    0.8042
                                   (0.60)    (1.93)+      (1.07)    (0.58)    (1.79)+     (0.96)
 Operating income                 0.9998      1.0132     0.9961     0.9994     1.0127    0.9962
                                   (0.08)     (1.60)     (2.44)*    (0.29)     (1.50)    (2.39)*
 Sales                            0.9880      0.9956     0.9563     0.9879     0.9961    0.9563
                                 (3.14)**     (1.20)    (4.52)**   (3.08)**    (1.04)   (4.46)**
 Total assets at IPO              1.0760      0.9306     1.2673     1.0980     0.9577    1.2763
                                  (2.24)*     (0.67)    (4.52)**   (2.73)**    (0.41)   (4.39)**
 Share of PPE in total assets     0.6211      0.1033     3.2547     0.6141     0.1139    3.3543
                                   (0.57)     (1.56)      (1.14)    (0.58)     (1.51)     (1.14)
 Share of cash in total assets    0.9100      1.3620     0.4262     0.9901     1.5076    0.4966
                                   (0.29)     (0.69)    (1.80)+     (0.03)     (0.92)     (1.44)
 Cash burn rate                   1.0620      1.0076     1.0841     1.0587     1.0057    1.0867
                                 (4.86)**     (0.20)    (5.65)**   (4.43)**    (0.20)   (5.03)**
 NASDAQ prior to IPO              1.3292      1.2338     1.3979     1.3474     1.2561    1.4271
                                  (2.56)*     (1.50)    (1.80)+    (2.65)**    (1.62)   (1.86)+

 At least one patent              0.6364      0.6098    0.6725     0.7331     0.6622    0.8706
 application                     (2.99)**    (2.59)**   (1.58)     (1.37)     (1.41)    (0.38)

 No. of US patent applications                                     0.9451      0.9016   0.9990
                                                                   (2.03)*    (2.37)*   (0.03)
 At least one international                                        1.0460      1.0812   1.0091
 patent application                                                 (0.19)     (0.26)   (0.02)
 Average cites per claim                                           0.9919      1.0807   0.7727
                                                                    (0.07)     (0.67)   (0.84)
 No. of patents with                                               1.0604      1.1718   0.9231
 >6 forward cites                                                   (0.84)    (1.71)+   (0.64)
 Average patent family size                                        1.0141      1.0249   0.9873
                                                                    (0.50)     (0.80)   (0.23)

 Internet Services                2.1047      2.2390     2.0358     1.9616    2.1382    1.8213
                                 (3.18)**    (2.73)**   (1.81)+    (2.82)**   (2.52)*   (1.48)
 Internet Software                1.5783      1.6478     1.5431     1.5591    1.6263    1.5569
                                 (1.79)+      (1.55)     (1.02)    (1.72)+     (1.50)   (1.00)

 Observations                      3671       3671       3671        3671      3671      3671
 Firms                             356         356        356        356        356       356
 Exits                              225        136         89         225       136        89
 Log Likelihood                  -1108.66    -689.47    -394.29    -1104.93   -684.55   -392.59




                                            30
Table 9: Results from Cox Proportional Hazards Regression. Estimates from pooled
and Competing Risks Specifications. Note: Patent characteristics used in Panels I and
II are computed from different sets of patents. Z-Values in parentheses ** 1%, * 5%,
+ 10% significant.

                               I: No 705 Patents                   II: Only 705 Patents
                         Pooled      Competing Risks           Pooled      Competing Risks
                           (1)         (2)       (3)             (4)         (5)      (6)
 Variables                            Merged  Delisted                     Merged   Delisted

 Age at IPO               0.9713      0.9804         0.9362     0.9750     0.9836     0.9443
                          (1.60)      (0.88)         (1.97)*     (1.38)     (0.73)   (1.76)+
 Venture backed           1.1042      1.4486         0.8043     1.0962     1.4574     0.7809
                          (0.69)     (1.95)+          (0.96)     (0.64)    (1.98)*     (1.08)
 Operating income         0.9991      1.0111         0.9961     0.9998     1.0138     0.9962
                          (0.43)      (1.30)         (2.45)*     (0.09)     (1.57)    (2.43)*
 Sales                    0.9883      0.9969         0.9554     0.9882     0.9964     0.9550
                         (3.02)**     (0.84)        (4.46)**   (2.98)**     (0.92)   (4.56)**
 Total assets at IPO      1.1015      0.9396         1.2859     1.0785     0.9246     1.2672
                         (2.80)**     (0.58)        (4.54)**    (2.22)*     (0.73)   (4.44)**
 Share of PPE in to-      0.4589      0.0639         3.2051     0.4839     0.0618     3.4147
 tal assets
                         (0.97)      (1.98)*        (1.18)     (0.91)      (1.99)*   (1.25)
 Share of cash in to-    0.8072      1.1220         0.4487     0.6950      0.9502    0.4132
 tal assets
                          (0.81)     (0.34)         (1.94)+     (1.39)     (0.15)     (2.15)*
 Cash burn rate           1.0548     1.0046          1.0793     1.0566     1.0056     1.0782
                         (4.28)**    (0.21)         (5.20)**   (4.43)**    (0.21)    (5.30)**
 NASDAQ prior to          1.3402     1.2500          1.4099     1.3271     1.2291     1.3935
 IPO
                         (2.59)**    (1.57)         (1.79)+    (2.51)*     (1.45)    (1.78)+
 At least one patent      0.5843     0.4820          0.8212    0.7122      0.4968     1.4868
 application
                         (2.21)*     (2.25)*        (0.51)     (1.08)      (1.62)    (0.74)
 No. of US patent        0.9439      0.8966         1.0007     1.0163      1.0401    0.9144
 applications
                         (1.84)+     (2.11)*        (0.02)     (0.24)      (0.51)    (0.49)
 At least one interna-    1.0208     1.0544         0.9376     0.7803      0.7943    0.7578
 tional
 patent application      (0.10)      (0.21)         (0.19)     (1.36)      (1.01)    (0.89)
 Average cites per       0.9833      1.0609         0.6510     1.6112      1.7599    0.2049
 claim
                         (0.11)      (0.38)         (0.74)     (1.81)+     (2.27)*   (1.04)
 No. of patents with     1.1009      1.2750         0.8657      1.0066     1.0085    1.5860
 >6 cites
                         (0.63)      (1.22)         (0.55)     (0.03)      (0.04)    (0.81)
 Average patent fam-     0.9931      1.0065         0.9777     0.9519      0.9444    0.9808
 ily size
                          (0.24)     (0.20)         (0.42)      (1.38)     (1.29)     (0.30)
 Internet Services        2.0813     2.2795         1.8954      2.3371     2.5743    2.2549
                         (3.03)**   (2.70)**        (1.57)     (3.60)**   (3.18)**   (2.02)*
 Internet Software        1.6407     1.7264         1.5318      1.5806     1.6637    1.6174
                         (1.92)+    (1.68)+         (0.98)     (1.77)+     (1.56)     (1.09)

 Observations              3671       3671           3671        3671       3671      3671
 Firms                      356        356            356         356        356       356
 Exits                      225        136            89          225        136       89
 Log Likelihoood         -1102.20    -682.38        -392.05    -1106.88    -686.97   -393.03
                                               31
Table 10: Results from Cox Proportional Hazards Regression. Estimates from pooled
and Competing Risks Specifications. Note: Z-Values in parentheses. ** 1%, * 5%, +
10% significant.

                                                Pooled          Competing Risks
                                                  (1)             (2)     (3)
 Variables                                                      Merged  Delisted

 Age at IPO                                      0.9707          0.9792     0.9389
                                                 (1.63)          (0.92)    (1.90)+
 Venture backed                                  1.1123          1.4460     0.7821
                                                 (0.74)         (1.94)+      (1.06)
 Operating income                                0.9992          1.0115     0.9962
                                                 (0.36)          (1.32)     (2.43)*
 Sales                                           0.9881          0.9968     0.9544
                                                (3.04)**         (0.84)    (4.51)**
 Total assets at IPO                             1.1055          0.9393     1.2819
                                                (2.85)**         (0.58)    (4.40)**
 Share of PPE in total assets                    0.4437          0.0651     3.1755
                                                 (1.01)         (1.96)*      (1.16)
 Share of cash in total assets                   0.7588          1.0679     0.4508
                                                 (1.05)          (0.19)    (1.91)+
 Cash burn rate                                  1.0582          1.0057     1.0808
                                                (4.42)**         (0.20)    (5.04)**
 NASDAQ prior to IPO                             1.3531          1.2716     1.4228
                                                (2.66)**        (1.68)+    (1.85)+

 At least one non-705 patent application        0.8326          0.8564     0.8700
                                                 (0.76)          (0.49)    (0.36)
 At least one international application         1.1083          1.1533     1.0032
                                                 (0.43)          (0.46)    (0.01)
 No. of non-705 US applications                 0.9356          0.8743     1.0076
                                                (2.06)*         (2.43)*    (0.17)
 Average cites per claim (non-705)              0.9727          1.0379     0.6505
                                                 (0.18)          (0.24)    (0.70)
 No. of patents with >6 cites (non-705)         1.1448          1.3620     0.8341
                                                 (0.90)          (1.55)    (0.68)
 Average patent family size (non-705)           0.9967          1.0080     0.9849
                                                 (0.11)          (0.23)    (0.26)

 At least one 705 patent application             0.6066          0.3951    1.3610
                                                 (1.39)         (1.84)+    (0.51)
 No. of US patent applications in 705            1.0218          1.0621    0.8896
                                                 (0.33)          (0.84)    (0.58)
 Average cites per claim (705)                   1.6428          1.7932    0.1814
                                                (1.93)+         (2.39)*    (1.14)
 No. of 70 5 patents with >6 cites               0.9803          0.9911    1.6636
                                                 (0.10)          (0.04)    (0.85)
 Average family size (705)                       0.9802          0.9729    1.0074
                                                 (0.51)          (0.57)    (0.10)

 Internet Services                               2.0082          2.2134     1.9082
                                                (2.87)**        (2.59)**    (1.56)
 Internet Software                               1.5729          1.6710    1.5863
                                                (1.74)+           (1.56)    (1.02)
 Observations                                     3671             3671      3671
 Firms                                             356             356        356
 Exits                                             225             136        89
 Log Likelihoood                                -1101.52         -680.43   -391.12
                                           32
Table 11: Mean and median values for key financial variables in the five quarters prior
to an observed exit.
 Quarters until delisting                           4        3         2         1        0

                                                                    Merged

 Sales (in $MM)                  Mean             17.73    19.01     17.47     17.82    18.21
                                 Median           10.43    10.39      9.43     9.70      9.61

 Operating Income (in $MM)       Mean              -5.49   -4.64     -3.69     -4.34    -4.27
                                 Median            -3.83   -3.77     -3.23     -3.58    -2.78

 Cash & Short Term Investments   Mean             71.39    67.73     66.56     64.31    60.62
 (in $MM)                        Median           48.68    43.09     42.80     40.09    38.77

 Working Capital (in $MM)        Mean             62.75    56.69     58.22     52.40    52.70
                                 Median           45.68    40.06     44.11     36.83    29.16

 Quick Ratio                     Mean              4.90    4.89      5.27      4.26     4.39
                                 Median            3.79    3.53      3.76      3.29     3.20

                                                                    Delisted

 Sales (in $MM)                  Mean             17.52    17.64     16.53     15.06    14.06
                                 Median           6.92      6.66      6.24     5.44      5.33

 Operating Income (in $MM)       Mean             -13.98   -14.87   -16.81     -10.38   -14.52
                                 Median            -8.26    -5.29    -5.39      -5.02    -3.64

 Cash & Short Term Investments   Mean             75.35    62.05     48.32     39.21    41.07
 (in $MM)                        Median           21.23    14.75     9.60      2.66      2.85

 Working Capital (in $MM)        Mean             63.44    43.95     32.33     -10.83   -20.67
                                 Median           22.69    19.33     15.30     10.75     8.83

 Quick Ratio                     Mean              4.16    4.49      4.26      5.89     5.88
                                 Median            2.71    2.20      1.56      1.24     1.22




                                          33
