NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOMESTIC INSTITUTIONS AND THE BYPASS EFFECT OF FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION
Jiandong Ju
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 13148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13148

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We thank Laura Alfaro, Christian Broda, Richard Baldwin, Mihir Desai, Mick Deveraux, Fabio Ghironi,
Piere-Olivier Gourinchas, Robert Feenstra, Elhanan Helpman, Olivier Jeanne, Kala Krishna, Nuno
Limao, Maurice Obstfeld, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Kenneth Rogoff, Hui Tong, Jaume Ventura and
seminar/conference participants at NBER Summer Institute 2006, NBER Spring Meeting 2007, AEA
2007, and IMF for helpful comments and suggestions, and Chang Hong and Xuebing Yang for research
assistance. The paper reflects the personal views of the authors and do not necessarily represent those
of the IMF or its policy. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jiandong Ju and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of Financial Globalization
Jiandong Ju and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 13148
June 2007
JEL No. F21,F30,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a simple model to study the relationship between domestic institutions - financial
system, corporate governance, and property rights protection - and patterns of international capital
flows. It studies conditions under which financial globalization can be a substitute for reforms of domestic
financial system. Inefficient financial system and poor corporate governance in a country may be completely
bypassed by two-way capital flows in which domestic savings leave the country in the form of financial
capital outflows but domestic investment takes place via inward foreign direct investment. While financial
globalization always improves the welfare of a developed country with a good financial system, its
effect is ambiguous for a developing country with an inefficient financial sector/poor corporate governance.
However, the net effect for a developing country is more likely to be positive, the stronger its property
rights protection. This is consistent with the observation that developed countries are often more enthusiastic
about capital account liberalization around the world than many developing countries. A noteworthy
feature of this theory is that financial and property rights institutions can have different effects on capital
flows.
Jiandong Ju
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
jdju@ou.edu
Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund
Room 10-700
19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
and NBER
swei@imf.org

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 The Model
2.1 A Sharing Rule on Return to Physical Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7
11

3 Capital Flows with No Frictions
3.1 Financial Capital Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Foreign Direct Investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Capital Bypass Circulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12
13
14
15

4 Frictions and Capital Flows
4.1 Is There Still a Bypass Eﬀect? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 One-Way Capital Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Comparative Statics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18
20
22
24

5 Welfare Impact of Capital Flows
5.1 World Welfare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 National Welfare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1 The Country with a Weak Financial Sector .
5.2.2 The Country with a Strong Financial Sector .

27
27
29
30
32

6 Conclusions

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

33

1

1

Introduction

Cross-border capital flows have been increasing in real value at a pace of about
6 percent a year since 1980, faster than those of world GDP and trade. The
progress has been particularly rapid since 1990 (though with a temporary dip during
1997-2002). This reflects falling barriers to capital flows in many parts of the world.
Yet, the composition varies across countries. Many developing countries (e.g., China,
Malaysia, and South Africa) are net importers of foreign direct investment (FDI) on
the one hand, but net exporters of financial capital on the other. Many developed
countries (e.g., France, the United Kingdom, and the United States) do the reverse,
exporting FDI but importing financial capital.
Consider the example of China. Its large and growing current account surplus
implies that it is exporting capital on net to the rest of the world, especially to
the United States. At the same time, it is a top recipient of FDI in the world,
with an amount in excess of 50 billion US dollars in 2005.

While traditional

explanations for its large inward FDI center on China’s cheap labor and large market,
MIT political scientist Yasheng Huang (2003) suggested a novel and fascinating
hypothesis: the large volume of inward FDI is a reflection of China’s inability to
allocate its household savings eﬃciently through its financial sector, rather than
its economic strength. FDI eﬀectively serves as a tool for Chinese private firms to
circumvent the ineﬃcient domestic financial sector.1
Two-way capital flows are certainly not unique to China.

Table 1 reports

patterns of capital flows for developed countries, emerging market economies, and
other developing countries during 1990-2004 (the most recent period of rapid financial
globalization). In 2004, a typical developed country exported 1120 dollars of net
cumulative FDI per person, but imported 1382 dollars of net cumulative financial
capital per person. In the same year, a typical emerging market economy did the
1

Dooley, Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2004) also suggested that multinational firms are part
of the mechanism for a vast Chinese labor force to be employed successfully in export-oriented
sectors without being dragged down by China’s ineﬃcient financial system.

2

opposite thing: importing FDI of 1671 dollars per person, but exporting financial
capital of $5556 dollars per person. Low income developing countries (“other developing
countries”) imported both FDI and non-FDI but with a much smaller magnitude.
The same qualitative patterns hold in 1990, 1995 and 2000 though the exact dollar
amount varies.

Table 1
This paper proposes a simple theoretical framework to study the relationship
between domestic institutions - financial system eﬃciency, corporate governance,
and property rights protection - and patterns of international capital flows. Two-way
capital flows are shown to be a natural consequence of cross-country diﬀerences in
the quality of financial system and the strength of corporate governance. In other
words, financial globalization allows ineﬃcient domestic financial system and weak
corporate governance to be bypassed through a combination of inward FDI and
outward flow of financial capital. The paper studies conditions under which two-way
capital flows and the bypassing eﬀect can take place.
To highlight the role of institutions rather than risk sharing motive as a driver
for capital flows, our model assumes that everyone is risk-neutral. By introducing
into an otherwise standard neoclassic framework a financial arrangement between
entrepreneurs and investors via a financial institution, we derive a sharing rule
of capital revenue by which expected marginal product of capital is divided into
three components: interest rate, cost of financial intermediation, and cost of weak
corporate governance. This sharing rule makes explicit the possibility that a developing
country (with a scarcity of capital and a potentially high return to physical capital)
may nonetheless oﬀer a low return to financial investment/savings due to the ineﬃciency
of its financial sector and the weakness of its corporate governance. Under some
conditions, the country may experience a combination of two-way capital flows:

3

exporting savings and importing FDI at the same time. Interestingly, regardless of
the initial endowment, capital flows may always bring two countries with diﬀerent
institutions into a pattern of two-way capital flows.
In contrast to the neoclassical model (as for example in Lucas 1990), our model
also defines a notion of “eﬀective capital abundance” which determines the size of
net capital flows (while the collective quality of financial institutions and corporate
governance determines the composition of gross flows). A country is eﬀectively more
capital abundant if it has either a high ratio of physical capital to labor or a weak
property rights institution. By reducing profitability of investment, weak property
rights protection discourages inward FDI and encourages outflow of savings.
The model in this paper makes a somewhat surprising prediction: In a world
free of any barriers to international capital flows, financial capital and foreign direct
investment not only move in the opposite directions but also reinforce each other
in a way that would lead to a complete bypass of inferior financial institution
and corporate governance.

In a sense, removal of barriers to capital mobility

and reforms of domestic financial system are substitutes. We realize that this
extreme proposition of a complete bypass eﬀect may not be realistic, but believe it is
instructive nonetheless. The Modigliani-Miller theorem predicts complete substitutability
between debt and equity as forms of corporate financing in a frictionless world,
while the Coase theory predicts complete substitutability between market-based
and within-firm transactions if there is no transaction cost. Neither is realistic, but
both are considered helpful in clarifying thinking on their respective topics. In our
context, it may be realistic that an open capital account partially makes up for the
shortcomings of an inferior domestic financial system and corporate governance.
Capital account liberalization has interesting and country-specific welfare consequences.
First, from the world’s perspective, as the inferior financial institutions are bypassed,
savings in all countries are served by the best financial system, and capital is
eﬃciently allocated to equate expected marginal product of capital across all countries.

4

The word’s welfare improves unambiguously. Second, the country with a strong
financial system also gains unambiguously: not only its domestic savings will receive
a higher return, but also its financial institutions and entrepreneurs will reap greater
reward. Third, for the country with an inferior corporate governance/financial
system, however, the welfare eﬀect is not clear-cut as it involves a trade-oﬀ between
an eﬃciency gain from free capital mobility on the one hand and a revenue loss by
its financial institution and native entrepreneurs on the other. One should note,
however, the stronger the country’s property rights protection, the more likely it
would benefit from capital mobility. These theoretical predictions are consistent
with the observation that the United States and other developed countries tend to be
more enthusiastic about global capital account liberalization than many developing
countries. They are also consistent with the empirical findings, reviewed in Prasad
et al (2003) and Kose et al (2006), that the strength of domestic property rights
protection in a developing country may aﬀect its ability to benefit from financial
globalization.
This paper is related to the literature that investigates the implications of
financial market imperfection on the direction of international capital flows. A
seminal paper is Gertler and Rogoﬀ (1990) which shows that a moral hazard problem
between foreign investors and domestic entrepreneurs may cause capital to be exported
by poor countries to rich ones (contrary to the frictionless neoclassical model).
Other important papers include Gordon and Bovenberg (1996) which focuses on
asymmetric information across countries as an explanation for diﬀerences in real
interest rates, Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) which argues that better investor
protection could generate a higher interest rate, Matsuyama (2004, 2005) and Aoki,
Benigno, and Kiyotaki (2006) which study the eﬀects of international credit market
constraint on cross-country capital flows, and Stulz (2005) which studies the dual
agency problems of government and entrepreneurs in limiting the extent of financial
globalization. These papers do not study potentially distinct roles of property rights

5

protection and financial institutions, and do not endogenously generate two-way
capital flows.
Our notion that property rights and financial sector institutions could play
diﬀerent roles in determining patterns of capital flows is most closely related to
the work of Acemoglu and Johnson (2005), who, inspired by North (1981), provide
a seminal empirical contribution that unbundles property rights and contracting
institutions. The former is found to have a first-order eﬀect on long-run growth,
while the second appears to matter mainly for financial development.
Several recent papers look into the composition of capital flows. Goldstein and
Razin (2006) and Razin and Sadka (2007) use information asymmetry to highlight
a trade-oﬀ between foreign direct investment and portfolio investment. Caballero,
Farhi, and Gourinchas (2005) show that an exogenously specified low capacity to
generate financial assets in a country reduces the interest rate in that country.
Antras, Desai, and Foley (2006) relate the choice of a multinational firm between
licensing a technology to foreign producers versus engaging in FDI to the strength
of property rights protection in the host country (though they treat property rights
protection and financial development as the same thing). Using a dynamic general
equilibrium model with an incomplete asset market, Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull
(2007) show that a country with a high level of financial development may have a
negative net foreign asset position but a still positive position in foreign productive
asset. These papers still do not distinguish property rights protection and financial
institutions, and do not investigate the conditions under which global capital flows
may lead to a complete bypass of ineﬃcient financial system and poor corporate
governance.
Several empirical papers links domestic institutions to international capital flows,
including Wei (2000a and 2000b) and Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2005).
These papers do not explore separate roles of diﬀerent institutions and do not study
the bypass eﬀect of capital flows. Two recent empirical papers are particularly

6

relevant for the current paper. Wei (2006) investigates separate roles of property
rights protection and financial development in the composition of capital flows. He
finds that, conditional on the quality of property rights protection, more financial
development tends to reduce inward FDI but increase gross inflows of financial
capital. Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2006) find that aggregate capital appears
to flow “upstream,” i.e., from poor to rich countries, while FDI does go “downstream,”
from rich to poor countries. The theory developed in this paper may provide a
starting point to explain these empirical patterns.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the model. Sections 3
studies the benchmark case with zero barrier to capital flows and shows a complete
bypass of inferior domestic financial system through two-way capital flows as the
unique equilibrium. Section 4 then extends the model to allow for a variety of
frictions and discusses comparative statics. Section 5 analyses the welfare consequences
of international capital flows. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

2

The Model

Let us start with a closed economy. Two factors, labor and capital, are used
for producing a good which is used for both consumption and investment. The
endowments of labor and capital in the country are L and K. The production
function of the good exhibits constant returns to scale and takes the form of y =
F (l, z) where l and z are labor and capital usages by the firm, respectively. The
wage rate and the interest rate (the return to financial capital) are denoted by w
and r, respectively. The product market is perfectly competitive and the good price
is normalized to one.
The production process is assumed to take two periods. There are K number
of capitalists, each born with 1 unit of capital and facing an endogenous choice of
becoming either an entrepreneur or a financial investor at the beginning of the first

7

period. If a capitalist chooses to be an entrepreneur, she would manage one project,
investing her 1 unit of capital (labeled as internal capital) and raising x amount
of additional capital (external capital) from financial investors, possibly through a
financial institution. The total investment in the firm is the sum of internal and
external capital, or z = 1+x. Let N denote the number of firms (or entrepreneurs) in
the market. Since all firms are symmetric, the economy-wide capital stock K = N z.
Full employment of labor would ensure that each firm hires l = z (L/K) amount of
labor.
After the investment decision is made in the first period, production and consumption
take place in the second period. Let depreciation rate be zero. If the project
succeeds, the gross return to one unit of capital, R, and the wage rate, w, are
determined by

R = 1 + Fk0 (l, z) = 1 + Fk0 (1, z/l) = 1 + Fk0 (1, K/L) and w = Fl0 (1, K/L)

(1)

For each firm, if the project succeeds, the value of its gross output is equal to the
total factor payment:
£
¤
F (l, z) + z = Fl0 (1, z/l)l + 1 + Fk0 (1, z/l) z = wl + Rz
Thus, the firm earns zero profit.

(2)

The gross return to one unit of investment

R, however, has to be sliced and shared among financial investors, the financial
intermediary, and the entrepreneur. The CRS production function implies that the
firm could borrow unlimited of capital if the capital market were perfect. A moral
hazard problem that we introduce next, however, results in credit rationing to the
entrepreneur.
We use a framework of moral hazard that is derived and simplified from Holmstrom
and Tirole (1997) to parameterize financial sector eﬃciency. More precisely, entrepreneurs,
8

whose own capital endowment is insuﬃcient for the firm’s financial need, obtain
external financing indirectly through an financial intermediation sector from financial
investors. Our main extension to the model of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) is
to let the total return per unit of capital, R, be endogenously determined by
country’s characteristics of endowment and institution, which allows us to study
international capital flows, whereas Holmstrom and Tirole set R as exogenously
given. In addition, while Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) also study the investment by
financial intermediaries, we don’t. On the other hand, we let agents endowed with
capital to endogenously choose to be either a financial investor or an entrepreneur,
but Holmstrom and Tirole don’t.
For a representative firm, the final output depends in part on the entrepreneur’s
level of eﬀort, which can be low or high, but is not observable by the financial
investors or the financial institution. Assume that the entrepreneur can choose
among two versions of the project. The “Good” version has a high probability
of success, λH , while oﬀering no private benefit. The “Bad” version has a lower
probability of project success, λL , but oﬀering a private benefit per unit of capital
managed, b, to the entrepreneur.

Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), we

further assume that only the “Good” project is economically viable.

That is,

λH R − (1 + r) > 0 > λL R − (1 + r) + b so that only “Good” project is implemented
in the moral hazard problem. We normalize λL = 0 and assume λH = λ thereafter.
The entrepreneur is paid RE per unit of capital to induce her to choose the
“Good” project. In addition to that, we assume that c/θ units of good (but no
capital and labor) are used to intermediate one unit of investment. Thus, the pay
to the financial intermediation is c/θ units of good per unit of investment. c/θ may
represent the transaction cost, the monitoring cost to reduce the extent of moral
hazard, or the expropriation by government oﬃcials. The eﬃciency level of the
financial system in the country is then represented by θ. The higher the θ, the
lower is the financial intermediation cost.

9

Other than the financial system, the strength of property rights protection, or the
control of the risk of expropriation, also plays an important role in this model. One
could conveniently think of a higher value of λ in our model as representing better
property rights protection (or lower expropriation risk). Equivalently, a higher value
of λ also represents a lower tax rate on capital return.
Conditional on the eﬃciency level of the financial system, the entrepreneur
chooses the amount of external capital x, her own capital contribution to the project
y, total investment of the project z, and the marginal pay to entrepreneur’s eﬀort
RE to solve the following program:

max U = zλRE + (1 + r) (1 − y)

x,y,z,RE

(3)

subject to

y ≤ 1

(4)

z ≤ x+y

(5)

¢
¤
£ ¡
λ R − RE − c/θ z ≥ (1 + r) x
λRE ≥ b

(6)
(7)

The objective function (3) represents entrepreneur’s expected income. The first
term represents the entrepreneur’s share in total capital revenue.

The second

term is the return from investing her own 1 − y capital in the market. Turning
into the constraints, inequality (4) requires that entrepreneur’s internal capital is
lass than her capital endowment. Inequality (5) requires that total investment
does not exceed the sum of internal and external capitals. Inequality (6) is the
participation constraint for the outside financial investors, while inequality (7) is
the entrepreneur’s incentive compatibility constraint.
It is then straightforward to show that all constraints must be binding in equilibrium.2
2

The problem is solved by setting the Lagrangian, and then straightforward manipulation of

10

The entrepreneur will invest all her endowment y = 1 in the firm. The total
investment z equals the sum of internal and external capitals x + 1. The incentive
compatibility constraint (7) must be binding, which gives
RE =

b
λ

(8)

The investors’ participation constraint (6) is binding. Substituting (8) into (6) gives
the firm’s optimal investment3

z=

1+r
(1 + r) + c/θ + b − λR

(9)

Substituting (8) and (9) into (3), the entrepreneur’s expected income becomes

U=

2.1

b (1 + r)
(1 + r) + c/θ + b − λR

(10)

A Sharing Rule on Return to Physical Capital

We assume that a capitalist (a potential entrepreneur) needs to pay a fixed entry
cost of f units of goods to become an entrepreneur.4 With free entry and exit of
entrepreneurs, the entrepreneur’s expected income, U, should be equal to (1 + r) (1 + f )
so that capitalists are indiﬀerent between becoming entrepreneurs or financial investors
in equilibrium. That is,
the first order conditions shows that (4), (5), (6), and (7) must bind.
3
Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), we rule out the case that (1 + r) + c/θ + b − λR < 0
in which the firm would want to invest without limit.
4
For expositional convenience, we assume that the fixed fee for becoming an entrepreneur is
due only in the second period so it does not reduce entrepreneur’s capital endowment in the first
period. The schedule in the first period could specify that the payment in the second period is
equal to f (1+r)
if the project succeeds, and zero otherwise, so that the expected present value of
λ
the fee is exactly f.

11

b (1 + r)
= (1 + r) (1 + f ) ⇔
(1 + r) + c/θ + b − λR
c
λR = (1 + r) + + β
θ
U

where β =

bf
1+f

=

(11)

denotes the average net pay to the entrepreneur. To see this, note

that U = bz = (1 + r) (1 + f ) . Thus, b = (1 + f ) (1 + r)/z. Using this result, we
have β = f (1 + r)/z and note that the entrepreneur’s expected return net of the
opportunity cost of her own endowment, U − (1 + r) = f (1 + r).
For a given value of f , the higher the private benefit b, the higher the β.
Therefore, one could think of β as a measure of the inferiority of corporate governance.
That is, the higher β, the lower the quality of corporate governance. The equation
(11) is a key expression in this model, as it describes how the expected return to the
physical capital is divided up among its usages, which we label as a capital revenue
sharing rule (CRSR). The expected marginal product of capital on the left hand
side of the equation, is shared by the return to financial investment, 1 + r, the cost
of financial intermediation, θc , and the average net pay to the entrepreneur β. The
lower the eﬃciency of the financial sector (as reflected by a higher

c
θ

or a lower θ),

or the poorer the corporate governance (as reflected by a higher β), the lower is the
return to financial investment in the economy. In other words, in spite of a scarcity
of capital in a developing country (which normally implies a high return to physical
capital), the return on savings and other financial investment may very well be low
if the country’s financial sector is ineﬃcient or the corporate governance is weak.

3

Capital Flows with No Frictions

Consider capital flows between countries i and j.5 They diﬀer in the eﬃciency level
of financial system, θ, the strength of property rights protection, λ, the average net
5

We use superscripts i and j to denote variables of countries i and j, respectively.

12

pay to the entrepreneur, β, and endowments L and K. For ease of keeping track, let
us make country i to have a relatively low capital-to-labor ratio, low financial sector
eﬃciency, and weak corporate governance, i.e., a typical developing country. There
are two types of international capital flows in this model. Foreign direct investment
(FDI) goes to where the expected return to an entrepreneur is the highest. It takes
place when the entrepreneur decides to take her project (and her capital managed)
to a foreign country and use foreign labor to produce. Non-FDI or financial capital
flow goes to where the interest rate is the highest; it occurs when a financial investor
decides to take her endowment out of the country and invests in a foreign financial
system. Labor is assumed to be immobile across countries.
We will proceed sequentially. We first study a case in which only financial capital
flow is allowed, and then a case in which only foreign direct investment is allowed.
We then study the general case in which both types of capital flows can take place.

3.1

Financial Capital Flows

Let K i0 (K j0 ) be the capital stock in country i(j), respectively, before any cross-border
capital flows, while K i and K j be the capital stocks in the two countries after the
capital flows. Financial capital will flow from i to j if and only if ri < rj . We
assume that free trade in goods equalizes the price of good across countries, which
is normalized to 1. Using (1) and CRSR (11), we obtain that ri = rj if

where ρi =

³

¤
¤
£
£
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ) − λi 1 + Fk0 (1, K i /Li ) = ρj − ρi
c
θi

(12)

´
+ β i . ρi is the sum of the cost of financial intermediation and the

average net pay to the entrepreneur and is referred to as the collective agency costs.
Higher ρi represents lower collective quality of financial institution and corporate
governance in country i. Equation (12) is labeled as a boundary condition for
financial capital flows (FCF ). Let k i = K i /Li , which is represented by horizontal

13

axis in Figure 1, while kj is represented by vertical axis. The F CF curve in Figure
1 represents condition (12).
We assume that Fk0 (1, 0) = ∞. The curve F CF starts from origin and is upward
sloping. The position of curve F CF is determined by the value of λi , λj , and ρj −ρi .
If ρj − ρi becomes smaller, or λi /λj becomes smaller, the curve F CF shifts to the
left. A point in the space, (ki , kj ), represents capital-labor ratios in two countries.
ri < rj for any point on the right side of the F CF curve so that financial capital
flows out of country i. On the other hand, financial capital flows into country i from
country j for any point on the left side of the F CF curve.
If country i is poor, that is, K i /Li < K j /Lj , the marginal product of capital in
country i, Fk0 (1, K i /Li ), is higher than that in rich country, Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ). However,
if country i has lower quality of financial institution and corporate governance
¡
¢
(ρi > ρj ), or worse property rights protection λi < λj , (ki , k j ) could be in the

right side of F CF curve. Hence the interest rate in country i could be lower.
Therefore, an ineﬃcient financial system or a poor corporate governance can result
in financial capital to flow from poor to rich countries (as found in Prasad, Rajan,
and Subramanian, 2006).

3.2

Foreign Direct Investment

FDI takes place when an entrepreneur decides she can earn a higher return by
moving her project to a foreign location. We assume that the entrepreneur still uses
her native financial system only and pay the domestic interest rate. In other words,
if a U.S. multinational firm operates in India, the US firm still uses a US bank or
stock market for its financing need. When the entrepreneur in country i directly
invests in country j and produces there, using (10), the entrepreneur’s expected
income becomes
U

id

=

¡
¢
bi 1 + ri

(1 + ri ) + c/θi + bi − λj Rj

14

(13)

The entrepreneur produces abroad if and only if U id > U i , which holds if and only
if λj Rj > λi Ri . Let
¤
¤
£
£
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ) − λi 1 + Fk0 (1, K i /Li ) = 0

(14)

This defines a boundary condition for the direction of foreign direct investment
(FDI). The condition (14) is indicated by the curve F DI in Figure 1. For any point
on the right side of the F DI curve we have λj Rj > λi Ri so that FDI flows out
of country i, while for any point on the left side of the F DI curve FDI flows into
country i from country j.

3.3

Capital Bypass Circulation

We now allow both types of capital flows. The patterns of bilateral capital flows
are determined by conditions (12) and (14). Let ρi > ρj so that country i has a
less eﬃcient financial system or weaker corporate governance than country j. In this
case, the curve F CF must be above the curve F DI.6
We will show that, without frictions to capital flows, the unique equilibrium in
the world capital market is a complete capital bypass circulation in which all capital
owned by country i leaves the country in the form of financial capital outflow, but
physical capital (and projects) reenters in the form of FDI. The lower quality of
financial institution and corporate governance in country i is completely bypassed.
When the collective agency costs in country i, ρi , is higher than that in country
j, ρj , there will be a two-way capital flow area where ρj − ρi < λj Rj − λi Ri < 0,
which is represented by the area between curves F CF and F DI in Figure 1. Within
the area the expected marginal product of capital is higher in country i than that
in country j, but the interest rate which equals the diﬀerence between the expected
6

If ρi = ρj , F CF and F DI coincide so that financial capital and FDI always flow in the same
direction. Furthermore, if λi = λj , F CF and F DI become the straight line at 45-degree. We are
back to the prediction of neoclassical model that capital flows from rich to poor countries.

15

marginal product of capital and the collective agency costs is higher in country j
than that in country i. Thus FDI flows from j to i, but financial capital flows from
i to j in the area.
The high-ρ country sends out financial capital to escape the low home interest
rate, and at the same time, receives the inward FDI due to the high domestic return
to physical capital. The key insight of the complete capital bypass circulation is that
FDI inflow and financial capital outflow reinforce each other so that in equilibrium
a corner solution must occur. Let capital/labor ratio of two countries before capital
flows, (ki0 , kj0 ), be between curves F CF and F DI, as indicated by point C in
Figure 1. The outflow of financial capital from i to j increases the marginal product
of capital in i but decreases the marginal product of capital in j, which results in
more FDI flowing from j to i. On the other hand, FDI flowing from j to i decreases
the marginal product of capital in i, which reduces the interest rate and therefore
results in more outflow of financial capital from i to j. Such capital bypass circulation
continues until all financial capital owned by country i leaves the country, and the
less eﬃcient financial institution is completely bypassed.
If the autarky capital/labor ratio, (ki0 , k j0 ), is on the left side of F DI curve, as
indicated by point A in Figure 1, then country i is labor abundant. Since A is to
the left of F DI curve, FDI will flow into i from j until F CF is reached. Although
A is also to the left of F CF curve, expecting that the flow of FDI from j to i would
eventually bring (k i , kj ) to the right side of F CF curve and make financial capital
flowing into country i not profitable, financial capital does not flow into country i in
the first place. When (ki , kj ) crosses F CF curve, it enters into the two-way capital
flow area. The two-way capital flows will continue until all capital owned by country
i leaves the country. When that happens, no financial investor uses the financial
sector in country i anymore and all capital in both countries is served by country j’s
financial system. Anticipating this scenario, domestic capitalists in country i would
not choose an entrepreneur career either. In this case, all projects in country i will

16

be operated by multinational firms headquartered in country j.
If (k i0 , k j0 ) is on the right side of F CF curve, as indicated by point B in Figure
1, country i is capital abundant. Financial capital flows out of country i into j at
the beginning. Expecting that the outflow of financial capital from i to j would
eventually bring (ki , k j ) to the left side of F DI curve and render FDI flowing out
of country i not profitable, FDI does not flow out of country i in the first place.
After (k i , kj ) crosses the F DI curve, the two countries enter into the two-way capital
flow area in which FDI moves from country j into country i, while financial capital
flowing from i into j. All capital owned by country i again leaves the country in the
form of financial capital outflows, but some physical capital (and projects) reenters
the country in the form of FDI.
It is worth noting that the complete-bypass equilibrium is independent from
initial endowment allocation (ki0 , kj0 ). Regardless of whether a country is poor or
rich, all of its financial capital will leave the country, with some compensating inflow
of FDI, if the collective quality of financial institution and corporate governance in
the country is lower.
While all financial capital leaves country i, the amount of FDI flowing into
country i is determined by the F DI condition (14). The equilibrium, E = (K i∗ /Li , K j∗ /Lj )
is determined by the intersection between the line of Li ki + Lj k j = K i0 + K j0 and
the F DI curve. That is,
¸
¸
∙
∙
K i0 + K j0 − K i∗
K i∗
0
i
0
λ 1 + Fk (1,
) − λ 1 + Fk (1, i ) = 0
Lj
L
j

(15)

Diﬀerentiating the above equation, it can be immediately seen that K i∗ declines as
λi decreases: a country with worse property rights protection receives less FDI in
the equilibrium.
Using a positive number to represent capital outflow, the net financial capital
outflow equals K i0 and the net FDI outflow equals −K i∗ in country i. The net overall

17

capital flow in country i equals K in = K i0 − K i∗ , which is positive if and only if
(ki0 , kj0 ) is on the right side of the F DI curve, as indicated by B in Figure 1. That is,
¤
¤
£
£
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, kj0 ) > λi 1 + Fk0 (1, ki0 ) . As an illustration, if F (L, K) = Lα K 1−α ,
then it requires

µ
¶
µ
¶
1−α
1−α
i
λ 1 + j0 α > λ 1 + i0 α
(k )
(k )
j

(16)

We define country i as eﬀectively capital abundant if condition (16) holds.
Country i is a net exporter of capital if and only if the country is eﬀectively capital
abundant. Note that even if country i is poor (ki0 < k j0 ), it can be eﬀectively
capital abundant if it has suﬃciently weak property rights protection (λi < λj ). To
summarize we have:
Proposition 1 (A) In a frictionless world capital market, the unique equilibrium
of capital flow features a complete bypass: all capital originally in the country with
lower collective quality of financial institution and corporate governance leaves the
country in the form of financial capital outflow, but domestic investment takes place
in the form of FDI. (B) Less FDI goes into a country with worse property rights
protection. (C) A country is a net exporter of capital if and only if it is eﬀectively
capital abundant.

4

Frictions and Capital Flows

It is natural to wonder if the strong result of a complete bypass of the weak domestic
financial system/corporate governance is a consequence of the assumption of zero
frictions in the capital market. We now introduce a variety of frictions into the
model. The key message that emerges is that the unique equilibrium of a complete
bypass survives as long as the diﬀerence in collective qualities of financial system/corporate
governance between two countries is larger than costs of capital flows. In this case,
the benefit of bypassing the less eﬃcient financial institution more than compensates
the costs of capital flows.
18

Let τ ij be the cost per unit of financial capital moving from i to j. It encompasses
the cost of acquiring information, sovereign risk, withholding tax in the host country
and so on. We assume the cost of capital flows is always non-negative. Financial
capital flows from i to j if ri ≤ rj − τ ij . The condition for financial outflows
(FCF-out) in country i now becomes:
¤
¤
£
£
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ) − λi 1 + Fk0 (1, K i /Li ) ≥ ρj − ρi + τ ij

(17)

The reverse happens if rj ≤ ri − τ ji . Note τ ji and τ ij may not be the same. This
condition for financial capital inflow (FCF-in) for country i can also be written as,
¤
¤
£
£
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ) − λi 1 + Fk0 (1, K i /Li ) ≤ ρj − ρi − τ ji

(18)

The FCF-out curve in Figure 2 represents condition (17) when the equality holds.
At any point on the right side of the FCF-out curve, financial capital flows out
of country i. Similarly, FCF-in curve represents condition (18) when the equality
holds. At any point on the left side of FCF-in curve, financial capital flows into
country i. Since −τ ji < τ ij , the FCF-in curve must lie above the FCF-out curve.
Let ηij be the cost per unit of foreign direct investment from i to j. There is also
a fixed cost for the entrepreneur to move her project from i to j, which is denoted as
(1 + ri )dij . The expected income when the entrepreneur in country i directly invests
in country j now becomes

U

id

¡
¢
bi 1 + ri
¢ − (1 + ri )dij
¡
=
(1 + ri ) + c/θi + bi − λj Rj − η ij

(19)

¡
¢
The entrepreneur in country i produces abroad if U id ≥ U i = 1 + ri f i . Using
¡
¡
¢
¢
CRSR (11) and substituting 1 + ri + c/θi by λi Ri − bi f i / 1 + f i into (19), the

19

FDI outflow condition (FDI-out) for country i is
£
£
¤
¤
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ) − λi 1 + Fk0 (1, K i /Li ) ≥

bi dij
+ η ij (20)
(1 + f i + dij ) (1 + f i )

Similarly, the FDI inflow condition (FDI-in) for country i is
¤
¤
£
£
λj 1 + Fk0 (1, K j /Lj ) −λi 1 + Fk0 (1, K i /Li ) ≤ −

bj dji
−η ji (21)
(1 + f j + dji ) (1 + f j )

When equalities in (20) and (21) hold, they are depicted in Figure 2 by curves
FDI-out and FDI-in, respectively. The FDI-in curve must lie above the FDI-out
curve. For all points on the right side of FDI-out curve, FDI flows from country i
to j, while for all points on the left side of FDI-in curve, FDI flows from j to i.

4.1

Is There Still a Bypass Eﬀect?

The patterns of capital flow are determined by the relative positions of four boundaries
in Figure 2. We can show that as long as the collective agency costs in country i, ρi ,
is larger than ρj by a suﬃcient amount, the complete bypass emerges as the unique
equilibrium. More precisely, if
ρj − ρi < −

(1

+ fj

bj dji
− η ji − τ ij = CI
+ dji ) (1 + f j )

(22)

then the curve FCF-out is above the curve FDI-in, which implies that both curves
FCF-in and FCF-out are above curves FDI-in and FDI-out. In this case, the
complete bypass is the unique equilibrium.
Let capital/labor ratio of two countries before capital flows, (ki0 , kj0 ), be on the
left side of FCF-in and FDI-in curves, as indicated by point A in Figure 2. Since A
is on the left side of FDI-in curve, FDI will flow into i from j. Expecting that the
flow of FDI from j to i would eventually bring (k i , kj ) to the right side of FCF-in
curve and make financial capital flowing into country i not profitable, financial

20

capital does not flow into country i in the first place. After (k i , kj ) passes FCF-out
curve, two countries then enter into an area of two-way capital flows between curves
FCF-out and FDI-in in which FDI flows from country j to country i, while financial
capital flows from i to j. This pattern of two-way flows will continue until all capital
originally in country i leaves the country. In equilibrium the amount of FDI received
by country i is determined by the equilibrium condition of FDI inflow, the curve
FDI-in. Similarly, if (k i0 , kj0 ) is on the right side of FDI-out curve, as indicated by
point B, we will also have a complete bypass in the equilibrium.
When ρi is suﬃciently smaller than ρj , an opposite pattern emerges. More
precisely, if
ρj − ρi >

bi dij
+ η ij + τ ji = CII
(1 + f i + dij ) (1 + f i )

(23)

the curve FCF-in is under the curve FDI-out, which implies that both curves
FCF-in and FCF-out are under curves FDI-in and FDI-out (not drawn to avoid
overcrowding the space). The region between curves FDI-out and FCF-in is the
two-way capital flow area. Similar to the above analysis, the capital flow will bring
(ki , k j ) into two-way capital flow area in which financial capital will flow from j
to i, while FDI will flow from i to j until all capital owned by country j leaves
the country. The amount of FDI received by country j is determined by the curve
FDI-out in this case.
The intuition for the result is as follows: if the diﬀerence in the collective agency
costs between two countries is larger than the costs of international capital flows,
the benefit of bypassing exceeds the cost of capital flows. Thus, it is rational for
investors to bypass poor financial institutions and ineﬃcient entrepreneurs at home.
If neither condition (22) nor (23) holds, there will be one-way capital flow, which
we turn into in the next subsection.

21

4.2

One-Way Capital Flows

We now consider a third scenario in which the cross-country diﬀerence in the
quality of financial system/corporate governance is in an intermediate range, or
more precisely,

CI < ρj − ρi < CII

(24)

The condition implies that the FCF-out curve is below the FDI-in curve, and
the FDI-out curve is below the FCF-in curve. The relative positions of the two
outflow curves FCF-out and FDI-out are determined by a further comparison of the
values on the right hand sides of (17) and (20), respectively. A similar examination
determines the relative positions of the two inflow curves. There are four possible
cases. We depict and analyze in detail one case in Figure 3. The analyses for the
others are similar.
The two inside curves, FCF-in and FDI-out, jointly determine a “no-capital-flow”
zone. If the initial capital allocation (k i0 , k j0 ) is in this zone, as represented by point
C in Figure 3, there is no capital flow between two countries. Note that if the costs
of capital flows increase, the two inflow curves would shift to the left and the two
outflow curves would shift to the right. Therefore, for suﬃciently large costs, the
zone of “no-capital-flow” would expand so much that any initial (ki0 , kj0 ) would not
lead to capital flows in either direction. If (ki0 , kj0 ) is outside of “no capital flow”
zone, the pattern of capital flows is determined by two inside curves, either FCF-in
or FDI-out, whichever is closer to the starting point.
Let (ki0 , kj0 ) be on the left side of the FDI-in curve, as represented by point A in
Figure 3. In spite of the fact that A is to the left of both FDI-in and FCF-in curves,
because an inflow of financial capital from j to i would eventually make FDI into
country i not profitable, FDI does not flow into country i in the first place and only
financial capital flowing into country i would occur. The amount of financial capital

22

inflow is determined by the intersection between the line of Li ki + Lj kj = K i0 + K j0
and the FCF-in curve. Now consider the case in which (ki0 , kj0 ) is on the right side
of the FCF-out curve, as represented by point B. In this case, only FDI flows out
of country i since now FDI-out is the inside curve.
Similar to Section 3, if (k i0 , k j0 ) is to the right of at least one of outflow curves,
country i is defined as eﬀectively capital abundant. On the other hand, country i
is eﬀectively labor abundant if (ki0 , kj0 ) is to the left of at least one of the inflow
curves.
We summarize our discussion by the following proposition.
Proposition 2 If the cross-country diﬀerence in the collective agency costs is suﬃciently
large (relative to the costs of capital flows, i.e., either condition (22) or (23) holds),
the unique equilibrium in the world capital market will be characterized by two-way
capital flows that completely bypass the ineﬃcient financial system/weak corporate
governance. Otherwise there will be one-way capital flows. Either financial capital
or FDI will flow out of an eﬀectively capital abundant country into an eﬀectively
labor abundant one.
Intuitively, this proposition implies that suﬃciently large marginal costs to capital
flows could prevent two-way capital flows (and hence the bypass of ineﬃcient domestic
financial institution/corporate governance) from taking place. This is not the only
way to break the complete bypass result. If instead of assuming a constant marginal
cost of capital flows, let us hypothesize that the cost is convex. For example, τ ij
and η ji are increasing in the amount of capital flows, there will in general still be
two-way capital flows but no complete bypass even if the costs of capital mobility is
not large. In this case, the FCF-out curve shifts down as financial capital flows out,
while the FDI-in curve shifts up as FDI flows in. If the amount of capital flow is
suﬃciently large, the FCF-out curve will eventually move below the FDI-in curve,
which terminates the complete bypass. If entrepreneurs are heterogeneous, as in the
23

model of Ju and Wei (2006), the marginal entrepreneur benefits less with more FDI
flows into foreign country. This also prevents a complete bypass from occurring (but
still generates two-way capital flows).

4.3

Comparative Statics

We now trace out how a change in either the collective agency costs ρ or property
rights protection λ aﬀects the patterns of capital flows. This essentially involves
discussing the earlier key results from a diﬀerent angle. We focus on the composition
of capital flows for country i, and let country j be the rest of the world. A key feature
to bear in mind is that the locations of the FDI-in and FDI-out curves are both
aﬀected by λ but not by ρ, whereas the FCF-in and FCF-out curves would both
shift to the right when either λ rises or ρ declines. To preview the results, we will
show that as the financial system/corporate governance of a country improves, it
would shift from importing to exporting FDI, but would shift from exporting to
importing financial capital. As property rights protection strengthens, the expected
marginal product of capital in the country increases. As a result, the net exports
of both FDI and financial capital would decline (or the inflows of both FDI and
financial capital would increase).
Let us consider a gradual improvement in the collective quality of the country’s
financial system/corporate governance from the worst possible value to the best one
(e.g., from ρi = ∞ to ρi = 0) while holding λi constant. To illustrate, let (k i0 , k j0 )
be at point A in Figure 2 so country i is eﬀectively labor abundant. There are four
zones of ρi to be considered. Using condition (22), let ρ1 be the cutoﬀ point of ρi
such that the FCF-out and FDI-in curves coincide, or
ρ1 = ρj +

bj dji
+ η ji + τ ij
(1 + f j + dji ) (1 + f j )

(25)

Suppose ρi ∈ [ρ1 , ∞), both FCF-in and FCF-out curves must be above FDI-in and

24

FDI-out curves. This corresponds to the case depicted in Figure 2. In this case, the
domestic financial institution/corporate governance is completely bypassed. The
exact amounts of financial capital flow and FDI can be found as, F CF = K i0 ,
and F DI = −K1i∗ where K1i∗ is determined by the intersection between the line
of Li ki + Lj kj = K i0 + K j0 and the FDI-in curve. As long as ρi is in the region
of [ρ1 , ∞), a change in the value of ρi has no eﬀect on the amount and composition
of the capital flows. This is depicted in the far left part of Figure 4 (ab and a0 b0 ).
In the second zone when ρi ∈ [ρ2 , ρ1 ), with ρ2 being the cutoﬀ point of ρi such
that the FCF-in and FDI-in curves coincide, or
ρi2 = ρj +

bj dji
+ η ji − τ ji ,
(1 + f j + dji ) (1 + f j )

(26)

the FCF-out curve is now below the FDI-in curve (indicated by FCF’-out in Figure
2). The pattern of capital flows changes from a complete bypass to one-way flows.
That is, only FDI flows into country i (recall that the pattern of one-way flows is
determined by the inside curve). Financial capital outflow drops from K i0 to zero.
¡
¢
The capital stock in country i now is K1i∗ so that F DI = − K1i∗ − K i0 . Because
capital flow is determined by the inside inflow curve now, further decreasing ρi until

FCF-in and FDI-in coincide has no eﬀect on capital flows. This is represented by
the middle left portion of Figure 4 (cd and c0 d0 ).
In the third zone when ρi ∈ [ρ3 , ρ2 ), with ρ3 being the cutoﬀ point of ρi such
that the FCF-in and FDI-out curves coincide, or
ρi3 = ρj −

bi dij
− η ij − τ ji ,
(1 + f i + dij ) (1 + f i )

(27)

we switch from one-way FDI inflow to one-way financial capital inflow as analyzed
in Figure 3 since now FCF-in curve is the inside inflow curve. The FDI inflow
drops to zero, whereas the financial inflow F CF = −(K2i∗ − K i0 ). The level of
capital stock in this zone K2i∗ is determined by the intersection between the line of
25

Li ki + Lj kj = K i0 + K j0 and the FCF-in curve. Note that the capital stock in
this zone is higher than in the second zone or K2i∗ > K1i∗ since FCF-in is under
FDI-in now. K2i∗ increases as ρi decreases until FCF-in and FDI-out coincide. This
is represented by the middle right portion of Figure 4 (ef and de0 ).
In the fourth zone when ρi ∈ [0, ρ3 ), we switch from one-way financial capital
inflow back to a pattern of two-way flows (but with opposite signs from zone one).
Now country i has better collective financial institution and corporate governance.
All of K j0 flows into country i. Thus, F CF = −K j0 < −(K2i∗ − K i0 ). The amount
of FDI flowing out of country i, F DI = K3i∗ , where K3i∗ is determined by the
intersection between the line of Li k i + Lj k j = K i0 + K j0 and the FDI-out curve.
Further decreasing ρi has no eﬀect on capital flows. This is depicted by the far right
portion of Figure 4 (gh and f 0 g 0 ).
The comparative statics can be recapitulated by looking at Figure 4. 0 < 1/ρi <
∞ is depicted in horizontal axis, while F CF and F DI are represented by vertical
axis. As 1/ρi increases, the collective quality of financial institution and corporate
governance is improving. The eﬀect of changing 1/ρi on financial capital flow is
represented by the line abcdef gh, while the eﬀect on FDI is represented by the line
a0 b0 c0 d0 de0 f 0 g 0 . It is clear that as the collective quality of financial institution and
corporate governance improves, net FDI outflow increases, but net financial outflow
decreases. Similar analysis can be conducted when country i is eﬀectively capital
abundant and the same result of comparative statics holds. Summarizing we have:
Proposition 3 The eﬀects of changing collective quality of financial institution
and corporate governance on financial capital flow and FDI are opposite. As the
collective quality of financial institution and corporate governance improves, net
FDI outflow increases, but net financial outflow decreases.
Now we turn into the eﬀect of a change in property rights protection (changing
λi ), while holding ρi constant. Examining conditions (17), (18), (20) and (21), we
26

know that changing λi does not aﬀect the relative positions of the four threshold
curves. Thus, the pattern of capital flow is not aﬀected by changing λi . However, the
increase in λi shifts all FCF-in, FCF-out, FDI-in and FDI-out curves to the right.
Therefore, FDI inflow and financial inflow into country i are increased, while FDI
outflow and financial outflow from country i are reduced. Summarizing we have:
Proposition 4 As property rights protection improves, both the net FDI outflow
and the net financial outflow decline.
Propositions 3 and 4 show the contrasting eﬀects of better property rights
protection versus better financial development on FDI. The intuition is straightforward:
better property rights protection increases expected marginal product of capital and
interest rate, leading to more inflow of financial capital and FDI; a better financial
system, on the other hand, encourages more financial capital inflow (or less capital
flight), which decreases marginal product of capital and therefore reduces inward
FDI.

5

Welfare Impact of Capital Flows

Does financial globalization enhance welfare for individual economies and for the
world as a whole? This is the subject of this section. We measure a change in
social welfare by the occurrence of a potential Pareto improvement, which in turn
can be represented by a change in aggregate income. For simplicity, we will focus on
the case of a frictionless world. A key result is that the welfare eﬀect may diverge
between financially sophisticated and financially backward economies.

5.1

World Welfare

We first examine the world as a whole. We start by showing that the aggregate
income in financial autarky equals the sum of aggregate output produced and the

27

capital stock left at the end of period 2.7 Note that the number of entrepreneurs
N = K/z. Assume that all financial intermediation costs, (c/θ) K, are distributed
to labor, and all license fees paid by entrepreneurs, (1 + r) f N, are distributed to
labor as well. The aggregate income in the country, W, is the sum of expected labor
income, entrepreneurs’ income, and investors’ income. That is,

W

∙
¸
cK
= λwL +
+ (1 + r) fN + (1 + r) N + (1 + r) (K − N )
θ
i
hc
+ β + (1 + r) K = λwL + λRK = λF (L, K) + λK
= λwL +
θ

(28)

where we have used the result that β = (1 + r) f/z, and equations (2) and (11), for
the above derivations. Thus, with the depreciation rate set at zero, the aggregate
income equals the sum of total output produced and capital left at the end of period
2.
Let us use superscripts 0 and 1 to denote variables before and after free capital
mobility, respectively. The expected world total output before free capital mobility
£
¤
£
¤
is λi F (Li , K i0 ) + K i0 + λj F (Lj , K j0 ) + K j0 . A social planner of the world will

choose capital stocks, K i and K j , to maximize the expected world total output.
That is,
£
¤
£
¤
max W ∗ = λi F (Li , K i ) + K i + λj F (Lj , K j ) + K j

K i ,K j

(29)

s.t. K i + K j = K i0 + K j0

One can see that the first order condition of the above optimization problem is
exactly the same as (15). Therefore, K i∗ determined by condition (15) maximizes
the expected world aggregate income. One can also check that the world aggregate
7

As in the leading graduate-level textbook for international macroeconomics (Obstfeld and
Rogoﬀ, 1996, Chapter 1), the capital stock is eaten after date 2 production. Thus welfare is
measured by the sum of the second-period GNP and the capital stock.

28

income with free capital flows equals W ∗ . As long as K i0 diﬀers from K i∗ so that
the net capital flow is not zero, the world as a whole must strictly benefit from free
capital flows as the eﬃciency of global capital allocation improves.
To put it diﬀerently, financial globalization in this case is a substitute for reforms
of weak domestic financial institutions/corporate governance in developing countries.
As the inferior financial system is completely bypassed by saving and investment,
return on savings becomes higher, and capital mobility equates the expected marginal
products of capital across all countries.

5.2

National Welfare

Unlike the world welfare, national welfare may not be higher with financial globalization
for every individual economy. To be precise, we will show that the country with a
strong financial institution/corporate governance always benefits from free capital
mobility. However, the country with a weak financial system/corporate governance
may lose out. For the latter country, the strength of its property rights protection
also plays a role in determining how likely it may benefit from financial globalization.
To see some of the intuition, recall from the capital revenue sharing rule (11)
that the expected marginal product of capital has to be distributed among financial
investors, financial intermediaries, and entrepreneurs. Free international capital
flows and the resulting bypass of the ineﬃcient financial system transfers the revenue
of financial intermediation and management from country i (the one with a weak
financial system) to j (the one with a strong financial system). The welfare impact
on country i, therefore, is determined by the trade-oﬀ between an eﬃciency gain from
capital mobility and a revenue loss in financial intermediation and entrepreneurial
pay.

29

5.2.1

The Country with a Weak Financial Sector

In general, the costs of financial intermediation and business entry have both a rent
and a waste (deadweight loss) component. We denote φi1 and φi2 , where φi1 , φi2 ≤ 1,
as the fractions of the intermediation and business entry costs that are wasted,
respectively. Formally, the expected aggregate income in country i in financial
autarky is:
£
¤ ¡
¢
W i0 = λi F (Li , K i0 ) + K i0 − φi1 c/θi + φi2 β i K i0

(30)

With free capital movement, all K i0 are intermediated through the foreign
financial system. Suppose K i∗ is the amount of FDI that enters country i from j.
Note that the interest rates are equalized across countries with free capital mobility,
¡
¢
ri1 = rj1 , and marginal products of capital are also equalized, 1 + rj1 + ρj =
¤
£
λj Rj1 = λi Ri1 = λi 1 + Fk0 (Li , K i∗ ) from (15). The expected aggregate income in
country i under free capital flows becomes:

¡
£¡
¢
¢
¤
W i1 = λi wi1 Li + 1 + ri1 K i0 = λi wi1 Li + 1 + ri1 + ρj K i0 − ρj K i0
¤
£
= λi wi1 Li + λi 1 + Fk0 (Li , K i∗ ) K i0 − ρj K i0
(31)
The change in national welfare in country i is given by W i1 − W i0
=

£ i i1 i
¤ ¡
¢
λ w L + λi Fk0 (Li , K i∗ )K i0 − λi F (Li , K i0 ) − ρj − φi1 c/θi − φi2 β i K i0

= A − µij K i0 = A − B

(32)

where µij = ρj − φi1 c/θi − φi2 β i . The first term in squared bracket in (32), denoted
by A, represents the standard triangle gain from free capital flows in the neoclassic
theory. More precisely,

30

£
¢¤
¡
A = λi wi1 Li + Fk0 (Li , K i∗ )K i∗ − F (Li , K i0 ) + Fk0 (Li , K i∗ ) K i0 − K i∗
£
¢¤
¡
= λi F (Li , K i∗ ) − F (Li , K i0 ) + Fk0 (Li , K i∗ ) K i0 − K i∗
#
"Z i∗
K
¡
¢
= λi
Fk0 (Li , K i )dK i + Fk0 (Li , K i∗ ) K i0 − K i∗
(33)
K i0

In Figure 5, expression (33) is depicted by the triangle below the curve Fk0 (.) if
K i∗ > K i0 , or the triangle above the curve Fk0 (.) if K i∗ < K i0 . In either case, it is
always positive.
The second term on the right hand side of equality (32), denoted by B, represents
country i’s revenue loss from a complete bypass. In Figure 5, it is depicted by the
rectangle B. The overall welfare impact of financial globalization for country i is
determined by the trade-oﬀ between A and B. As an example, if K i0 = K i∗ and
φi1 = φi2 = 0 so that net capital flows happen to be zero with financial globalization
(but the gross capital flows could be massive), and the fees paid for financial
intermediation and business licenses before financial globalization are pure rents
in country i, then A = 0 and B = ρj K i0 . In this example, free capital mobility is
guaranteed to reduce the welfare of country i. On the other hand, if φi1 = φi2 = 1 so
all intermediation cost and license fee are deadweight loss in financial autarky, B
then becomes negative since ρj < ρi . In this case, free capital mobility must improve
country i’s welfare.
As indicated in Figure 5, the magnitude of the triangle gain from capital flows,
A, is determined by the size of net capital flow, K i∗ −K i0 . Let country i be eﬀectively
labor abundant. Using (15), we can show that K i∗ − K i0 becomes larger if λi is
larger. Therefore, the triangle gain from free capital flows, A, becomes larger if the
protection of property rights in country i is stronger. Therefore, the country with
a weak financial system is more likely to benefit from free capital mobility if its
property rights protection is strong.

31

5.2.2

The Country with a Strong Financial Sector

We turn now to the welfare impact of financial globalization for country j - the one
£
¤
with a strong financial system. Similar to the above analysis, W j0 = λj F (Lj , K j0 ) + K j0 −
´
³
φj1 c/θj + φj2 β j K j0 , while
´¡
¡
¢
¡
¢ ³
¢
W j1 = λj wj1 Lj + 1 + rj1 K j0 + ρj K i0 + K j0 − φj1 c/θj + φj2 β j K i0 + K j0
´
£
¤
¢ ³
¡
= λj F (Lj , K j1 ) + K j0 + λj Fk0 (Lj , K j1 ) K j0 − K j1 − φj1 c/θj + φj2 β j K j0
´
´ i
h³
³
+ 1 − φj1 c/θj + 1 − φj2 β j K i0
where K j1 = K i0 + K j0 − K i∗ is the capital stock in country j with capital mobility.
¡
¤
¢
£
We have used the fact that 1 + rj1 + ρj K j0 = λj 1 + Fk0 (Lj , K j1 ) K j0 to derive
the above expression. Thus we have
W j1 − W j0 = λj

"Z

K j1

K j0

¡
¢
Fk0 (Lj , K j )dK j + Fk0 (Lj , K j1 ) K j0 − K j1

´
´ i
h³
³
+ 1 − φj1 c/θj + 1 − φj2 β j K i0

#
(34)

The first term in the right hand side of (34) is again the triangle gain from capital
flows, which is always positive. The second term is the rent (i.e., not wasted) part
of the revenue transferred to country j from country i due to the bypass eﬀect.
In contrast to the previous case, the second term is also positive. Therefore, the
country with the good financial system/corporate governance must benefit from
global capital mobility. To summarize we have:
Proposition 5 (A) In a frictionless world, the inferior financial system/corporate
governance is completely bypassed. All savings are served by the world’s best financial
system and the world’s first best eﬃciency is reached through free international
capital flows. (B) The country with a strong financial institution and corporate

32

governance gains unambiguously from global capital mobility. (C) The country with
a weak financial institution and corporate governance, however, many not benefit
from financial globalization, depending on the trade oﬀ between an eﬃciency gain
from better capital allocation and a loss of revenue previously accrued to domestic
entrepreneurs and financial institution. If the country is eﬀectively labor abundant,
the stronger the protection of property rights, the more likely the country would
benefit from free capital mobility.
These theoretical predictions are consistent with the observation that advanced
countries like the United States tend to be more enthusiastic about pushing for
capital account openness around the world than many developing countries. Furthermore,
they are consistent with the empirical findings, reviewed in Kose, Prasad, Rogoﬀ,
and Wei (2006), that not all developing countries benefit from financial globalization,
and that those developing countries with strong property rights protection are more
likely to benefit from it. In addition, the model is consistent with the idea that it is
better to liberalize FDI inflows than capital outflows.

6

Conclusions

Net financial capital and net FDI often go in opposite directions. Developed countries
with an eﬃcient financial system, strong corporate governance, and strong property
rights protection are often net exporters of FDI but net importers of financial capital.
Developing countries with an ineﬃcient financial system, weak corporate governance
but an intermediate level of property rights protection tend to exhibit an opposite
pattern, exporting financial capital, but importing FDI on net. If the diﬀerence
in the quality of financial system/corporate governance between the two sets of
countries is suﬃciently large (relative to the costs of cross-border capital flows), the
theory developed in this paper suggests that the inferior financial system/corporate
governance can be completely bypassed by two-way capital flows.
33

In a sense,

financial globalization is a substitute for reforms of domestic financial sector as
capital can be put to the most eﬃcient use in this case even without domestic
financial reforms. However, the net welfare eﬀect on a developing country with
a weak financial system may not always be positive, if the fees paid for financial
intermediation and business entry have a rent component. While the welfare eﬀect
for a developing country may be ambiguous, the model suggests that the net eﬀect
is more likely to be positive the stronger is the quality of property rights protection.
Unlike the neoclassical theory that equates the expected marginal product of
capital to interest rate, the sharing rule on capital revenue derived in this paper
states that the expected marginal product of capital is the sum of the interest rate,
the cost of financial intermediation, and the cost of weak corporate governance.
In other words, the weaker the financial system or the corporate governance in a
country, the greater the gap between the interest rate and the expected marginal
product of capital. Also, while risk sharing is an explanation in the literature
for two-way portfolio capital flows across countries, this paper provides a new
explanation based on diﬀerences in institutional quality (even with risk neutral
investors).
This simple model is a first step towards a framework for understanding the
composition of international capital flows and its connection with domestic institutions.
There are still many areas in which the model can be enriched. First, while the
current analysis groups quality of financial system and quality of corporate governance
together, future work could investigate their separate implications. For example,
if one allows for international direct investment in the banking sector, then the
eﬃciency of a developing country’s banking sector (though not the strength of its
corporate governance) may be improved partially. If one introduces joint venture
between foreign and local entrepreneurs, perhaps the quality of local corporate
governance can be partially modified as well. Second, while the current model
lumps together international portfolio equity and portfolio debt flows under the

34

rubric of financial capital, it would be useful to separate them. Third, the quality
of domestic financial sector and the eﬃciency of corporate governance are two
parameters in the current model. It would be useful to endogenize them, and
in particular, to discuss ways in which they may respond to global capital flows.
Fourth, a systematic empirical investigation can be conducted to examine whether
and how financial institutions and property rights protection may aﬀect patterns of
international flows diﬀerently. Given our theory, one needs to have information on
barriers to cross-border financial capital flows and FDI. Comprehensive information
on these variable is not yet available. These could be fruitful directions for future
research.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson (2005), “Unbundling Institutions,”
Journal of Political Economy, 113, 949-995.
[2] Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych (2005), “Why
doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?
An Empirical
Investigation,” NBER Working Paper 11901.
[3] Antras, Pol, Mihir A. Desai, and C. Fritz Foley (2006), “Multinational Firms,
FDI Flows and Imperfect Capital Markets,” Working Paper, Harvard
University.
[4] Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (2006), “Adjusting
to Capital Account Liberalization,” Unpublished working paper, London
School of Economics.
[5] Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2006),
“An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,”
MIT Working Paper.
[6] Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, 2004, “The
Revived Bretton Woods System: The Eﬀects of Periphery Intervention
and Reserve Management on Interest Rates and Exchange Rates in Center
Countries,” NBER Working Paper 10332.
[7] Gertler, Mark and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1990), “North-South Lending and
Endogenous Domestic Capital Market Ineﬃciencies,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 26, 245—266.
[8] Gordon, Roger H. and A. Lans Bovenberg (1996), “Why is Capital so Immobile
Internationally? Possible Explanations and Implications for Capital Income
Taxation?” American Economic Review 86, 1057—1075.
35

[9] Goldstein, Itay and Assaf Razin (2006), “An Information-Based Trade Oﬀ
between Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio Investment,”
Journal of International Economics, 70, 271-295.
[10] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne (2006), “Capital Flows to
Developing Countries: the Allocation Puzzle,” Working Paper.
[11] Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable
Funds, and the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3),
663—691.
[12] Huang, Yasheng, 2003, Selling China: Foreign Direct Investment in the Reform
Era, Cambridge University Press.
[13] Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei (2006), “A Solution to Two Paradoxes of
International Capital Flows,” NBER Working Paper, 12668.
[14] Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006),
“Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal,” NBER Working Paper 12484.
[15] Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreti (2006), “The External Wealth of
Nations Mark II,” IMF Working Paper.
[16] Lucas, Robert (1990), “Why doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor
Countries?” American Economic Review 80, 92—96.
[17] Matsuyama,
Kiminori (2004),
“Financial Market
Symmetry-Breaking,
and Endogenous Inequality
Econometrica, 72, 853-884.

Globalization,
of Nations,”

[18] Matsuyama, Kiminori (2005), “Credit Market Imperfection and Patterns of
International Trade and Capital Flows,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 3, 714-723.
[19] Mendoza, Enrique, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2007),
“Financial Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” NBER
Working Paper 12909.
[20] North, Douglas, 1981, Structure and Change in Economic History, New York:
Norton.
[21] Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian (2006), “Patterns
of International Capital Flows and Their Implication for Economic
Development,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Jackson Hole conference
paper.
[22] Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2003),
Eﬀects of financial globalization on developing countries: Some empirical
evidence, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C..
[23] Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2007), “Corporate Transparency,
Cream-Skimming and FDI,” European Economic Review, forthcoming.
[24] Shleifer, Andrei, and D. Wolfenzon (2002), “Investor Protection and Equity
Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 3-27.
36

[25] Stulz, Rene (2005), “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of
Finance, 60(4), 1595-1638.
[26] Wei, Shang-Jin, (2000a), “How Taxing is Corruption on International
Investors?” Review of Economics and Statistics, February, 82(1): 1-11.
[27] Wei, Shang-Jin (2000b), “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activities, 2: 303-354.
[28] Wei, Shang-Jin (2006), “Connecting Two Views on Financial Globalization:
Can We Make Further Progress?” Journal of Japanese and International
Economics, 20, 459-481.

37

Table 1: Patterns of Capital Flows by Country Groups, 1990-2004
(Unit: current U.S. dollars per person)

Year

1990

Country Group

Per Capita Net
FDI Outflows

Per Capita Net
Financial Capital Outflows

(average within the group) (average within the group)
Developed Countries
165
-1564
Emerging Markets
-756
1541
Other Developing Countries
-226
-483

1995

Developed Countries
Emerging Markets
Other Developing Countries

275
-1462
-273

-1773
2184
-437

2000

Developed Countries
Emerging Markets
Other Developing Countries

1204
-1668
-406

-2486
3680
-281

2004

Developed Countries
Emerging Markets
Other Developing Countries

1120
-1671
-569

-1382
5556
-138

Notes:
1) Source: Authors’ calculations based on the database described in “The External Wealth of Nations Mark
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004”, by Philip R. Lane and
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, IMF Working Paper 06/69, 2006. Population data is from the IMF’s
“International Financial Statistics”.
2) Variable Definitions:
Per capita net FDI outflows = (FDI Asset – FDI Liability)/population
Per capita net financial capital outflows = [(total foreign asset-FDI asset)-(total foreign liability-FDI
liability)]/population
Numbers are averaged across countries within the group. Negative numbers indicate inflows.
3) Country Groups (based on IMF Occasional Paper 220, “Effects of Financial Globalization on
Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and
Ayhan Kose (2003), Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.)
21 Developed Countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
22 Emerging Markets: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Egypt, Hong Kong SAR, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Singapore, South Africa,
Thailand, Turkey, and Venezuela.
33 Other Developing Countries: Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Gabon,
Ghana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Kenya, Mauritius, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, and Uruguay.

38

kj

FCF
A
C

FCF
FDI

FDI
E
B
O

ki
Figure 1: Boundary Conditions for Capital Flows

kj
FCF-in
FCF-out

A

FDI-in

FDI

FCF'-out

FCF

FDI-out
B
O

ki

Figure 2: Boundary Conditions with Barriers to Capital Flows

39

kj
FDI-in
A

FCF-in

C

FDI-out
FCF-out
B

O

ki
Figure 3: One-way Capital Flows

Net exports of
FDI/financial
capital

K io

a

b

K 3i*
c

0

d

1/ ρ

1/ ρ

a'

i
2

1 / ρ3i

d'

c'
b'

g'

e'

i
1

− ( K1i* − K io )
− K 1i*
− ( K 2i* − K io )

FDI

f'

Quality of financial
system and
corporate
governance

e
f
FCF

− K jo

g

h

Net imports of
FDI/financial
capital

Figure 4: Comparative Statistics – Patterns of Capital Flows as a
Function of Quality of Financial System/Corporate Governance

40

1/ ρ i

Ri

R i0
A
R

i1

µ

ij

FK′ ( Li , K i )
B
K i0

K i*

Ki

Figure 5: Welfare Effect of Financial Globalization

41

