                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              OUTSOURCING AND VOLATILITY

                                          Paul R. Bergin
                                         Robert C. Feenstra
                                         Gordon H. Hanson

                                        Working Paper 13144
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13144


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




We thank Thomas Chaney, Fabio Ghironi and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute
2007, ASSA 2007 meetings in Chicago, UC San Diego, Carnegie Mellon University, University of
Colorado, University of Paris, the International Monetary Fund and Academia Sinica in Taipei for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Paul R. Bergin, Robert C. Feenstra, and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Outsourcing and Volatility
Paul R. Bergin, Robert C. Feenstra, and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 13144
June 2007
JEL No. F1,F4

                                              ABSTRACT

While outsourcing of production from the U.S. to Mexico has been hailed in Mexico as a valuable
engine of growth, recently there have been misgivings regarding its fickleness and volatility. This
paper is among the first in the trade literature to study the second moment properties of outsourcing.
We begin by documenting a new stylized fact: the maquiladora outsourcing industries in Mexico experience
fluctuations in value added that are roughly twice as volatile as the corresponding industries in the
U.S. A difference-in-difference method is extended to second moments to verify the statistical significance
of this finding. We then develop a stochastic model of outsourcing with heterogeneous firms that can
explain this volatility. The model employs two novel mechanisms: an extensive margin in outsourcing
which responds endogenously to transmit shocks internationally, and translog preferences which modulate
firm entry.

Paul R. Bergin                                       Gordon H. Hanson
Department of Economics                              IR/PS 0519
University of California, Davis                      University of California, San Diego
One Shields Ave.                                     9500 Gilman Drive
Davis, CA 95616                                      La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER                                             and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu                                 gohanson@ucsd.edu

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
I. Introduction

         Outsourcing, the arrangement whereby firms contract with independent counterparts in

another country to carry out particular stages of production, has grown over the last fifteen years to

become an important part of the trade relationship between the U.S. and Mexico. It is also of

growing importance for trade between the E.U. and emerging economies in Europe, and in global

trade with China. In Mexico, employment in outsourcing industries grew ten-fold from 0.12 million

in 1980 to 1.2 million in 2005. The sector accounts for just under 3% of Mexico’s total GDP, 20% of

Mexican manufacturing value added, and nearly half of the country’s exports. While Mexican

officials have hailed the export assembly plants that engage in outsourcing for their contribution to

economic growth , some have also complained that the sector is fickle and subject to excessive

volatility.1 The assembly plants, known as maquiladoras, are seen as a channel by which the U.S.

exports to Mexico a portion of its employment fluctuations over the business cycle. Despite

abundant literature on how global outsourcing affects the volume of trade, wage levels, and

environmental regulation,2 there is little to no work on the implications of outsourcing for the

variability of economic activity.3 This paper aims to help fill this gap.

         We begin by documenting the variance in outsourcing industries in Mexico. These industries

are composed of maquiladoras to which U.S. and other foreign firms outsource the assembly of

inputs into final outputs. Our data cover Mexico’s four largest outsourcing industries, which together

account for three quarters of outsourcing production in the country: apparel, transportation

1
  See for example the news account of how the Mexican car industry is highly susceptible to fluctuations in demand
for American brand automobiles in Dickerson (2005).
2
  See Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1997), and Grossman and Helpman (2002, 2005) for examples and Feenstra and
Hanson (2003) for a survey of the literature.
3
  Burstein, Kurz, and Tesar (2005) develop a dynamic model of trade in intermediate inputs in which trade flows
between high-wage and low-wage countries (whose respective outputs are assumed to be complements in
production) synchronizes business cycles among trading partners. One difference from our work is that they focus
on international comovement and correlations, whereas we focus on relative volatilities. A second difference is that
they model international production as the aggregation of home and foreign intermediate goods that are
complements, whereas we model international production in terms of outsourcing of variable cost activities over a
continuum of heterogeneous firms. For other work on in intermediate inputs and business cycle synchronization see
Kose and Yi (2001) and Ambler, Cardia, and Zimmerman (2002).


                                                          1
equipment, electronics, and electrical machinery. We match these industries to their counterparts in

the United States. Our main empirical result is that in all four outsourcing industries the volatility of

economic activity in Mexico is significantly higher than in the U.S.; averaging over the four

industries, volatility in Mexico is twice as high as in the U.S. One conjecture might be that this

simply reflects higher volatility in the Mexican economy overall. While aggregate manufacturing in

Mexico is more volatile than in the U.S., the gap is much less than that found between Mexican

maquiladora industries and their U.S. counterparts. In a difference-in-difference regression, adapted

for second moments, there is a statistically significant difference between Mexican and U.S.

volatility in outsourcing industries, even after controlling for cross-country differences in aggregate

manufacturing volatility. Another conjecture might be that higher volatility in Mexico reflects the

smaller size of industries in Mexico. However, our results are robust to comparing Mexican

industries with the more similarly sized industries of U.S. border states.4

         To explain differential volatility in countries engaged in outsourcing, we develop a

theoretical model of global production sharing that introduces two new mechanisms for generating

volatility. The model relies on a continuum of products in the outsourcing sector, and for each

product an endogenous number of varieties. This structure combines the Dornbusch-Fisher-

Samuelson (1977) framework with the monopolistic competition model, as also done by Romalis

(2004). Production in the outsourcing sector requires two activities: a fixed-cost activity that takes

place in the high-wage home country, representing headquarter and managerial costs, and a variable-

cost activity representing assembly work that can be done at home or outsourced to a low-wage

foreign country.

4
  A third conjecture might be that labor-market institutions differ between the countries, such that it is easier to hire
and fire employees in Mexico. However, when Botero et al. (2004) rank countries in terms of job security laws
restricting the hiring and firing of workers, Mexico ties for the most regulated among the 85 countries in the sample,
whereas the U.S. ranks as the fifth least regulated economy in this respect; these data are used in the analysis of
volatility and comparative advantage by Cunat and Melitz (2006). We also see this contrast in labor market
flexibility reflected in our employment data discussed below, in which volatility of employment in overall Mexican
manufacturing is lower than that for U.S. overall manufacturing.


                                                            2
         The first key feature of the model is that the point along the product continuum at which

firms in the home country begin to outsource the variable-cost activity to firms in the foreign country

is endogenously determined as firms compare the unit labor costs across borders.5 When the home

country experiences a boom in demand, the fact that wages in the country tend to be procyclical

alters the outsourcing decision of some firms. If home workers become relatively more expensive to

hire, firms that previously had not outsourced any production now find it profitable to do so. This

shift in the extensive margin acts as a powerful mechanism for the international transmission of

shocks, whereby U.S. producers shift unusually high levels of production abroad during a domestic

economic boom, and the reverse during a recession. Even when the shock is a purely domestic one,

the simulation shows that it is amplified in its transmission abroad, so that it has a greater impact on

the outsourcing industries in the low-wage foreign country than on the domestic counterpart

industries. Volatility is higher in the foreign country, owing to the fact that firms there specialize

entirely in the variable-cost activity.

         A second novel feature of the model is the use of preferences obtained from a translog

expenditure function, which has the convenient property that the elasticity of demand for each

product variety is proportional to the number of firms in the industry.6 As a result, markups charged

by firms are countercyclical, and stochastic increases in demand are not fully absorbed by new

entrants; rather, increases in demand are split between entry of new firms and increases in firm size.7

Because countercyclical markups dampen the entry of new firms, the fixed-cost activity fluctuates

less than the variable-cost activity. Through outsourcing, the higher volatility in the variable-cost

activity translates into higher volatility in production for the low-wage foreign country.
5
  This version of outsourcing is similar to the structure used by Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1997), except that we
also allow firms to enter and exit new varieties of each product.
6
   The translog expenditure function is used by Bergin and Feenstra (2000, 2001), but with a fixed number of
product varieties. Feenstra (2003) shows how the reservation prices are solved for when varieties enter and exit, and
substituting the reservation prices back into the expenditure function yields the functional form used here.
7
  Similar reactions to a change in market size could be obtained from the model of Melitz and Ottaviano (2005), but
the translog expenditure function has the convenient property that preferences are still homothetic, so that two-stage
budgeting can be used.


                                                           3
         The outsourcing sector is embedded in a two country, general equilibrium trade model, which

also includes an undifferentiated traded good in each country. Analytical results show how both of

our new mechanisms affect the relative volatility in the industry wage bill across the two countries in

the outsourcing sector. Numerical examples, by way of stochastic simulation under demand and

supply shocks, indicate that the two mechanisms together can provide a reasonable explanation for

the extra volatility in Mexican outsourcing. The results also indicate that among the two new model

features, it is the endogeneity of the extensive margin in outsourcing that is the more potent in

accounting for differential volatility in U.S. and Mexican outsourcing industries.

         The next section presents the data and empirical results. Section 3 presents the theoretical

model, and section 4 discusses theoretical results.



II. Data and Empirical Results

      Outsourcing by the U.S. to Mexico generally takes the form of U.S. firms producing parts and

components, exporting these intermediate inputs to Mexico to be assembled or processed into final

goods, and re-importing the finished products. U.S. firms tend to specialize in R&D, component

production, marketing, and other headquarters activities, while Mexican plants – the maquiladoras –

tend to specialize in assembly services.8 Mexico is among the most important locations for global

outsourcing by U.S. firms and the U.S. is by far and away Mexico’s largest trading partner. Over the

period 2000-2003, the United States was the source country for 73.4% of the inputs imported by

maquiladoras in Mexico and maquiladora exports back to the United States were equal to 5.3% of



8
 The Mexican government measures imports and exports by registered export-assembly plants in Mexico. Under
Mexican trade policy, firms that export their output do not have to pay duties on any imported intermediate inputs
used in production. To obtain duty-free status, a firm must register with the government. While under the North
American Free Trade Agreement imports from the United States are not subject to duties in Mexico, imports from
most other countries are. As a result, the vast majority of export-assembly plants in Mexico are registered. (Strictly
speaking, export-assembly plants in Mexico may be registered either as maquiladoras or as PITEX (Program for
Temporary Imports of Articles to be Exported) companies (see http://www.economia.gob.mx/). Only the former
appear in our data. In 2003, maquiladora exports to the United States were 2.2 times those by PITEX companies.)


                                                           4
U.S. industry shipments (U.S. International Trade Commission, 2005).9 Maquiladoras have become

an integral part of the Mexican economy, with their share of national manufacturing employment

rising from 4.1% in 1980 to 28.3% in 2002 (Hanson, 2006).

      Most outsourcing by U.S. firms in Mexico occurs in one of four industries: apparel, electronic

accessories (including computer parts and electronic circuitry), electrical machinery (including

televisions and small domestic appliances), and transport equipment and parts (primarily motor

vehicles). Figure 1 shows that over 1990 to 2005 these four industries accounted for 72.7% of

employment in the maquiladora sector. Several common features of these industries make them

amenable to global production sharing. Their production stages—R&D, component production, final

assembly—tend to be physically separable. Firms need not perform all tasks in the same location,

allowing them to allocate stages across countries. Production stages also vary in their factor

intensity, with R&D and component production being more skill and capital-intensive and assembly

being more labor-intensive, giving multinational firms an incentive to locate labor-intensive activities

in low-wage countries.

      Mexico first began to allow export assembly plants to operate in the country in the 1960s. The

maquiladora sector did not reach an appreciable size until the government relaxed restrictions on

inbound foreign investment in the 1980s. Initially, U.S. firms outsourcing to Mexico received

favorable tariff treatment under the HS9802 provision of the U.S. tariff code (Feenstra, Hanson, and

Swenson, 2000). Under HS9802, U.S. firms that manufacture components at home and have them

processed into final goods abroad pay duties on the foreign value-added only when the goods are

brought back into the United States. The North American Free Trade Agreement ended special tariff

9
  These figures apply to the four core outsourcing industries, described in the text. Comparing U.S. imports from
Mexico to U.S. industry output may give a deceptive sense of the size of Mexico’s maquiladora sector relative to
U.S. manufacturing. U.S. imports from Mexico include a substantial component of U.S. value added, in the form of
the intermediate inputs produced in the United States and sent to Mexico for further processing. As an alternative
measure of relative size, one might examine value added in the two countries. Over the period 2000-2003, the ratio
of value added in Mexico’s maquiladoras to value added in U.S. manufacturing was 0.034 in the four core
outsourcing industries (based on annual data).


                                                         5
treatment for U.S. firms outsourcing to Mexico. But, as Figure 2 shows, it did not slow growth in

production sharing. Growth in real value added by maquiladoras accelerated after NAFTA was

implemented, increasing by over 100 log points between 1994 and 2005. Far from removing the

incentive for Mexico to specialize in assembly services, NAFTA freed resources Mexico had devoted

to domestic production to move into export assembly.

      Of primary interest to our analysis is the relative variance of output in U.S. manufacturing

industries and the plants to which they outsource in Mexico. Ideally, we would like to measure

output using value added. However, data constraints require us to use the industry wage bill, instead.

At the three-digit industry level, monthly data on value added, input purchases, and labor earnings

(for production and nonproduction workers) are available for maquiladoras in Mexico, but no such

data are available for the United States. The only monthly U.S. industry series available are an

industry production index, which is not directly comparable to value added; the wage bill for

production workers, which is a substantial component of value added; employment of production

workers; and total employment.10 We compare the monthly variation in the production-worker wage

bill in the two countries at the industry level. We match Mexico’s four primary outsourcing

industries (assembly of apparel items, electronic materials and accessories, assembly of electrical

machinery and equipment, and construction and assembly of transport equipment and parts) with

their closest U.S. three-digit industry matches (apparel manufacturing, NAICS 315; computer and

electronic product manufacturing, NAICS 334; electrical equipment, appliance, and component

manufacturing, NAICS 335; and transportation equipment manufacturing, NAICS 336). Data are

available from 1993 forward.11 However, in late 1994 there was a large depreciation of the peso, as

capital fled Mexico, and in 1995 output dropped sharply. Given the exposure of the maquiladora


10
   In U.S. manufacturing, the production-worker wage bill accounts for 27.8% of value added; in Mexico’s
maquiladora sector, the comparable figure is 19.0%.
11
   Data for Mexico’s maquiladora industries go back to 1990. However, data on Mexico’s overall manufacturing
sector is only available from 1993 forward, owing to a change in the construction of the series in that year.


                                                        6
sector to exchange-rate fluctuations, including the peso-crisis years in our sample could make

volatility in Mexico’s outsourcing industries seem artificially high. To avoid this problem, we limit

the analysis to the period 1996-2005.

      To provide a visual sense of the relative variation in industry activity in the two countries,

Figure 3 plots the production-worker wage bill for the four core outsourcing industries over the

sample period. Each series is in log terms, deflated by the national CPI. To remove seasonal

fluctuations and time trends, each series is seasonally adjusted and HP filtered. In each industry,

economic activity in Mexico is substantially more volatile than in the United States. Table 1A,

which shows the ratio of the standard deviations for the wage bill in Mexican and U.S. industries,

reinforces this perception. In each industry, the standard deviation of Mexican earnings is greater

than in the United States, with the Mexico-U.S. ratio averaging 2.03 over the four industries.

      Of course, Mexican industries may be more volatile than their U.S. counterparts simply

because at an aggregate level the Mexican economy is more volatile than the U.S. economy. To

control for such differences in aggregate volatility, Table 1A also shows the relative standard

deviation in the industry wage bill in the two countries divided by the relative standard deviation for

the production-worker wage bill for all manufacturing industries. While overall manufacturing

earnings in Mexico are more volatile than in the U.S., the relative volatility of Mexico’s maquiladora

industries is even greater. The Mexico-U.S. standard-deviation ratio, divided by the aggregate

manufacturing standard-deviation ratio, averages 1.3 over the four outsourcing industries.

      For robustness, Table 1B reports the same standard deviations and ratios for production worker

employment rather than the wage bill. The contrast in outsourcing volatility stands out even more

clearly here. This is mainly due to the fact that volatility in overall manufacturing employment in

Mexico is low relative to the U.S. This may reflect the finding in Botero et al. (2004) that Mexico has

more restrictive laws regarding employment security (see note 4).



                                                    7
      Another concern is that the size of the two economies may affect their estimated relative

volatilities. If a Mexican manufacturing industry is small and its U.S. counterpart is large, the

variance in the Mexico industry wage bill may be larger than for the U.S. simply because summing

over a larger number of plants in the United States tends to smooth out shocks that are idiosyncratic

to plants. Table 2 reports production worker employment in each industry, showing that in two of

the four industries the U.S. is indeed much larger. One option to deal with potential size disparities

would be to use more narrowly defined industry categories in the U.S. But if we were to move to

four-digit classifications, the composition of goods in the U.S. and Mexican industries would differ,

making it difficult to draw reasonable comparisons.12 An alternative way of dealing with potential

size disparities is to reduce the geographic coverage of the U.S. series. The vast majority of

maquiladoras in Mexico are located in Mexican border cities and many are linked to production

operations on the U.S. side of the border (Feenstra, Hanson, and Swenson, 2000). This makes U.S.

border states a natural geographic unit to which to compare Mexican outsourcing industries. In

Table 3, we compare Mexican industries to their counterparts in California and Texas, which are the

two U.S. border states for which industry data are available.13 At the state level, the only series

available for three-digit industries is total employment. Table 2 shows that employment in

outsourcing industries in California and Texas is similar in scale to Mexican industries. Table 3

shows that that standard deviations and their ratios based on state employment data are very similar

to those obtained for national data.

      To examine in a more formal manner the relative volatility of Mexican and U.S. outsourcing

industries, we test whether the variability of the industry wage bill differs between the two countries,

controlling for aggregate differences in volatility. Let Yict be the wage bill for production workers in


12
   In unreported results, we examined relative volatilities in Mexican industries and their corresponding U.S. four-
digit industries. The results are qualitatively very similar to those reported in Tables 1, 3 and 4.
13
   The small number of plants in three-digit manufacturing industries in Arizona and New Mexico makes industry-
level data for these states to disclosure restrictions.


                                                           8
industry i, country c (c=Mexico, United States), and time t. An industry may be one of the four

outsourcing industries, in which case i=o, or the aggregate across all manufacturing industries (and

not just outsourcing industries), in which case i=m. A standard measure of industry variability is the

squared deviation from the mean, (Yict − Yic ) 2 , where Yic is the mean value of the wage bill in

industry i and country c over the sample period.

      For each of the four outsourcing industries, we pool observations on (Yict − Yic ) 2 across

countries

and time. Then, we add to this sample pooled observations on (Yict − Yic ) 2 in aggregate

manufacturing in the two countries, yielding a data set with 2*2*T observations, where T is the

number of months in the sample period. Using these data, we estimate the following regression for

each combination of an outsourcing industry with aggregate manufacturing:


        (Yict − Yic )2 = β 0 + β11[ i = o] + β 21[ c = MX ] + β31[ i = o]1[ c = MX ] + ε ict


where 1[i=o] equals one if industry i is an outsourcing industry and zero if industry i is a

manufacturing aggregate, 1[c=MX] equals one if country c is Mexico and zero if country c is the

United States, and εict is a disturbance term we discuss below.

      The regression equation is a difference-in-difference estimator of the variability of industry

activity. The coefficient β3 identifies the difference in the variability of the wage bill specific to

outsourcing industries in Mexico, controlling for aggregate differences in variability between Mexico

and the United States (captured by the main effect on the Mexico dummy, β2) and differences in

variability between outsourcing industry o and aggregate manufacturing (captured by the main effect

on the outsourcing industry dummy, β1). Given the regressand is the square of a variable, the error

term is likely to have a non-spherical distribution, complicating inference on the regression



                                                        9
parameters. We use bootstrap methods to obtain standard errors for the coefficient estimates. By

estimating the regression for each outsourcing industry separately, we allow Mexico-U.S. relative

volatility to vary across industries. The sample period for the analysis is 1996:1-2005:12.

        In Table 4A, we see that the variability of the wage bill in Mexico’s outsourcing industries is

higher than in corresponding U.S. industries, even after controlling for the binational difference in

variability for aggregate manufacturing. For all four industries, the difference in relative variability

is very precisely estimated. Not surprisingly, variability in the wage bill is higher for outsourcing

industries than for aggregate manufacturing (as shown by the positive and significant main effect on

the outsourcing industry dummy) and higher for Mexico than for the United States (as shown by the

positive main effect on the Mexico dummy). Table 4B shows that the results are essentially the same

when the methodology is applied to state-level employment data. For all industries and cases tested,

the interaction term is positive and strongly statistically significant. These results indicate that

economic activity in industries engaging in high levels of outsourcing is higher in the country

specializing in labor-intensive product assembly (Mexico) than in the country specializing in skill-

intensive headquarters operations and component production (the U.S.).



III. Theoretical Model

A. Pricing and Product Variety in the Outsourcing Sector

      Consider a model of two countries, labeled home and foreign. The outsourcing relationship in

this model is characterized by the home country outsourcing to the foreign country, so that home may

be thought of as representing the U.S. and foreign represents Mexico. We will scale the quantity

variables coming from the foreign country by its relative size: if the share n of the world population

resides in the home country and 1-n in the foreign country, then we scale foreign quantities by (1-

n)/n. Foreign variables will be denoted by an asterisk *.




                                                     10
         Each country has two sectors. The first is a standard nondifferentiated good whose

production is specific to that country; this will be subscripted by H for the home country’s

domestically produced good, and F for the foreign good. The second sector consists of differentiated

products that are multinational, subscripted by M, in that they can be produced using factors in either

country. This sector represents the aggregate of the four industries listed in the empirical section

above, and it sometimes will be referred to as the outsourcing sector. There is a continuum of

products in this sector indexed by z ∈ [0,1] , and for each z, there is free entry of firms who then

produce N(z) differentiated varieties of input z. The model follows Romalis (2004) in combining a

continuum of products z in the M sector along with multiple varieties N(z) of each product.

        The main contribution of the model is to propose a theoretical description of outsourcing that

can broadly replicate the empirical results described above. Production in the outsourcing sector

involves a fixed cost activity as well as a variable cost activity. The fixed cost, B, represents

headquarters and R&D services. It is assumed here to be uniform across goods and takes place in the

home country, due to the assumption that it is sufficiently more productive in these activities. The

variable cost activity has a unit labor cost that differs by variety, and follows the decreasing

distribution aMt ( z ) = exp ( az + bt ) in the source country. The foreign country has a corresponding

distribution, and the relative unit cost function between the two countries will be specified:

                                     aMt ( z ) exp ( az + bt )
                          A( z ) =            =                   = exp ( ad z + bdt )
                                      *
                                     aMt ( z ) exp ( a* z + bt* )

The share of outsourcing varieties z 't , is determined by the relative wages across countries ( Wt and

Wt* )

                                                   Wt*
                                     A( z 't ) =                                                    (1)
                                                   Wt

        Overall demand for this sector in the home country is specified as



                                                            11
                                                     1
                                     ln D Mt = ∫ ln d Mt ( z )dz                                       (2)
                                                    0


where d M ( z ) is the aggregated demand for a variety z. This in turn is equated to

                                      ⎧⎪ N t ( z ) p t ( z ) y t ( z )    z ≥ z 't
                         d Mt ( z ) = ⎨                         *
                                       ⎪⎩ N t ( z ) p t ( z ) y y ( z )   z ≤ z 't

where N t ( z ) is the number of firms in the industry, pt ( z ) is the price (equal across product

varieties), and y t ( z ) the level of production in each firm. Under our assumptions that the fixed cost

and weight in demand are both are uniform across varieties, then the number of entrants likewise is

uniform across varieties, so Nt does not vary with z. We choose the multinational good DMt as the

numeraire.

      The number of entrants depends on the market structure assumed for each variety. If we were

to make the usual assumption of a CES specification of preferences over entrants within a variety

with elasticity σ , the number of entrants will be

                                             * ⎛1− n ⎞
                                      DMt + DMt ⎜    ⎟
                         N CES ,t   =           ⎝ n ⎠.                                           (3)
                                           σ BWt

That is, the number of entrants in the CES specification is directly proportional to demand. This is a

well-known result in the CES case, but works against finding any difference in the employment

volatility in our model between the home and foreign countries. Even though all the fixed-cost

activities take place at home, those activities are not any less volatile than the variable cost activities

when entry is proportional to demand, as in (3).

      Instead, we will focus on a case where preferences over varieties that are not CES. A

particularly useful and tractable specification for preferences in this case are those that follow a

translog form, where the unit-expenditure function over the varieties of each product z is




                                                                    12
                                 N t ( z)                        N t ( z) N t ( z)
                                            ln pit ( z )
                e ( pt , z ) =    ∑           N t ( z)
                                                         +   1
                                                             2    ∑ ∑                γ ij ln pit ( z ) ln p jt ( z ) ,         (4)
                                  i =1                            i =1     j =1


where pit (z ) is the price of variety i of product z, and where

                                 ⎧ N ( z) −1
                                 ⎪−γ         , i= j
                                 ⎪     N (z)
                          γ ij = ⎨                                           γ > 0.                                            (5)
                                 ⎪   γ
                                          ,   i≠ j
                                 ⎪ N (z)
                                 ⎩

      Notice that the parameters in this translog function vary with the number of products. Feenstra

(2003) shows that this specification arises by starting with a symmetric translog function with fixed

parameters, and then solving for the reservation price for varieties not available. Substituting these

reservation prices back into the translog function, we obtain the specification above. In this

specification the elasticity of demand is time varying, but with the added parameter restriction that γ

= 1, then the demand elasticity very conveniently equals the number of entrants. As shown in the

Appendix, the number of entrants then follows a “square root formula”:

                                                                * ⎛1− n ⎞
                                                         DMt + DMt ⎜    ⎟
                                            NTLog ,t =             ⎝ n ⎠                                                 (6)
                                                               BWt




So the translog case naturally gives rise to a dampened response of new varieties to demand shocks,

which will generate less volatility in the fixed-cost activities (done at home) as compared to the

variable cost activities (done in both countries). When examining the translog case we shall keep the

outsourcing margin z 't fixed for convenience. Our interest, then, will be in comparing the volatility

in employment generated by dampened entry (6) in the translog case, to the volatility in employment

generated by endogenous outsourcing margin (1) in the CES case.




                                                                         13
      The overall labor demand in the multinational sector in each country, LMt and L*Mt , also

depends on the particular market structure within varieties. Labor demand at home includes labor

used for the fixed cost activity as well as the variable cost activity for varieties not outsourced

( zt > z 't ); labor demand abroad includes just variable cost activity for outsourced varieties ( zt < z 't ).

For CES preferences:

                                       ⎛            * ⎛1− n ⎞ ⎞
                                       ⎜ DMt + DMt ⎜ n ⎟ ⎟
                          LCES , Mt = ⎜
                                       ⎜          σ Wt
                                                      ⎝
                                                              (
                                                            ⎠ ⎟ 1+ σ −1 1− z '
                                                              ⎟
                                                                  (      )(    t )   )
                                       ⎜                      ⎟
                                       ⎝                      ⎠
                                                                                                    (7a,b)
                                                  ⎛        * ⎛1− n ⎞ ⎞
                                                  ⎜ DMt + DMt  ⎜    ⎟⎟
                          ⎛1− n ⎞ *
                                     L          = ⎜            ⎝ n ⎠ ⎟⎛ σ −1⎞ z '
                          ⎜        ⎟   CES , Mt                        ⎜    ⎟ t
                          ⎝ n ⎠                   ⎜       Wt *       ⎟⎝ σ ⎠
                                                  ⎜                  ⎟
                                                  ⎝                  ⎠

For translog preferences:

                                              * ⎛1− n ⎞             ⎛         * ⎛1− n ⎞ ⎞
                                     DMt + DMt  ⎜        ⎟          ⎜ DMt + DMt  ⎜    ⎟⎟
                 LTLog , Mt = B
                                             Wt
                                                           (
                                                ⎝ n ⎠ z' + ⎜
                                                             t )    ⎜         Wt        ⎟
                                                                                           ( t)
                                                                                 ⎝ n ⎠ ⎟ 1− z '

                                                                    ⎜                   ⎟
                                                                    ⎝                   ⎠
                                                                                                    (8a,b)
                                          ⎛        * ⎛1− n ⎞ ⎞            ⎛                     ⎞
                     −                    ⎜ DMt + DMt ⎜ n ⎟ ⎟ ⎜                                 ⎟
                 ⎛ 1   n  ⎞ *                           ⎝        ⎠ ⎟ z ' ⎜1 −        BW         ⎟
                          ⎟ L TLog , Mt = ⎜
                                                                                         t
                 ⎜
                                                                                      * ⎛1− n ⎞ ⎟
                                                                        t
                 ⎝   n    ⎠               ⎜       W   *
                                                                   ⎟      ⎜
                                          ⎜
                                                    t
                                                                   ⎟ ⎜         DMt + DMt ⎜     ⎟⎟
                                          ⎝                        ⎠ ⎝                   ⎝ n ⎠⎠




B. Production in the Rest of the Economy

      The remainder of the model follows a standard open macroeconomy specification. The

country-specific sector in the home country is a perfectly competitive market for an undifferentiated

traded good with production function

                                            LHt
                                    YHt =       ,                                                      (9)
                                            aHt




                                                             14
where LHt is labor in the home country-specific sector and aHt is labor cost. Profit maximization by

producers in this sector implies

                                           pHt
                                    Wt =                                                                            (10)
                                           aHt

Where pHt is the relative price of the home domestic good in terms of the multinational good

numeraire.


C. Households

      The representative household in each country has additively separable preferences over

consumption ( Ct ), which is a composite of goods in the three sectors, and overall labor ( Lt ). We

assume complete asset markets in state-contingent securities between countries. The household

optimization problem in the source country may be expressed:

                             ∞
                                 ⎛ 1         1     1+ μ ⎞
                        E0 ∑ β t ⎜
                                        1−φ
                max                   Ct −       Lt ⎟
                           t =0  ⎝1−φ       1+ μ        ⎠
                st. PHt CHt + PFt C Ft + CMt + ∑ v ( s t +1 | s t )X ( st +1 ) = Wt Lt + X t
                                                   st +1
                                                                                                              χ
                                                                                η χ −1
                           ⎛                                                                               ⎞ χ −1
                           ⎜          1     ⎛ 1 η −1             1            ⎞
                                                                          η −1 η −1 χ
                                                                                             1
                                                                                                      χ −1
                                                                                                           ⎟
                where Ct = ⎜ (1 − a ) χ     ⎜θ η CHt η + (1 − θ )η CFt     η  ⎟          + a χ ( CMt ) χ ⎟
                                            ⎜                                 ⎟
                           ⎜                ⎝                                 ⎠                            ⎟
                           ⎝                                                                               ⎠

and where X t is the holdings of Arrow-Debreu securities that pay off in units of the numeraire

multinational good in state s. Likewise for the foreign country.

      Labor is mobile between sectors within a country, and between fixed and variable cost

activities within the home outsourcing sector, but there is no labor mobility between countries. So

each country has a single but distinct equilibrium wage rate.

      Complete asset markets implies the following risk-sharing condition equating the marginal

utilities of consumption up to a constant of proportionality




                                                              15
                                      φ
                                  PC
                                   t t
                                          =ω ,                                             (11)
                                 P*t Ct*φ

where ω is a constant indicating the relative per-capita wealth of the home country in the initial asset

allocation. Relative demand for the home and foreign local goods follow:

                                 CMt ⎛ α            ⎞
                                     = ⎜⎜           ⎟ PHt                                  (12)
                                 C Ht ⎝ θ (1 − α ) ⎟⎠


                                 CMt ⎛         α          ⎞
                                     = ⎜⎜                 ⎟ PFt .                          (13)
                                 C Ft ⎝ (1 − θ )(1 − α ) ⎟⎠

Note that the law of one price holds here, so the relative prices PHt and PFt apply to the goods

markets in both countries. And labor supply is

                                 Lμt              C 1−φ
                                     = θ (1 − α ) t      .                                 (14)
                                 Wt              PHt CHt

Corresponding conditions apply for the foreign country.

      An exogenous component of demand will be denoted Gt . This term is introduced to capture

exogenous changes in demand arising from several sources, including shifts in government purchases

and shifts in investment demand. The exogenous demand is allocated among the three goods in the

same way as private consumption, according to demand conditions like (12 and 13) above. We

denote total demands as the sum of consumption and government demand: Dt = Ct + Gt ,

DMt = CMt + GMt , etc.




D. Market Clearing and Equilibrium

      The market clearing condition for domestic good in the home country is

                               ⎛1− n ⎞ *           ⎛1− n ⎞ *           LHt
                         CHt + ⎜     ⎟ CHt + GHt + ⎜     ⎟ GHt = YHt ≡     .               (15)
                               ⎝ n ⎠               ⎝ n ⎠               aHt




                                                         16
      Market clearing in the labor market requires that overall labor supply equal the sum of labor

demands in the sectors

                             Lt = LHt + LMt                                                                       (16)

                             L*t = L*Ft + L*Mt

      Equilibrium here is a sequence of 19 endogenous variables: Lt , L*t , LHt , L*Ft , LMt , L*Mt , Wt , Wt* ,

N t , N t* , CHt , C Ht
                     *
                        , CFt , C Ft* CMt , CMt
                                             *
                                                , pHt , pFt , and z 't , which are determined by the labor-supply

condition (14), relative demand for the home country-specific good (12), that for the foreign country-

specific good (13), optimal entry condition (3 or 4), labor demand for the country-specific sector

(10), and the multinational sector (7 or 8), market clearing condition for the country-specific sector

(15), labor (16), and foreign counterparts for each of these. In addition there is the marginal

outsourcing condition (1), the risk sharing condition in (11). The price of the numeraire good DMt is

set to unity (as described in the Appendix).

      Finally, value added in each sector (in units of the multinational goods numeraire) can then be

computed as

                            Yt = Wt Lt , YMt = Wt LMt ,         pHt YHt = Wt LHt
                               *     *    *        *      *    *          *   *         *   *
                                                                                                                  (17)
                            Yt = Wt Lt , YMt = Wt LMt ,                 pFt YFt = Wt LFt


E. Shocks

      The model will include shocks both to demand and supply, entering through the additive

demand term ( Gt and Gt* ) and the unit labor cost terms ( aHt and aFt* ). Both types of shocks are

specified as first order autoregressions in log deviations from their respective means:


          ⎢
                           ( )⎥⎤
          ⎡log ( aHt ) − log aH
                                            ⎢
                                                                ( )⎥⎤ ⎡ε
                                            ⎡log ( aHt −1 ) − log aH
                                                                                      ⎤         ⎡ε aHt ⎤   ⎛ ⎡0 ⎤     ⎞
                                  =ρ                                   +          aHt
                                                                                      ⎥ , where ⎢ε ⎥ ~N    ⎜ ⎢ ⎥ ,σ a ⎟
                                                                     ⎥ ⎢⎣ ε
          ⎢
                           ( ) ⎥⎦
                                ⎥           ⎢
                                                                ( ) ⎥⎦
                                         a

         ⎢⎣ log ( aFt ) − log aF           ⎢⎣ log ( aFt −1 ) − log aF             aFt ⎦         ⎣ aFt ⎦    ⎝ ⎣0 ⎦     ⎠




                                                                   17
         ⎡ log ( Gt ) − log G ⎤
         ⎢
                                ( ) ⎥ =ρ ⎢
                                                                 ( )
                                          ⎡ log ( Gt −1 ) − log G ⎤
                                                                       ⎥ + ⎡ ε Gt ⎤ , where ⎡ ε Gt ⎤ ~N     ⎛ ⎡0 ⎤     ⎞
and:                                                                                                        ⎜ ⎢ ⎥ ,σ G ⎟ .
         ⎢
                (               ( )
                      t ) − log G
                                  * ⎥     ⎢
                                                 (               ( )
                                                      t −1 ) − log G
                                                                     * ⎥
                                                                           ⎢ε ⎥             ⎢ε ⎥
                                        G
            log   G *
                                             log   G *
                                                                           ⎣  G *t ⎦        ⎣ G*t ⎦         ⎝ ⎣0 ⎦     ⎠
         ⎣⎢                         ⎥⎦    ⎣⎢                           ⎦⎥



IV. Model Results:

A. Analytical result

       This section demonstrates that the model can broadly generate the primary empirical result in

section 2, which is amplified volatility in the outsourcing sector of the destination country. It then

analyzes the model features most important for this result.

       Some useful intuition into the relative volatility across countries in this sector can be gained by

taking the ratio of the labor demand conditions (7a,b) in the CES case, each multiplied by its

country’s wage to find value added:

                                    ⎛ n ⎞⎛          ⎛ 1 − n ⎞ * ⎞⎛ σ −1⎞
                                    ⎜     ⎟ ⎜ DMt + ⎜       ⎟ DMt ⎟ ⎜      ⎟ z 't
         Y *
            =
              W L  * *
                      CES ,Tt
                                =
                                    ⎝1− n ⎠⎝        ⎝ n ⎠         ⎠ ⎝ σ ⎠
                                                                                   =
                                                                                          (σ − 1) zt'      ⎛ n ⎞
                                                                                                                   ⎟.   (18)
          Tt     t
                                                                                                       ' ⎜
         YTt Wt LCES ,Tt          ⎛       ⎛1− n ⎞ * ⎞                                1 + (σ − 1) (1 − zt ) ⎝ 1 − n ⎠
                                     D  +
                                  ⎜ Mt ⎜ n ⎟ Mt ⎟   D
                                  ⎜
                                  ⎜
                                          ⎝
                                             σ
                                                  ⎠
                                                         ⎟
                                                          (                      )
                                                         ⎟ 1 + (σ − 1) (1 − z 't )
                                  ⎜                      ⎟
                                  ⎝                      ⎠

Note that if the outsourcing margin were to taken to be taken to be a constant, then this ratio is would

also be a constant, and value added across countries are directly proportional to each other. In other

words, the percentage volatility of earnings in the outsourcing sectors in the two countries are

necessarily equal to each other.

       This may seem surprising, since the U.S. engages a portion of its labor in this sector in a fixed

cost activity, which by definition does not vary when a firm raises its level of production. However,

the free entry condition (3) indicates that the number of firms producing each variety rises in direct

proportion with demand in the CES case, so that the expenditure on the fixed cost rises likewise in

proportion. In essence, the market accommodates the rise in demand by replicating firms without


                                                                  18
any increase in average firm size. Labor demand for the fixed cost activity rises in proportion to labor

demand for the variable cost activity in this case, so the fixed/variable distinction has no bearing on

the volatility of value added across the two countries.

      There are two readily apparent ways to break this tight linkage. First, we can allow the

outsourcing margin to be endogenous, so that the term z’ in equation (18) above varies, thus implying

the ratio of income on the left side of that equation also to vary over time. For example, consider a

rise in overall demand in the source country. If this drives up relative wages in the source country, it

will induce some firms previously near the margin to begin outsourcing. This direct shift in

employment for variable cost activities from one country to the other will reduce the impact of the

demand shock on employment and labor earnings in the source country, and act as a mechanism to

transfer some of the impact of the demand shock to the foreign outsourcing sector. Depending on

how sensitive firms are in the outsourcing sector of the U.S. to relative wage changes, and depending

on the prevalence of U.S. demand shocks, this is a potential mechanism for reducing volatility in the

U.S. outsourcing sector and raising it in the corresponding sector in Mexico. In other words, even if

Mexico has restrictions on the ability of firms to fire and hire workers, if U.S. firms are able to enter

and exit outsourcing relationships with Mexican firms, this becomes a mechanism by which U.S.

firms can shunt temporary excess demand off on foreign production facilities, and vice versa during

temporary shortfalls in demand.

      It is more ambiguous how this mechanism would play out in the case of productivity shocks. If

an overall rise in productivity in a country, including the outsourcing sector, leads to a rise in wages

of a similar amount, there then would be no change in the cross-country ratio of relative unit labor

costs and relative wages, and hence no movement of the extensive margin of outsourcing. Any

movement along this margin would rely upon relative wages moving less or more than the rise in

productivity in the outsourcing sector.



                                                     19
        The second approach used in the paper for breaking the link between countries in the

outsourcing sector is to introduce sluggishness in the entry of new firms, thus preventing the fixed

cost activity in the source country from mimicking volatility in the variable cost activity abroad. As

discussed above, introducing translog preferences in the model is one way to implement this feature.

When a rise in demand encourages new entry, the resulting rise in substitution elasticity and resulting

fall in markups lowers profits, thereby discouraging entry. As a result, aggregate earnings by workers

in the fixed-cost activity of the outsourcing sector in the source country varies less in response to

fluctuations in demand than does the variable cost activity.



B. Calibration of Numerical Experiment

        A numerical experiment is helpful for evaluating the ability of the model with translog

preferences and endogenous outsourcing to generate volatility in the outsourcing sector.

        The parameters characterizing production in the outsourcing sector can be calibrated in part by

using our available data. Regarding the U.S. cost distribution in the outsourcing sector ( aM ( zt ) ), we

first set the value at the steady state margin equal to the value for the overall manufacturing sector

                  ()         (        )
(that is, set aM z ≡ exp az + bt = aHt ). Secondly, Bernard et al. (2003) report that the standard

deviation of log U.S. plant sales is 1.67. Together, these facts are sufficient to pin down the values of

the two parameters in the outsourcing distribution parameters.14 Comparing the level of employment

in our data set for the four outsourcing industries in Mexico and in the U.S., Mexican employment

represents 20% of the total over both countries. This is used to calibrate the steady state outsourcing

share: z =0.20




14
     In particular, given that distribution is over the unit interval, the constant value a can be computed as
1.67(1/12)−0.5 / σ , and bt varies with overall productivity shocks bt = log(aHt ) − az .

                                                         20
       Regarding the distribution of relative unit costs between the two countries,

A ( zt ) = exp ( ad zt + bdt ) , the lack of cross-sectional data for Mexican plants hampers calibration. As

with the U.S. distribution above, two pieces of information are needed to pin down the two

parameters, ad and bd . First, if one computes the average weekly rate of payment to workers for the

four outsourcing industries in our data set, workers in the U.S. sector are paid 8 times as much as the

Mexican workers. To make the relative unit cost distribution consistent with this fact in steady state,

                    ()
it requires that A z =1/8, which is sufficient to solve for the steady state value of


bd = log ( 0.125 ) − ad z . Unfortunately we have no information on the standard deviation of the

relative unit cost distribution analogous to that used above to pin down the second parameter in the

U.S. cost distribution. Of special significance for the endogenous outsourcing mechanism is the slope

                                                                            ()
of the distribution at the steady state margin of outsourcing, A ' z . The flatter the distribution at this

point, the stronger will be the adjustment in the outsourcing margin for a given relative wage change.

To gauge the potential impact of the outsourcing margin, we begin by calibrating this slope to be

near zero, implying that the relative unit cost of firms in Mexico to that in the U.S. changes little in

the neighborhood of the steady state. Simulations will investigate the sensitivity of results for a range

of alternative calibrations for this value. Note that the relative unit cost distribution parameters are

not time-varying, so the distribution does not shift in response to productivity shocks in either

country. This specification implies that productivity shocks in one country are transmitted fully to

foreign affiliates, so that the ratio of the unit costs across countries remains stable.15




15
   An alternative assumption would be to shift the A(z) distribution in proportion to productivity shocks in either
country. In experiments, this was found to imply a strongly negative correlation in the output levels of the
outsourcing sectors across countries, which is counterfactual. The assumption that productivity shocks are
transmitted fully to foreign affiliates is very similar to that assumed in Burstein, et al (2005), also used to generate
positive cross-country correlations in a model of multi-national production.


                                                             21
      The size of the fixed cost of entry in the outsourcing sector (B) is calibrated so that in steady

state each industry in the outsourcing sector has six firms that choose to enter ( N =6); this requires

B=0.0087. This facilitates comparison between the translog and CES versions of the model, since the

number of entrants will be the elasticity of substitution between goods, which was calibrated for the

CES case above at 6.

      Regarding preference parameters, calibrations for the most standard of these are taken from the

business cycle literature. The elasticity of substitution between varieties is set to imply a price

markup of 20% (so σ =6). The labor supply elasticity is set at unity, μ =1. The curvature parameter

is set at φ =2. The elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is calibrated at the

common value of unity ( η = 1). Since the multinational good can be produced either as a home or as

a foreign good, we assume that it has double this elasticity ( χ =2).

      The remaining preference parameters are calibrated to reflect the relationship between the U.S.

and Mexico in the last year of our data set, 2003. The home bias parameters as set to reflect the share

of import expenditures in GDP, θ =0.88, θ * =0.71. The four U.S. industries classified as outsourcing

industries in the data set represent 24% of total U.S. manufacturing, so the outsourcing share

parameter is calibrated as α = 0.24 . The relative weight on the home country in the complete asset

market allocation ( ϖ ) is calibrated so that the model generates in steady state a ratio of home

consumption to foreign consumption that is close to ratio of real consumption levels per capita in the

data, which is 6.27 (requiring 1/ ϖ =37). The steady state level of the additive demand term ( G and

G * ) is calibrated to represent government spending, and since our model abstracts from the

investment component of demand, the steady state value is set to equal the share of government

purchases in GDP net of investment spending, which is 22% in US data. The U.S. population

represents 74 percent of the total population of the two countries combined, so n = 0.74.




                                                     22
        Productivity shock parameters are estimated from a first-order autoregression on Solow

residuals computed from our data set on earnings and employment in overall manufacturing in each

country.16 Using HP filtered monthly data, the estimated coefficients are shown in Table 5.

Regarding demand shocks, there is no monthly series available for government consumption, so we

use total government spending from IFS. Again the parameter values from the autoregression are

listed in Table 5.



C. Numerical Results

      Simulations consist of solving the model numerically in its original nonlinear form for 120

periods of random draws of shocks. The first 20 periods are dropped, and the remaining 100 periods

are HP filtered and deflated by the CPI, just as were the data reported in Table 3, and used to

compute moments. This process is repeated 1000 times, and we report the average of moments over

the replications.

      Table 6 reports results for the benchmark model. As a precondition for studying the

transmission to the outsourcing sector, the combination of demand and supply shocks does a

reasonably good job of replicating the degree of volatility in the overall level of income in the US

and Mexican economies, though the U.S. overall manufacturing volatility is overstated somewhat in

the simulation. Of primary interest is the fact that the calibrated model does a remarkably good job

of replicating the relative amplification of volatility in the outsourcing sectors of the two countries.

While the data imply that outsourcing income is twice as volatile in Mexico as in the U.S., the model

can explain why it is 78% more volatile. Further, the correlations are all positive in the simulation, as

in the data. In fact, the outsourcing model implies a very strong positive correlation in the income of



16
  Following Glick and Rogoff, we compute Solow residuals setting the labor share at 0.6 and assuming a
constant capital stock. Resulting parameter estimates are almost identical if we follow the production
function in the theoretical model and assume a labor share of unity.

                                                     23
the outsourcing sector and overall economies of the two countries.17 The subsequent columns of the

table indicate that the US demand shocks and Mexican supply shocks are the primary drivers of these

moments.

      Table 7 investigates the sensitivity of the results to the calibration of the relative cost

distribution, A ( z ) . Clearly a flat distribution in the neighborhood of the steady state amplifies the

relative volatility in the outsourcing sector. The ability of the model to generate amplified volatility

in the Mexican outsourcing sector drops off as the slope is assumed to be steeper, but a range of

assumptions for this slope still generates substantial amplification.

      Next we investigate the relative contributions of the two key model features, endogenous

outsourcing and translog preferences. Table 8 shows that when the outsourcing margin is held fixed,

the translog preferences on their own generate significantly less amplification, albeit still a positive

amount. The potency of translog preferences to make Mexican volatility more volatile than in the

U.S. is limited by the size of the fixed cost activity in the U.S. The fixed cost parameter, B, is

calibrated to imply an endogenous elasticity of substitution of 6; in the present model, this calibration

limits the size of the fixed cost activity to approximately 10% of employment in the U.S. outsourcing

sector. When translog preferences are replaces with CES, the endogenous outsourcing mechanism

on its own generates only slightly less volatility in the Mexican outsourcing mechanism than in the

benchmark case. When both translog preferences and endogenous outsourcing are shut down,

volatility in the outsourcing sector is strongly reduced.18

      Next, we consider a case to address the concern that translog preferences might not dampen

firm creation sufficiently to be realistic. For example, the theory does not attempt to model the


17
   The strong positive correlations are a point of interest, given that related work by Burstein et al (2005) found this
fact challenging to replicate in theoretical simulations. Experiments to follow will study why this result arises here.
18
   The fact there is any extra volatility in Mexican outsourcing relative to the U.S. in this case is due entirely to
relative movements in the CPIs used to deflate the variables before computing moments. Simulation results confirm
the theoretical prediction earlier in the paper, that when income is reported in units of goods and not deflated to
consumption units, the ratio of standard deviation in Mexican outsourcing to that in the U.S. is precisely unity.


                                                            24
complex dynamics of firm entry, in which it is reasonable to think there are substantial delay between

a decision to enter and actually commencing production. Nor does the theory model the sunk cost of

entry, which might discourage entry in response to transitory shocks. We test whether the modeling

of this feature of the economy could be quantitatively relevant for the issue at hand, by modeling it in

its most extreme form. Column 6 of Table 8 reports simulation results for the case where no new

firms are able to enter. The results show that precluding entry only raises by a small amount the ratio

of outsourcing volatility in Mexico compared to the U.S. Since modeling the most extreme form of

sluggishness in firm entry has a quantitatively small impact on the results, it would seem that

modeling the intermediate cast of realistic entry dynamics, requiring an entirely new model solution

methodology, is not warranted.

      Lastly, we consider the impacts of outsourcing on the overall transmission of business cycle

shocks. This issue is not the primary focus of the present paper, but since the simulations do have

implications for this important question, we summarize these here. Burstein et al. (2005) notes that

the output correlations are higher across countries that engage in internationalized production like

outsourcing. Our model of outsourcing appears to imply such a result. The cross-country correlation

in overall income is a very high value of 0.91 in the benchmark case. This result is partly due to the

presence of endogenous outsourcing. Even though the international correlation in the outsourcing

sector itself is somewhat lower than this value for the overall economy, the fact that the two countries

are linked by the endogenous outsourcing condition acts as a potent mechanism linking wages and

hence labor earnings across economies. It is a well-know feature in many trade models that a

homogeneous good produced in all countries fixes the relative wage between countries. In our model

of endogenous outsourcing, the relative wage is not completely fixed, but its movements are limited

by the ability of the outsourcing margin to move along the relative unit cost distribution. This

hypothesis is tested by simulating a version of the model where the outsourcing sector is removed

(a=0, and the outsourcing margin made exogenous). The output correlation in this case falls to 0.72.

                                                    25
The rest of the high international correlation is due to the presence of demand shocks, which fall on

both home and foreign goods as specified by the calibrated degree of home bias. When the supply

shocks as well as the outsourcing sector both are removed, the overall income correlation falls to

0.16. There appears to be an interaction between these two model features, since when the

benchmark outsourcing model is limited to demand shocks, the overall output correlation remains at

a higher value of 0.60. These results clearly are just suggestive, and for a more thorough examination

of the overall propagation properties of outsourcing we would recommend a more general model that

includes investment dynamics in real capital. This is left to future research.



V. Conclusion

      This paper has studied the second-moment properties of global outsourcing. It has documented

a new empirical regularity: outsourcing industries in Mexico experience fluctuations in economic

activity that are twice as volatile as the corresponding industries in the U.S. A difference-in-

difference method adapted to second moments is used to verify the finding is statistically significant

and is specific to the outsourcing sector. The paper then developed a new theoretical model of

outsourcing which can explain this stylized fact. The model features heterogeneous firms that are free

to enter and exit outsourcing relationships, and where the degree of entry of new firms into

production is modulated by a novel modeling of countercyclical markups. Stochastic simulations

show that modeling the extensive margin response of outsourcing to shocks is key for explaining the

empirical regularity.




                                                    26
References

Ambler, S., E. Cardia and C. Zimmerman. 2002. “International Transmission of the Business Cycle
    in a Multi-Sectoral Model.” European Economic Review 46: 273-300.

Bergin, Paul R. and Robert C. Feenstra, 2000. “Staggered Price Setting and Endogenous
     Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45, June, 657-680

________, 2001. “Pricing to Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real Exchange Rate Persistence,”
     Journal of International Economics, 54(2), August, 333-359.

Botero, J., S. Djankov, R. La Porta, F. López de Silanes, and A. Schleifer (2004): “The Regulation of
     labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1339-1382.

Burstein, Ariel, Johann Kurz, and Linda Tesar. 2005. “Trade, Production Sharing, and the
     International Transmission of Business Cycles.” Mimeo, University of Michigan.

Cunat, Alejandro and Marc Melitz, 2006. “Volatility, Labour Market Flexibility, and the Pattern of
     Comparative Advantage,” University of Essex and Harvard University.

Dickerson, Marla, 2005. “Big 3’s woes migrate: Mexico’s dependence on assembling cars for U.S.
     automakers puts pressure on its economy as Detroit loses market share to foreign competitors,”
     Los Angeles times Business Section, August 21, p.1.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul A. Samuelson, 1977. “Comparative Advantage,
     Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic
     Review, 67(5), December, 823-39.

Feenstra, Robert C., 2003. “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models,
     Without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economic Letters, 78, 79-86.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, 1996. “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative
     Wages,” in R.C. Feenstra, G.M. Grossman and D.A. Irwin, eds., The Political Economy of
     Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, MIT Press, 1996, 89-127.

________, 1997. “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s
     Maquiladoras,” Journal of International Economics 42, 371-394.

________, 2003. “Global Production and Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages,” in E. Kwan
     Choi and James Harrigan, eds., Handbook of International Trade, Blackwell, pp. 146-185.

Feenstra, Robert C., Gordon H. Hanson, and Deborah Swenson. 2000. "Offshore Assembly from the
     United States: Production Characteristics of the 9802 Program," in Robert C. Feenstra, ed., The
     Impact of International Trade on Wages, University of Chicago Press and the National Bureau of
     Economic Research, pp. 85-128.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 2002. “Integration versus outsourcing in industry
     equilibrium, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 85-120.

________, 2005. “Outsourcing in a global economy,” Review of Economic Studies 72, 135-159.



                                                  27
Hanson, Gordon H. 2006. "Globalization, Labor Income, and Poverty in Mexico," in Ann Harrison,
     ed., Globalization and Poverty, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and the National Bureau
     of Economic Research, forthcoming.

Kose, M. Ayhan and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “International Trade and Business Cycles: Is Vertical
     Specialization the Missing Link?” American Economic Review 91: 371-375.

Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, 2005. “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” NBER
     working paper no. 11393.

Romalis, John .2004. “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,” American
    Economic Review, 94(1), March, 67-97.

U.S. International Trade Commission. Industry Trade and Technology Review, USITC Publication
      3762, December/January 2005.




                                                28
Appendix

        In addition the nondifferentiated goods from each country, consumers purchase the

continuum of products in the multinational sectors indexed by z. For each z, there are Nt(z) products

and the unit-expenditure function from consumers is given by (4)-(5). Differentiating this unit-

expenditure function with respect to ln pit(z), we obtain the share sit(z) of variety i in the expenditure

on product z:

                                                     Nt ( z)
                                       sit ( z ) =    ∑γ ij ln p jt ( z ) ,                              (A1)
                                                      j =1


where the parameters γij satisfy (5). The elasticity of demand for each variety is computed as:

                                              ∂ ln sit ( z )       γ
                            ηit ( z ) = 1 −                  = 1 − ii .                                  (A2)
                                              ∂ ln pit ( z )      sit ( z )

When prices are equal across varieties in a symmetric equilibrium, ln pit(z) = ln pt(z), then the shares

of varieties are also equal, sit(z) = 1/Nt (z). So making use of (5) we rewrite (A2) as:

                                       ηit ( z ) = 1 + γ [ N t ( z ) − 1].                               (A3)

With the added parameter restriction that γ = 1, then we see that ηit ( z ) = N t ( z ) , so the elasticity of

demand equals the number of firms in the symmetric equilibrium.

        To determine the number of firms we make use of zero profits for each product z. Fixed

costs for each product variety are BWt. Since the price of the multinational good is taken as

numeraire, then the revenue earned from home plus foreign sales of each variety is

                                          *
pit ( z )d it ( z ) = sit ( z )[ D Mt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ] . In the symmetric equilibrium this equals

          *
[ DMt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ] / N t ( z ) . To obtain profits, equal to revenue minus variable costs, we divide by

the elasticity of demand. So in the CES case we divide revenue by σ, thereby obtaining profits

          *
[ DMt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ] /[σN t ( z )]. Setting this equal to fixed costs BWt, we solve for the number of

products in (3), which is equal for all z. Alternatively, in the translog case the elasticity is


                                                                     29
                                                                          *
ηit ( z ) = N t ( z ) , and dividing revenue by this we obtain [ D Mt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ] / N t ( z ) 2 . Setting this

equal to fixed costs BWt, we solve for the number of products in (6), which is again equal for all z.

         Labor demand at home is obtained by integrating over the fixed costs B for every product

z ∈ [0,1] , and the variable labor costs a Mt ( z ) y t (z ) for those products z ∈ [ z ' t ,1] :

                                              1             1
                                       Lt = ∫ BN t dz + ∫ a Mt (z ) y t ( z ) N t dz .                              (A4)
                                              0             zt'



The number of varieties Nt appearing in the first integral of (A4) is obtained from (3) or (6). For the

second integral, we multiply the labor costs ayt ( z ) by the wage Wt, and further multiply by the

                                                                       *
markup σ /(σ − 1) in the CES case, to obtain the expenditure [ DMt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ] / N t on each

                                                                               *
variety. So the expression inside the second integral of (A4) equals [ DMt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ](σ − 1) / σWt ,

which is integrated over z ∈ [ z t' ,1] and summed with the first integral to yield (7a). In the translog case

the logic is similar, except that the markup of price over marginal costs is η t /(ηt − 1) = N t /( N t − 1) ,

and Nt is obtained from (6). Evaluating the integrals in (A4) we obtain (8a).

                                                                        *
       For foreign labor demand we integrate the variable labor costs a Mt (z ) yt* ( z ) for z ∈ [0, zt' ] :
                                              zt'

                                       L = ∫ a Mt
                                        *
                                        t
                                               *
                                                  (z ) yt* ( z ) N t dz .                                     (A5)
                                              0



Multiplying the labor costs a * y t* ( z ) by the wage Wt* , and further multiplying by the markup

                                                                      *
σ /(σ − 1) in the CES case, we again obtain the expenditure [ DMt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ] / N t on each

                                                                         *
variety. So the expression inside the integral of (A5) equals [ D Mt + D Mt (1 − n ) / n ](σ − 1) / σWt* , which

is integrated over z ∈ [0, z ' t ] to yield (7b). Again, in the translog case the markup of price over

marginal costs is instead η t /(ηt − 1) = N t /( N t − 1) , and evaluating the integral in (A5) we obtain (8b).




                                                                  30
         Finally, we need to derive the price index for the numeraire good DMt, and set this equal to

unity.

It can be shown that in the CES case the price index is:

                                                       ⎛ σ ⎞ ⎛a −a⎞
                                                                   *
   ln PM ,CES ,t = z 't ln Wt + (1 − z 't ) ln Wt + ln ⎜
                             *

                                                       ⎝ σ − 1
                                                                +
                                                               ⎟ ⎜
                                                               ⎠ ⎝   2 ⎠
                                                                                 (        )       a
                                                                       ⎟ ( z 't ) + bt − bt z 't + + bt ,
                                                                                 2    *

                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                            (A6)


and alternatively in the translog case:

                                                        ⎛ N t ⎞ ⎛ a* − a ⎞
   ln PM ,T log,t = z 't ln Wt + (1 − z 't ) ln Wt + ln ⎜
                              *
                                                                 ⎟+⎜                 (        )     a
                                                                         ⎟ ( z 't ) + bt − bt z 't + + b . (A7)
                                                                                   2    *

                                                        ⎝ Nt − 1 ⎠ ⎝ 2 ⎠                            2

Both of these expressions are set equal to unity in the simulations to close the model.




                                                             31
               Table 1A. Relative Volatility in Mexico and U.S. Outsourcing Industries:
                                   Production Worker Wage Bill

                                                       Electrical                 Transport
                                            Apparel    Machinery Electronics      Equipment      Average
Standard Deviations
σ (Yi* ) (Mex. Outsourcing Industry)          4.83         4.41        6.21          4.20          4.91
σ (Yi ) (U.S. Outsourcing Industry)           2.31         2.01        2.79          2.63          2.44
σ (Y* ) (Mex. Aggregate Manufacturing)        1.94         1.94        1.94          1.94          1.94
σ (Y) (U.S. Aggregate Manufacturing)          1.27         1.27        1.27          1.27          1.27
              σ (Yi* )/σ (Yi )                2.09         2.19        2.23          1.60          2.03
              σ (Y* )/σ (Y)                   1.53         1.53        1.53          1.53          1.53
              σ (Yi* )/σ (Yi )
                                              1.37         1.44        1.46          1.05          1.33
              σ (Y* )/σ (Y)
Correlations
               corr (Yi* ,Yi )                0.24         0.29        0.51          0.41          0.36
                       *
               corr (Y ,Y )                   0.24         0.24        0.24          0.24          0.24
                        *   *
               corr (Y ,Y )
                       i                      0.33         0.48        0.47          0.15          0.36
               corr (Yi ,Y)                   0.52         0.75        0.57          0.63          0.62

Notes:

The top half of the table shows standard deviations (in percent) for the production-worker wage bill in
specific Mexico and U.S. outsourcing industries, and in Mexico and U.S. aggregate manufacturing, and
the ratios of these standard deviations. Each series is in log real values (deflated by the national CPI),
seasonally adjusted, and HP filtered. Data are monthly from 1996 through 2005.
The bottom half of the table shows correlations between the wage-bill series, and between the wage bill
and average hourly wage in manufacturing. Each series is in log real values (deflated by the national
CPI), seasonally adjusted, and HP filtered. Data are monthly from 1996 through 2005.




                                                      32
               Table 1B. Relative Volatility in Mexico and U.S. Outsourcing Industries:
                                    Production Worker Employment
                                                      Electrical              Transport
                                            Apparel Machinery Electronics Equipment            Average
Standard Deviations
σ (Yi* ) (Mex. Outsourcing Industry)          4.52      4.34        5.95        2.96             4.44
σ (Yi ) (U.S. Outsourcing Industry)           1.89      1.79        3.06        1.42             2.04
σ (Y* ) (Mex. Aggregate Manufacturing)       0.89        0.89         0.89          0.89         0.89
σ (Y) (U.S. Aggregate Manufacturing)         1.15        1.15         1.15          1.15         1.15
              σ (Yi* )/σ (Yi )               2.39        2.42         1.94          2.08         2.21
              σ (Y* )/σ (Y)                  0.77        0.77         0.77          0.77         0.77
              σ (Yi* )/σ (Yi )
                                             3.09        3.13         2.51          2.69         2.86
              σ (Y* )/σ (Y)
Correlations
               corr (Yi* ,Yi )               0.49        0.43         0.66          0.45         0.51
                       *
               corr (Y ,Y )                  0.78        0.78         0.78          0.78         0.78
                        *   *
               corr (Y ,Y )
                       i                     0.56        0.71         0.62          0.68         0.64
               corr (Yi ,Y)                  0.66        0.86         0.88          0.63         0.76

The table follows the same format as Table 1A, replacing the standard deviation of the production-worker
industry wage bill with that for production worker employment.




                                                    33
               Table 2: Size of Outsourcing Industries in Mexico and the U.S.

                                                   Thousands of employees (mean 2000-2005)
NAICS   Industry                               Mexico           US         Texas    California
        All maquiladoras (Mex.)                1,151.00          --          --         --

        All manufacturing (U.S.)                   --        15,336.70      955.5    1,649.00

 315    Apparel                                   230.8        356.9            --     97.4

 334    Electronic materials                      265.6       1,512.30      132.9     366.6

 335    Electrical machinery                      100.2        497.5        20.0       38.5

 336    Transport equipment                       240.7       1,855.80      85.2      137.5




                                             34
              Table 3: Relative Volatility in Mexico and U.S. Outsourcing Industries:
                             Total Employment at the U.S. State Level



                                                          Electrical                  Transport
                                            Apparel       Machinery     Electronics Equipment      Average
                                                                       National Level
σ(Yi* ) (Mex. Outsourcing Industry)           4.48          4.11           5.50         2.73         4.21
σ(Yi ) (U.S. Outsourcing Industry)            1.63          1.52           2.47         1.07         1.67
σ(Y ) (Mex. Aggregate Manufacturing)
    *
                                              0.77          0.77           0.77         0.77         0.77
σ(Y) (U.S. Aggregate Manufacturing)           1.01          1.01           1.01         1.01         1.01
             σ(Yi* ) / σ(Yi )                 2.75          2.70           2.23         2.55         2.56
              σ(Y ) / σ(Y)
                   *
                                              0.76          0.76           0.76         0.76         0.76
             σ(Y ) / σ(Yi )
                  i
                   *
                                              3.61          3.55           2.92         3.35         3.35
             σ(Y ) / σ(Y)
                    *


                                                                         California
σ(Y ) (Mex. Outsourcing Industry)
    i
     *
                                              4.48          4.11           5.50         2.73         4.21
σ(Yi ) (U.S. Outsourcing Industry)            2.25          2.35           2.62         1.31         2.13
σ(Y ) (Mex. Aggregate Manufacturing)
    *
                                              0.77          0.77           0.77         0.77         0.77
σ(Y) (U.S. Aggregate Manufacturing)           1.40          1.40           1.40         1.40         1.40
             σ(Yi* ) / σ(Yi )                 1.99          1.75           2.10         2.08         1.98
              σ(Y ) / σ(Y)
                   *
                                              0.55          0.55           0.55         0.55         0.55
             σ(Y ) / σ(Yi )
                  i
                   *
                                              3.62          3.18           3.82         3.79         3.60
             σ(Y ) / σ(Y)
                    *


                                                                           Texas
σ(Y ) (Mex. Outsourcing Industry)
    i
     *
                                              4.48          4.11           5.50         2.73         3.09
σ(Yi ) (U.S. Outsourcing Industry)              --          2.48           3.12         1.66         2.42
σ(Y ) (Mex. Aggregate Manufacturing)
    *
                                              0.77          0.77           0.77         0.77         0.77
σ(Y) (U.S. Aggregate Manufacturing)           1.16          1.16           1.16         1.16         1.16
             σ(Yi* ) / σ(Yi )                   --          1.66           1.76         1.64         1.69
              σ(Y ) / σ(Y)
                   *
                                                --          0.66           0.66         0.66         0.66
             σ(Y ) / σ(Yi )
                  i
                   *
                                                --          2.50           2.66         2.48         2.54
             σ(Y ) / σ(Y)
                    *



The table follows the same format as Table 1A, replacing the standard deviation of the production-worker
industry wage bill with that for total employment.




                                                     35
Table 4A: Difference-in-Differences for Variation in Mexico and U.S. Outsourcing Industries
                                 Production Worker Wage Bill


                                                    Electrical                      Transport
                                       Apparel      Machinery       Electronics     Equipment
                  Constant               0.161         0.161           0.161           0.161
                                        (0.021)       (0.020)         (0.020)         (0.021)

            Outsourcing Industry         0.370         0.240           0.613           0.526
                                        (0.126)       (0.049)         (0.105)         (0.201)

                  Mexico                 0.211         0.211           0.211           0.211
                                        (0.046)       (0.045)         (0.047)         (0.045)

            Outsourcing*Mexico           1.574         1.315           2.841           0.852
                                        (0.294)       (0.232)         (0.475)         (0.319)

                 R Squared               0.224         0.246           0.234           0.110


Each column shows results for a regression of the squared deviation from the mean of the production-
worker wage bill (times 1000) for a sample that includes a Mexico maquiladora industry, the
corresponding U.S. industry, aggregate Mexican manufacturing, and aggregate U.S. manufacturing, over
the period 1996:1-2005:12. Regressors include a constant, a dummy for whether observations pertain to
an outsourcing industry (as opposed to aggregate manufacturing), a dummy for whether observations
pertain to Mexico (as opposed to the United States), and the interaction of the outsourcing-industry and
Mexico dummies. Standard errors are obtained through bootstrapping, using 1000 repetitions.




                                                    36
Table 4B: Difference-in-Differences for Variation in Mexico and U.S. Outsourcing Industries
                            U.S. State Level Total Employment

                                            Electrical                    Transport
                                  Apparel   Machinery       Electronics   Equipment

                                                   National Level
                Constant           0.101       0.101           0.101        0.101
                                  (0.013)     (0.013)         (0.014)      (0.013)
           Outsourcing Industry    0.161       0.127           0.505        0.013
                                  (0.034)     (0.035)         (0.096)      (0.030)
                 Mexico           -0.043      -0.043          -0.043       -0.043
                                  (0.016)     (0.016)         (0.016)      (0.016)
           Outsourcing*Mexico      1.767       1.492           2.441        0.668
                                  (0.237)     (0.205)         (0.505)      (0.150)
                R Squared          0.282       0.261           0.164        0.108

                                                        California
                Constant           0.195       0.195           0.195        0.195
                                  (0.031)     (0.031)         (0.031)      (0.032)
           Outsourcing Industry    0.307       0.353           0.484       -0.024
                                  (0.075)     (0.098)         (0.110)      (0.041)
                 Mexico           -0.137      -0.137          -0.137       -0.137
                                  (0.032)     (0.033)         (0.032)      (0.033)
           Outsourcing*Mexico      1.620       1.266           2.462        0.705
                                  (0.239)     (0.220)         (0.495)      (0.152)
                R Squared          0.249       0.209           0.158        0.093

                                                          Texas
                Constant                       0.134           0.134        0.134
                                              (0.015)         (0.014)      (0.015)
           Outsourcing Industry                0.474           0.832        0.141
                                              (0.090)         (0.120)      (0.053)
                 Mexico                       -0.075          -0.075       -0.075
                                              (0.017)         (0.016)      (0.017)
           Outsourcing*Mexico                  1.145           2.113        0.540
                                              (0.226)         (0.504)      (0.155)
                R Squared                      0.219           0.157        0.090



                                             37
Each column shows results for a regression of the squared deviation from the mean of total employment
(times 1000) for a sample that includes a Mexico maquiladora industry, the corresponding U.S. industry,
aggregate Mexican manufacturing, and aggregate U.S. manufacturing, over the period 1996:1-2005:12.
Regressors include a constant, a dummy for whether observations pertain to an outsourcing industry (as
opposed to aggregate manufacturing), a dummy for whether observations pertain to Mexico (as opposed
to the United States), and the interaction of the outsourcing-industry and Mexico dummies. Standard
errors are obtained through bootstrapping, using 1000 repetitions.




                                                    38
        Table 5: Calibration of model Parameters

Preferences

σ           elasticity between varieties              6
χ           elasticity between outsourcing and        2
            non-outsourcing goods
η           elasticity between home and foreign       1
            goods
θ           home bias in U.S.                         0.88
θ*          home bias in Mexico                       0.71
α           outsourcing share                         0.24
μ           labor supply elasticity                   1
φ           risk aversion                             2
n           relative size of US                       0.74
ϖ           relative wealth of Mexico                 1/37
GH          US mean government demand                 0.1651
GF          Mexican mean government demand            0.0301


Technology

aH          US steady state unit cost                 1
aF          Mexican steady state unit cost            4.03
B           fixed cost                                0.0087
z           share of outsourcing                      0.20
a           US outsourcing slope parameter            -0.964
bt          US outsourcing level parameter            0.1928
ad          relative cost slope parameter             -0.964
bd ,t       relative cost level parameter             -1.8866


Shock processes

        ⎡ 4.308 x10−5     −1.502 x10−5 ⎤          ⎡0.6046 0.0425 ⎤
σa = ⎢                                 ⎥     ρa = ⎢               ⎥
                                                  ⎣ 0.1165 −0.0051⎦
                     −5
        ⎣ −1.502 x10      2.8534 x10−4 ⎦

        ⎡3.3948 x10−3     0⎤                      ⎡ −0.5648 0 ⎤
σG = ⎢                     ⎥                 ρG = ⎢
        ⎣       0         0⎦                      ⎣ 0       0 ⎥⎦




                                 39
                               Table 6 . Model Simulation
                                    Benchmark Case

                         (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)
                                     U.S.        Mexico    U.S.    Mexico
                       All four    Demand        Demand   Supply   Supply
                        shock       shock         shock   shock    shock    data

Standard deviations:
  σ (Y*os)              4.08         2.71         1.87     0.19     2.30    4.91
  σ (Yos)               2.29         1.55         0.62     0.48     1.40    2.44
  σ (Y*)                2.01         1.65         0.31     0.11     1.13    1.94
  σ (Y)                 1.77         1.64         0.31     0.36     0.39    1.27
  σ (Y*os)/ σ (Yos)     1.78         1.75         3.04     0.40     1.64    2.03
  σ (Y*)/ σ (Y)         1.14         1.01         1.01     0.31     2.94    1.53
   σ (Y*os)/σ (Yos)
     σ (Y*)/σ (Y)
                        1.58         1.74         3.00     1.28     0.56    1.33

Correlations
         *
 corr (YOS ,YOS )       0.77         0.98         -0.77    0.90     1.00    0.36
         *
 corr (Y ,Y )           0.91         1.00         1.00     0.91     1.00    0.24
         *    *
 corr (Y ,Y )
         OS             0.87         0.99         -0.14    0.99     1.00    0.36
 corr (YOS ,Y)          0.85         1.00         0.73     1.00     1.00    0.62




                                            40
                                Table 7 . Model Simulation
                       Sensitivity to alternative calibration of A’(z)

                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)    (5)
                         ()
                       A' z :   -0.001      -0.1         -1        -2    data

Standard deviations:
  σ (Y*os)                       4.08       3.57       3.08      3.02    4.91
  σ (Yos)                        2.29       2.30       2.36      2.38    2.44
  σ (Y*)                         2.01       1.94       1.91      1.92    1.94
  σ (Y)                          1.77       1.78       1.80      1.82    1.27
  σ (Y*os)/ σ (Yos)              1.78       1.56       1.31      1.27    2.03
  σ (Y*)/ σ (Y)                  1.14       1.10       1.06      1.06    1.53
   σ (Y*os)/σ (Yos)
     σ (Y*)/σ (Y)
                                 1.58       1.42       1.23      1.20    1.33

Correlations
         *
 corr (YOS ,YOS )                0.77       0.88       0.97      0.97    0.36
         *
 corr (Y ,Y )                    0.91       0.90       0.87      0.88    0.24
         *    *
 corr (Y ,Y )
         OS                      0.87       0.89       0.93      0.94    0.36
 corr (YOS ,Y)                   0.85       0.87       0.89      0.90    0.62




                                           41
                                  Table 8 . Model Simulation
                               Alternative Versions of the Model

                              (1)      (2)       (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)
               firm entry: translog translog    CES     CES    no entry no entry   data
   endogenous outsourcing:    yes      No       yes      no      yes       no

Standard deviations:
  σ (Y*os)                  4.08      3.01      4.05    2.72       3.84   2.77     4.91
  σ (Yos)                   2.29      2.37      2.04    2.16       1.79   2.06     2.44
  σ (Y*)                    2.01      1.89      1.97    1.84       1.92   1.83     1.94
  σ (Y)                     1.77      1.80      1.71    1.77       1.66   1.74     1.27
  σ (Y*os)/ σ (Yos)         1.78      1.27      1.99    1.26       2.15   1.35     2.03
  σ (Y*)/ σ (Y)             1.14      1.05      1.15    1.04       1.16   1.05     1.53
   σ (Y*os)/σ (Yos)
     σ (Y*)/σ (Y)
                            1.58      1.21      1.73    1.22       1.86   1.29     1.33

Correlations
         *
 corr (YOS ,YOS )           0.77      0.97      0.70    0.97       0.65   0.96     0.36
         *
 corr (Y ,Y )               0.91      0.85      0.91    0.84       0.90   0.84     0.24
         *    *
 corr (Y ,Y )
         OS                 0.87      0.94      0.85    0.93       0.83   0.92     0.36
 corr (YOS ,Y)              0.85      0.89      0.84    0.88       0.80   0.86     0.62




                                               42
        Figure 1: Industry Shares of Maquiladora Employment in Mexico


            Apparel                             Electronic Materials
            Electric Machinery                  Transport Equipment

.3




.2




.1




0
     1990                   1995                2000                    2005
                                        Year




                                   43
                                           Figure 2: Maquiladora Activity in Mexico
                                                        (log values)


                                      Maquiladora Value Added            Maquiladora Employment

                          12                                                                      14
Maquiladora Value Added




                                                                                                       Maquiladora Employment
                          11                                                                      13




                          10                                                                      12




                          9                                                                       11
                               1980     1985        1990          1995         2000       2005
                                                           Year




                                                                  44
                         Figure 3: Wage Bill for Production Workers in Mexico and U.S. Outsourcing Industries
                                           (log real values, seasonally adjusted and HP filtered)


             Mexico Apparel                  US Apparel (NAICS 315)                         Mexico Electronic Materials          US Electronics (NAICS 334)

.2                                                                             .2




                                                                               .1




 0                                                                              0




                                                                               -.1




-.2                                                                            -.2
      1990                    1995           2000                      2005          1990                   1995                 2000                     2005
                                     Year                                                                                 Year
             Mexico Electric Mach.           US Electrical Mach. (NAICS 335)                Mexico Transport Equip.              US Transport Equip. (NAICS 336)

.2                                                                             .2




                                                                               .1




 0                                                                              0




                                                                               -.1




-.2                                                                            -.2
      1990                    1995           2000                      2005          1990                   1995                 2000                     2005
                                     Year                                                                                 Year




                                                  1
