                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       A TEST OF DUAL LABOR
                            MARKET THEORY


                        tT11
                        Y' .L4.._I_ J_.1Ii m
                                           -L .   I.1J )

                                 Kevin Lang


                      Working Paper No. l314




              NATIONAL BTJREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1984




We would like to acknowledge the able research assistance of Kathy
Marshall and Ed Plumrner, the generous support of the Institute of
Industrial Relations at Berkeley, and helpful advice from Paul Ruld
and Torn Rothenberg. This work has also benefitted from comments of
colleagues at Berkeley, Irvine, USC, and the NBER Labor Studies
group. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #13 14
                                          March 1984




                 A Test of Dual Labor Market Theory

                              ABSTRACT


        Despite substantial differences in their views of the appropriate
policy response to the existence of poverty, neither the proponents of
dual market theory nor its critics have proposed potentially conclusive
tests of the dual market hypothesis.

        This paper presents a test of the two central propositions of dual
market theory——i) the existence of two distinct labor markets with differ-
ent wage setting mechanisms and 2) the existence of barriers to mobility
between the labor markets. We find considerable support for both hypo-
thesis.

        Estimation of a switching model of wage determination with un-
known regimes yields two distinct wage equations. The one which most
workers are associated with closely resembles the standard human capital
regression with significant returns to education and experience. The
other equation is flat with no returns to human capital. These two equa-
tions resemble the predictions of dual market theory for the "primary"
and "secondarytt markets respectively. Further, we present evidence that
(at least) some non—white workers are involuntarily confined to the
secondary market. This crowding of minority workers into the low wage
labor market accounts for a substantial portion of white/non—white wage
differences.

        We interpret these results as providing empirical support for the
dual market hypothesis and for recent theoretical work on efficiency wage
models. In addition, combining the efficiency wage argument with the
observation that much of the white/non—white wage difference is explained
by the exclusion of non—whites from the primary sector suggests an ex-
planation for the persistance of wage differences.




William T. Dickens                           Kevin Lang
Department of Economics                      Department of Economics
University of California                     University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720                           Irvine, CA   92717
(415) 642—3546                               (714) 856—6205
I. Introduction

    This paper presents a test of two of the most important claims of

dual market theory——that there is a distinct low wage (secondary) labor

market In which there are no returns to schooling and workers do not

receive on the job training, and that there are noneconomic barriers

which prevent at least some secondary workers from obtaining better

      JI irihc
lnrimru\

    Human capital theory has tended to emphasize differences among

people, rather than among jobs, as a determinant of the distribution of

Income. Workers in low wage jobs are viewed simply as low productivity

workers who are unwilling or unable to obtain the skills which are

necessary for access to higher paying jobs. It follows from this

approach that a solution to the poverty trap (if a solution Is necessary)

is to provide individuals with more skills or with incentives to obtain

skills.

    Dual market theorists have maintained that jobs can be roughly

divided into two groups: those with low wages, bad working conditions,

unstable employment and little opportunity for advancement (secondary

jobs), and those with relatively high wages, good working conditions and

opportunities for advancement into higher paying jobs (primary jobs)

(Doeringer and Plore, 1971). Advocates of this view have argued that

primary sector jobs are rationed and that, in particular, women, blacks

and other minorities find it difficult to obtain primary employment.

Since, in the view of dual market theorists (Berger and Piore, 1980), it

is unlikely that rationing can be eliminated, training programs will not
                                                                         2



be successful in eliminating poverty and the major   roles   for policy are

providing income support, ensuring that the rationing system is "fair,"

and minimizing the extent of the secondary sector by stabilizing

aggregate demand.

    Despite significant differences in their views of the low wage labor

market, neither the advocates of dual market theory nor its critics have

specified potentially conclusive tests of either the dual market typology

or the hypothesis of noneconomic barriers to entering the primary

sector. Difficulties arise because tests of the dual market hypothesis

often rely on circular definitions of the sectors.

    We propose strong tests of both hypotheses. Our results provide

considerable support for the view that there are two distinct labor

markets——a primary labor market with a wage profile similar to that

predicted by human capital theory and a secondary market with a

completely flat (low) wage profile. Our results also provide support for

the hypothesis that there are noneconomic barriers which prevent

nonwhites from entering the primary sector.

    In the next section we review some of the most noteworthy empirical

work on dual market theory. In the third section, we outline what we

consider to be the essential differences between dual market and human

capital theory and develop a formal test which allows us to distinguish

between the two hypotheses. The results are presented in section four.



II. A Partial Review of Empirical Work on Dual Market Theory

    Although advocates of dual market theory may differ on the

particulars, all agree on two basic tenets:
                                                                          3


     1.       The dual market typology described above is a useful

              characterization——most jobs strongly resemble the

              description of either primary or secondary jobs.

     2.   At most times there is rationing of primary sector

          jobs.

A number of attempt have been made to test either or both of these

hypotheses.

     Studies of the validity of the dual market typology have taken two

forms, factor analysis of job and/or worker characteristics and

comparisons of wage equations for different occupations and industries.

All authors who have used factor analysis have found a dominant factor

fitting the dual market typology and have found bimodal distributions of

factor scores (Gordon, 1971; Buchele l976a, 1976b; Oster, 1979).

However, the correlation of certain attributes such as low wages and bad

working conditions does not provide strong support for the dual market

hypothesis of the existence of sectors with distinct wage setting

mechani Sm.

    Consequently, some researchers have attempted to test more directly

the hypothesis that the wage setting mechanisms are different in the two

sectors. The approach these authors have followed is to divide

occupations and/or industries into two sectors on the basis of the

characteristics of the jobs or of workers in those occupations or

industries. Having thus divided the sample, they test for differences In

the wage equations for the two sectors. Some have found patterns

corresponding roughly to dual market theory (Osterman, 1975; Carnoy and
                                                                         4


Ruinberger, 1980; Buchele, 1976a, 1976b; Rosenberg, 1976; Wright, 1979);

others have found little support for the hypothesis (Zucker and

Rosenstein, 1981; Bibb and Form, 1977; Hodson, 1977). In addition, none

of these studies has been entirely free of anomalies.

    Unfortunately, dividing the sample on the basis of occupation or

Industry has major drawbacks.   Since a worker's choice of industry or

occupation is not independent of unmeasured characteristics, there is

considerable danger of sample selection bias. It is not surprising to

find that in low wage sobs the return to schooling is relatively low

(Cain, 1976). In addition, the assumption that all members of an

occupation or industry are In the secondary sector may significantly

reduce the power of the test. For example, no one would argue that

managers and skilled workers in industries which employ a substantial

number of secondary workers are themselves In secondary jobs. It is

possible that the anomalous results found in this literature are due to

inaccurate classification.

    Both the factor analyses and attempts to test for the existence of

distinct wage equations for the primary and secondary sectors described

above are essentially concerned only with the dual market typology. As

noted in the introduction, dual market theorists maintain not only that

they have developed an accurate typology but that primary jobs are

rationed. In fact, it is the latter position which constitutes the major

break with human capital theory.

    Several authors have suggested that the existence of distinct wage

equations for the primary and secondary sectors would constitue a
                                                                         5



 refutation of human capital theory (Buchele, 1976a, 1976b; Osterman,

1975), but this is not the case. If an individual can move out of the

secondary sector in order to obtain returns on experience or education,

the existence of a sector in which there are no returns is

inconsequential (Cain, 1976). Thus the basis of the allocation of

workers between the sectors Is crucial; are primary sector jobs rationed?

    Several authors have addressed the issue of mobility between the two

sectors. Leigh (1976) finds substantial and comparable earnings growth

for black and white workers and suggests that this refutes the dual

market hypothesis. Shiller (1977) reports extensive upward mobility of

individuals at the bottom of the income distribution during the period

1957 to 1971. He argues that this constitutes a refutation of dual

market theory.

    On the other hand, Rosenberg (1976) and Carnoy and Rumberger (1980)

find that minority workers are more likely to begin their careers in the

secondary sector and, having started there, are less likely to leave than

are whites. Rosenberg also finds that human capital variables do not

help to explain the upward mobility of minority workers. These authors

argue that this differential mobility supports dual market theory.

    In fact, measuring mobility does not provide a test of rationing of

primary market jobs. As Rosenberg (1979) notes, some mobility is

consistent with dual market theory while purely random movement is not

implied by human capital theory. It is easy to derive a simple human

capital model with firm—specific training 'in which there is no mobility

between jobs whatsoever. No one has specified, and it is probably
                                                                         6


Impossible to do so correctly, what levels of mobility would constitute

refutations of dual market or human capital theory. Although studies of

differential mobility between races are suggestive, the key issue is

whether there are qualified individuals who would like to work in the

primary sector but cannot find a job there. No study has addressed this

issue.

    Thus empirical work contrasting dual market and human capital theory

has suffered from two major drawbacks. The taxonomies which have been

developed simultaneously bias the results in favor of the dual market

hypothesis by virtue of the selection criteria and are too gross to allow

accurate testing of the hypothesis. Furthermore, the crucial issue of

barriers to entry has not been addressed.

    In Section III we propose a technique which allows us to derive the

probability of sector attachment directly from the observed distribution

of wages and worker attributes. This resolves the problem of attributing

primary or secondary sector employment to everyone in a given industry or

occupation. We then propose a direct test for involuntary confinement of

workers to the secondary sector.



III. A Formal Test

    How can we test the descriptive power of the dual markety hypothesis

without prior knowledge of the sector a person is in? Consider how we

might proceed If people's earnings potential could be suninarized by a

single observable trait---for example education and a single unobserved

trait which was uncorrelated with education. In that case we could plot
                                                                         7



a scatter diagram of log wages and education. The standard view of the

labor market holds that such a scatter diagram should resember figure 1.

From dual market theory we would expect a scatter diagram similar to

figure 2. A straight—forward test of the theories would therefore entail

plotting the scatter diagram and assessing whether it corresponds to

either the human capital model, or the dual market model.

    Two problems complicate such an approach. First, wages are

determined by many observable characteristics other than education. To

control for all variables simultaneously, we would have to plot a scatter

diagram for each sub—group in the sample. As the number of other

variables increased, the number of observations on each diagram would

decrease considerably. With a reasonable number of controls the number

of diagrams and the sparseness of observations would certainly make it

impossible to discern any pattern.

    Secondly, even if we were able to plot all the scatter diagrams, we

would still lack a formal mechanism for testing the hypotheses. Each

researcher would be free to decide for him/herself whether the diagrams

correspond more nearly to the predictions of human capital or dual market

theory. These problems can be resolved by the use of the formal methods

described in the following paragraphs.

    The question of whether a plot looks more like figure 1 or 2 can be

rephrased; do two wage equations fit the data significantly better than

one, and do the best fitting equations fit the predictions of the dual

market hypothesis? We can imagine fitting first one, and then two lines

by hand to figure 2. To compare the explanatory power we might, for
                                                                         8


example, compute the distance from each point to the closest line. The

reduction in the sum of squares going from one line to two would be much

larger for figure two than for figure one.

    Of course, two equations having more explanatory power than one is

not, by itself, a test of the dual market hypothesis. For example, two

equations might have significantly more explanatory power than one for a

scatter diagram such as figure 3. However, there is no Identifiable

secondary market. Thus, in addition to requiring two equations to have

significantly more explanatory power than one, we also require the best

fitting lines to have characteristics consistent with the dual market

hypothesis. To correspond to the predictions of dual market theory, one

wage equation should be upward sloping in schooling and experience while

the other equation should be flat with respect to human capital variables

and below the other at most points. Since we are dealing with a sample

of adult males we also expect that there will be fewer observations

associated with the low wage line.

    Formally, we may fit two wage equations using maximum likelihood

techniques. Since we do not know a priori with which wage equation to

compare an IndivIdual, we estimate a "switching model with unknown

regimes." To do this we must specify two wage equations and a third

equation which predicts sector attachment and estimate all three

equations simultaneously. The likelihood function for this model can be

found In Appendix 1.

    Since the single equation model is nested In the switching model we

may test the hypothesis that the two equation model fits significantly
                                                                         9



better than the single equation model by comparing the log—likelihood

values for the two models. We may then examine the coefficients of the

two wage equations to see if they fit the dual market hypothesis.

    The existence of two sectors with different wage setting mechanisms

is fundamental to dual market theory, but it is not incompatible with

human capital theory. While neoclassical economics tends to emphasize

the development of models which are continuous and therefore tractable in

calculus, if the technology were sharply discontinuous In the way

suggested by Piore (l980b), no fundamental assumptions of mainstream

economics would be violated. In this case, individuals would choose the

sector of employment which maximized the expected present value of their

lifetime utility.

    The second postulate of dual market theory, that primary sector jobs

are rationed, is less compatible with human capital theory. Dual market

theory maintains that individuals cannot necessarily choose the sector

which they prefer——some workers who would prefer to be employed in the

primary sector cannot find jobs there. As a general phenomena this would

be highly incompatible with the standard neoclassical view. However,

rationing as a general phenomena is believed to be restricted to

recession periods (Piore, l980a). During other periods only women and

minorities are likely to experience rationing. Such a contention, If

true, would be no more troublesome than the widely acknowledged

importance of race and sex discrimination in the determination of wages.

   To test for the presence of noneconomic barriers to primary sector

employment, we need to postulate a mechanism for allocating workers
                                                                        10


between the sectors tn the absence of rationing. To begin, we assume

that experience in one sector raises wages in that sector more than it

raises wages in the other sector.' We also assume that workers will

behave so as to maximize utility over their lifetime. Utility is assumed

to be increasing with the net present value (NPV) of lifetime income. If

we then assume that people's preferences with respect to the

non—pecuniary aspects of jobs do not change over their lifetime and that

workers are perfectly informed about the characteristics of all jobs, we

can conclude that workers will choose employment in one of the two

sectors at the beginning of their careers and stay in that sector for

their entire working life.2

    If the non—pecuniary characteristics of the two sectors were similar

we would expect workers to pick the sector which yields the highest

lifetime income. However, this is unlikely. Dual market theorists are

unanimous in maintaining that the non—pecuniary aspects of secondary

employment are inferior to those obtained in primary employment. On the

other hand, starting wages in the secondary sector may be higher than in

the primary sector and this could be attractive to a worker who plans to

leave and enter the labor force frequently or change jobs often. In

addition, secondary employers may be less concerned with lateness and

absenteeism and the work pace may be slower in secondary jobs. Formally,

we assume that workers will choose primary sector employment if the log

of the NPV of their income stream in the primary employment exceeds the

log of the NPV of secondary employment by more than an amount C, where

C   is the additive inverse of the compensating differential for secondary
                                                                                         11



employment. We may write the probability that a worker is employed in

the primary sector as:



      P(Prlmary sector employment) =

                  —                 > C)
                      ln(NVP5)                                                          (1)
      P(ln(NPV)


To model the NPV in the two sectors we write two wage equations


                      1n(W) = XB           +
                                               Ya
                                                    +
                                                        e                               (2)

and

                          ln(W5) = XB5 ÷        Ya      +
                                                              e5                        (3)




where X is a vector of individual characteristics, Y is years of job

experience, W, is the wage received in the primary sector,                       is a
                                                                             e
normally distributed error representing unobserved characteristics

affecting the primary sector wage, and B and                       a are parameters.

The terms W, e, B. and                a are similarly defined for the

secondary sector. Approximating the length of the indlviduaUs working

life by infinity, and using (2) and (3), equation (1) becomes



      P(Primary Sector Employment) =

                  +       —        + C' > 0)
      P(X(B_B5)       e       e5                                                        (4)

where


                                           —   ii
                                           — '"'d—a
                                                    d-a

                                                        p
                                                          S




and d     Is the discount rate.
                                                                             12



    If we asume that C'    is equal to a constant plus a normally

distributed error term (i.e., people's preferences with respect to the

non—pecuniary aspects of employment and their discount rates do not vary

with observable characteristics (X), we may test the hypothesis that

people choose their sector of employment to maximize their utility by

estimating an equation to determine sector membership and testing the

hypothesis that the coefficients on the Xs are equal to       —        or
                                                                  Bc

that the B3s in (6) are equal to zero.



                                   —
         X(B_B5÷B3) + C'   +
                               e       e5
                                            +
                                                e3                          (6)




    It may not be reasonable to assume that preference for the

non—pecuniary aspects of primary or secondary employment are not related

to any observed worker characteristics. If they are related we would

expect at least some of the B3s to be different from zero even If

workers are free to choose the sector they are employed in.       In this case

we may be able to find some Xs which should not be related to tastes or

to suggest inequality constraints on the effects of certain

characteristics on tastes. Specific tests of this type are proposed in

Section IV.

    An intuitive explanation of this approach uses the example of race.

Suppose that the lines fitting the scatter diagram in figure 2 were the

same for blacks and whites. Suppose further that the distribution of

education was the same for the two groups, but that a higher proportion

of blacks than of whites were scattered around the lower line. Under
                                                                        13


these circumstances, we would conclude that either blacks are less averse

to secondary employment than are whites or that blacks face

discrimination in obtaining primary jobs. Supplementary evidence would

support the latter explanation.

    The data used in this study are drawn from the thirteenth wave (1980)

of the Panel Study on Income Dynamics. We limited the sample to men

working more than one thousand hours in the previous year, did not work

in government and for whom data on education and marital status were

available. Estimates were obtained for both the full sample (2812 cases)

and with only members of the Survey Research Center sample (1696 cases).



IV. Results

    Table 1 presents the results for both OLS estimation and the dual

market model. Since the results for the samples are similar, we discuss

only the restricted sample here. The OLS results are similar to those

obtained by other researchers. The return to schooling is about 6

percent while the return to experience is about 1 percent. Whites

receive wages about 13 percent higher than nonwhites holding other

factors constant. Workers living in an SMSA earn wages almost 20 percent

higher than equivalent workers outside an SMSA and workers who have never

been married earn considerably less than other workers. All the

coefficients are highly significant at conventional levels.

    The second part of Table 1 tells a very different story from the

results of OLS estimation. The primary sector wage equation resembles

the OLS equation, but there are some striking differences. Most notably,
                                                                        14


the white/nonwhite differential falls to zero (although it is measured

very imprecisely). In addition, the effect of living in an SMSA declines

and the returns to schooling and experience increase somewhat.

    On the other hand, the secondary sector wage equation contrasts

sharply with the OLS equation. None of the coefficients is statistically

significant at conventional levels. We cannot resect the hypothesis that

the secondary sector wage equation is completely flat. The return to

experience (which is measured quite precisely) is essentially zero.

Further, the secondary sector wage equation is almost everywhere below

the primary sector. For a non—white living in an SMSA who has never been

married and has a sixth grade education, the predicted primary sector

wage is greater than the secondary wage after one years experience. For

all other workers, except those with less education, the predicted

primary sector wage is always higher than the predicted secondary sector

wage.

    Since the coefficients of the secondary sector wage equation are

measured imprecisely, it might be presumed that, in fact, there Is only

one labor market. However, using a likelihood ratio test, we can easily

resect the single labor market (OLS) model at any conventional level of

significance.3 Two wage equations fit the data considerably better

than one.

    Thus we can reject the single labor market model and cannot reject

the predictions of dual market theory that there are no returns to

education or experience in the secondary sector. As noted above, this

characterization of the market, while not commonly assumed in mainstream
                                                                         15


economics, is not incompatible with it. A more crucial aspect of dual

market theory is the assumption that primary sector jobs are rationed.

    Testing this assumption entails testing constraints on the switchng

equation. Using the restricted sample, we were unable to get the

constrained likelihood function to converge. Since a Wald test of the

constraints is not Invariant with respect to the choice of

normalization,4 a likelihood ratio test is preferable.   Consequently,

in the following paragraphs, we report the results of likelihood ratio

tests performed on the full sample.

    If workers were free to choose between the sectors and tastes for the

non—pecuniary aspects of employment were not related to the location of a

worker's residence, his marital status, education, or race, we would

expect the coefficients of these variables In the switching equation to

equal the difference between the coefficients in the two wage equations.

    It is probably not reasonable to expect workers' preferences with

respect to non—pecuniary job attributes to be independent of these

variables. For example, we would not be surprised to find that workers

outside of SMSAs required less of a compensating differential to get them

to take secondary work since they may often be engaged in agricultural

labor we therefore test the hypothesis that B3 in equation (5) equals

zero for school, white and never married. Twice the difference between

the log—likelihoods for the constrained and unconstrained models is

14.92. The one percent critical value for the chi-square with two

degrees of freedom is 9.2l. Here, too, the hypothesis of free choice

is easily rejected.
                                                                         16



    Finally, we can reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on white

and never married in the switching equation are both equal to the

difference between their respective coefficients in the primary and

secondary wage equations (x2 = 14.56, critical value for one degree

of freedom =   6.63).   We are thus left with three potential explanations

for our results. First, high}y educated workers prefer secondary

employment more than less educated workers. This hypothesis seems

unlikely. Intuitively, we would expect more educated workers to be more

averse to the poor working conditions of secondary employment. Kahn

(1983) finds that the demand for occupational safety increases with

education. A second explanation is that blacks are less averse to

secondary jobs than are whites, but this runs counter to evidence that

blacks are more likely to support unions in representation elections

(Farber & Saks, 1980; Dickens, 1983), are less likely to quit a job

(Viscusi, 1979) and have greater demand for occupational safety than

equivalent whites (Kahn, 1983). Primary jobs are more likely to be

unionized, offer more stable employment and better job safety. If we

cannot accept these other two explanations we are forced to conclude that

blacks face noneconomic barriers to employment in the primary sector.

    At the present time there is no formal way of establishing which of

these three explanations is correct. However, since the first two

hypotheses appear to be inconsistent with other studies of the demand for

job quality, the most reasonable explanation Is the last; blacks are

discriminated against when seeking primary employment.

    If we accept the dual market hypothesis, we may use the model to

determine the composition of the primary and secondary sector.6
                                                                         17


According to this model 11.4 percent of working male heads of households

are employed in the secondary sector. This seems large, especially since

we would expect a sample containing teenagers, women, and the unemployed

to have a higher proportion of secondary workers. Table 2 shows the

makeup of the sample and the secondary market. It also shows the percent

of each type of worker in the secondary market. Since many of the

parameters of the switching model are estimated with a great deal of

error, we also estimated a restricted model (parameter estimates In Table

3) where the wage equation in the secondary sector was constrained to be

flat and education and marital status were removed from the switching

equation. (A likelihood ratio test fails to reject the constraints at

the .1 level.)7

    Both models show the same pattern evident in the parameters of the

switching equation: workers in SMSAs, married workers, more educated

workers, and whites are less likely to be in the secondary sector.

    Finally, we examine how sharply the model distinguishes between

workers in the primary and secondary sectors. Figure 4 shows the

distribution of predicted probabilities of being In the primary market.

The distribution is distinctly bi-modal, with the two modes at 0—10%

probability and 90-100%. There are a large group of workers who are

clearly Identifiable as being in the secondary sector, and a larger group

with a high probability of being primary workers. Thus, It appears that

there is a distinct secondary sector which the model can Identify.
                                                                        18



V. Conclusions

    Our results provide strong support for two of the basic tenets of

dual market theory: there are two distinct sectors of the labor market

with different wage setting mechanisms, and there is a queue for primary

sector sobs, We believe that our approach and results represent a

considerable advance over previous research in this area. By allowing

the distribution of wages and worker attributes to determine our

"assignment't of workers to sectors, we avoid the problems of

arbitrariness and sample selection bias which complicated the

interpretation of earlier research. In addition, our approach allows us

to estimate the size and composition of the secondary work force In a

noncircular manner.

    Of course, we cannot exclude other interpretations of these results

which postulate different distributions of the error term or some unusual

nonlinear functional form for the wage equation. While we canot deny

these possibilities, we suggest that in the absence of our results, such

a distribution would not be suggested. It was dual market theory which

led to our test, and the results therefore tend to corroborate that

theory.

    However, given the strength of the reactions (deifying or executing

the messenger) of some of the individuals with whom we discussed

preliminary results, it is Important to take stock of exactly what it Is

that we have and have not shown.

   More (1983) suggests that the strength of opposition to dual market

theory is due, in part, to the use of participant observer techniques
                                                                         19


rather than econometric techniques which are more common in mainstream

economics. We have shown that the dual market hypothesis can be derived

and supported from standard data and statistical techniques. It is,

however, unlikely that standard approaches would have uncovered labor

market duality, a fact which suggests that there is a role for other

methods in mainstream economics.

    On the other hand, the fact that we can test dual market theory using

mainstream techniques suggests that the two theories are not as

incompatible as would appear from the antagonisms in the profession. We

have already suggested that neoclassical economics makes few assumptions

regarding the nature of technology. It is relatively straightforward to

develop a model in which a high fixed cost/low variable cost technology

is used in the "stable" demand sector and a low fixed cost/high variable

cost technology is used to accommodate fluctuations in demand. Plore

(1980b) gives a verbal description of such a theory and Applebaum and Lin

(1982) present a formalization.    It is a direct consequence of human

capital theory that workers and firms will invest little in firm speclfic

training If the worker is not expected to remain with the firm for very

long. Thus the existence of two markets with distinct wage profiles can

be easily accommodated by mainstream theory.

    Similarly, while when first proposed, the view that there is a queue

for primary sector jobs may have appeared to be incompatible with

neoclassical theory, there are an increasing number of imperfect

information models which imply that there can be a queue for jobs. In

particular, Weiss (1980), Stoft (1982), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1982) and
                                                                        20


Bowles (1983) have developed models In which job queues arise in firms in

which there are unobserved skills or effort. Thus there could well be a

queue for primary sector jobs. If there are few skill differences in

secondary sector jobs, there would be no queues for them.

    While these models are compatible with queues, we have presented

evidence that rather than allocating jobs randomly, primary sector

employers discriminate against nonwhites. This may appear to be

incompatible with neoclassical economics. However, discrimination is an

anomaly which remains to be explained whether or not one accepts dual

market theory. In fact, these results may help to explain the existence

and persistence of discrimination. According to the point estimates

presented in the last section, more than 40% of white/non—white wage

differences can be explained in the restricted model by the fact that

non—whites are crowded Into the secondary sector while in the

unrestricted model the within sector differential is zero.     If the

unobservability of skills or work effort make it optimal for queues for

primary jobs to exist, primary employers with a utasteil for

discrimination may Indulge It by hiring fewer non—whites from the queue

without sacrificing profits. No economic Incentive exists for the

elimination of this sort of discrimination. Thus the aspects of dual

market theory which we have tested do not appear to us to be incompatible

with mainstream economics.

    On the other hand, we do not wish to imply that there are no

incompatibilities between dual market theory and neoclassical economics.

For example, dual market theorists have generally assumed that
                                                                        21



preferences are endogenous, a position strongly resisted by most

mainstream economists despite some exceptions.

    Perhaps more Important, dual market theorists have developed very

elaborate theories of the origin and operation of labor market

institutions which are rich in institutional detail.8 These

descriptions are quite remote in many ways from the neoclassical

description of the labor market. However, we have not attempted to test

these aspects of dual market theory.9

    Finally, we call the reader's attention to the title of this paper.

We have chosen to refer to our work as a test of dual market theory

rather than as a test of human capital theory because, in our view, dual

market theory is not necessarily incompatible with standard neoclassical

analysis. Our results therefore point to the need for additional work to

understand the origins of these institutions rather than to abandon the

neoclassical model of the labor market. In addition, our results point

to the value of noneconometric techniques for uncovering and

understanding labor market institutions.
                                                                                 22


                                        Table 1




                                 RESTRICTED SAMPLE



                                                          Switching Model
Variable            Mean        OLS          Pr I mary       Secondary      Switch

Constant            1.00        .874              996          1 .32         - .006
                               (.075)          (.297)         (3.33)         (.574)
SMSA                0.67        .197            .112            .197             .361
                               (.025)          (.060)         (1 .   28)     (.158)
Never Married       0.08       -.305           —. 261          - . 244       —.157
                               (.044)          (.055)          (.580)        (.354)
School           12.7           .059              • 067        - .003         .020
                               (.005)          (.005)          (.072)        (.031)
White                .91        .134            .008           -.192          .796
                               (.040)          (.166)         (2.73)         (.328)
Experience       18.4           .010            .013             .001
                               (.001)          (.001)          (.002)
Covariance with
  switching error                                                • 068       -   .009
                                               (.389)         (4.42)
                                .477            .374             .381              *
S.e.
Log—likelihood             —1151.4                         -1062.9



                                       FULL SAMPLE

Constant            1.00        .760              .982         1.27          -.389
                               (.051)          (.108)          (.636)        (.379)
SMSA                0.69        .194            .078            .073          .526
                               (.020)          (.036)          (.452)        (.144)
Never Married       0.10       —.265           -.286           -.268          .238
                               (.031)          (.047)          (.263)        (.338)
School           12.07          .063            .069            .006             .037
                               (.004)          (.005)          (.034)        (.024)
White               0.67        .180            .006           -.139          .885
                               (.020)          (.059)          (.781)        (.190)
                 17.9           .010            .014            .000               —
Experience
                               (.001)          (.001)          (.002)
Covariance with
  switching error                                 .155         -.019
                                               (.084)         (1,18)
S.e.                            .471            .392            .373
                           -1875.3                                                 *
Log—likelihood

Standard errors in parentheses
Dependent variable is log hourly wage
*norffiaized to 1
                                                                                   23




                                          Table 2

                        Composition of Sample and Secondary Sector




                % of Sample % of Secondary          % of workers in      % of        % in
                               Sector workers       Secondary Sector   Secondary   Secondary
SMSA              66.9             56.3                  9.6            46.8            7.9
Not SMSA          33.1             43.7                 15.1            53.2

Married           91.8             86.5                 10.8            88.4        11.0
Not Married        8.2             13.5                 14.4            11.6        11.0
Educatlon<12      19.9             24.4                 14.0            23.1        13.0

Education=1 2     39.8             42.8                 12.2            41.0        11.7

Education>l 2     40.3             32.8                  9.3            35.9        10.1

White             90.6             77.2                  9.7            84.5        10.6
Non—White          9.4             22.8                 27.6            15.5        18.1



Total               *                *                  11.4              *
                                                                                    11.3
                                                                     24


                                    Table 3



                      Estimates for Restricted Model



Variable                  Primary             Secondary   Switching

Constant                   .887                  1.22         .503
                          (.073)                 (.093)      (.281)

SMSA                        108                     -         .537
                           (.026)                            (.132)

Never married             -.288                                 —
                          (.037)
School                     .069
                          (.004)

White                      .083                               .433
                          (.043)                             (.227)

Experience                 .013                                 —
                           (.001)
Log—likelihood:       -1069.1

s.e.                       .3773                  .4098        *


Standard errors in parentheses
Dependent variable: log of hourly wage
*normaljzed to one
— constrained to zero
2-1 88


                       r r _:I
                      • ftTr-:
                                t-L__                                      t
                                                                                  __                      (-
                                                                                                          ::J::::4:r i:::::.




                 iN___:                                                                                f L1L
                                                                                                          tt;                              =

                                                                   4:Zi ii__
                                                                          L                                                          t

             H
                                                             -
                                                                    t -                                       :—-
                                                                                                                         'ill.
                                                                                                                 ——4ie&1ion —

                                                                           I                              'ii
                                                       ypfhP fFf aI Sattetf PIo_t
                                                                                                 I H H-
                                     J1gui                                                                               — —J
                         —           -                 Dual Marke                                     —                  D     --—--- ——
                                                                                                      —
                        —            -                                                           ——p• --—----- -
                                                                                                            —_____           —c—--
                 - —------—-         --—-----—-                                  ——--p-- —p-
             .             —                                                            I
                      -—____ —--- —-----            —.-—---- —--------—-- -—-F-----—.—-                                  ——          -
                                                                                       -————-—---—-----——-—---——-----
                                                                                                              -


                 —-
                                         J
                                             #t
                                                   IA
                                                             J/
                                                  —.----,--------—4-----
                                                                               —-—*-----.


                                                                                            4T
                                                                                            -'    )
                                                                                                            $       'I



                                                                                                                               --
                                                                                                                                               -


                                                                                                                                                   ——--




                                                                                                                               Education




\1i1lin-ietrs t         (iitinietr
           Figure 3.    Hypothetical Scatter Plot——
                        Human Capital Theory with
                        Non—Linear Wage—Educat:
                        Relation.
Log Wage
                                                           a
                                                      a


                                                                  a
                            a
                                                                  a
                       I,                 S
                S

                            V
                                 I   a
                                          a

                       9         0

                a




           I



                                                      Education
                                           I:.
                                                                           T:ILL                                                                Tv: :1 :.t:.. :i:E.                                    1



          '        .   ....
                                                                                               J.                            F
                                                                                                                                                                   I.
                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                     IIIIIIL
                                                                                                                                                       .       .


                                 -                 UUC                                                                           ——                        — --


Number 0fLT
                   1_LLI__                                                                                                                             ::
Workers



          L
          80      .''
               [1L-—_S1pSz                                       .1 .                                            ... I..
                                                                                                                                           H                               -—
                                                                                                                                                                           ..:.:.               t•
                                                                                                                                                                           -                    .1.
                                                                                                       ...                           .. I                               — ...
          70—
            f::: I
                                                           —           . .— —.                                                                                                              .




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ii
                                                                                                                                                                                                f




                                     I




               F




                       -IS

                                                                                               —                     .—                     .                              —.                         -—
         60:.::::                                    :.




                                                   f
               L_
         50___ _____
                                     t


                                                   :TTtTT +5: .                          ::::                        .—.
                                                                                                                         —
                                                                                                                         ::.::+
                                                                                                                      -____
                                                                                                                            :.V...               —
                                                                                                                                                                             .:
                                                                                                                                                                                  :         TrT
                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                  50

         401




                   T             .
                                                            H.
                                                                             .
                                                                                 -        33                                            .




                                                     —_:-              .     .                                       S




         20                  —.                .
                                                                           22.       —.    .
                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                             —-____                                        —.

                             -                 —                                     - —                                                        —-- --                                --
         10




                       Q                 I U        2ft.
                                                         - -,    30

                                                                 •..
                                                                                 O_ 5fl G& ..7.0
                                                                             ..,..   .             .     .       .               .
                                                                                                                                                       80_
                                                                                                                                                                    ..--
                                                                                                                                                                        90            1OQ

              —                                          —-—                              —j—-— ——- —---Being- 1--i-ay- Seeter——

  .\Iillimeters to the Centimeter
                                                                         28


                                FOOTNOTES



     1This assumption appears reasonable In light of recent empirical

evidence on experience—earnings profiles. James Brown (1983) shows that

experience in other firms counts very little towards earnings for workers

on their current sobs. The assumption entails the existence of sector

specific training. If some training is firm specific it Is ipso facto

sector specific.

     21t might be argued that young people, in particular, lack the

necessary career information to make informed ob choices, They may also

have different preferences. For our purposes, these problems should be

of less importance since we estimate our model on a sample of heads of

households.

     3Twlce the difference between the log—likelihood values for the

two models is 177. Although the single equation model is nested in the

switching model, when the switching equation model is constrained to

yield the single equation model, several parameters are unidentified.

This problem complicates the calculation of the degrees of freedom. In

addition, it is possible that the asymptotic likelihood ratio statistic

does not have a chi.-squared distribution. However, Monte—Carlo tests

(Goldfeld an Quandt, 1976) suggest that setting the degrees of freedom

equal to the number of constraints plus the number of unidentified

parameters yields a conservative test using the cM—squared

distribution. For our problem, this computation yields fourteen degrees

of freedom. The one percent critical value for the cM-squared
                                                                         29



distribution with fourteen degrees of freedom is 29.14—-far smaller than

our computed likelihood ratio test statistic.

     41n the unrestricted model it is not possible to simultaneously

identify all the coefficients of the switching equation and its error

variance. This is a problem comon to all discrete dependent variable

estimation. Thus any one restriction onthe coefficients of the

switching equation cannot be tested as it would only constitute a

normalization. It Is possible to perform a Wald test if there is more

than one constraint but the test is not invariant to the normalization

chosen. In all cases reported below the results of the Wald test were

Inconclusive since the Wald test rejected the null hypothesis for some

reasonable normalizations but not for others.

     5We are imposing three constraints but we also relax the

normalization that the variance of the switching equation equals one.

Thus there are only two degrees of freedom.

        straightforward application of Bayes theorem gives the result

that the probability of being in the primary sector conditional on the

observed wage and personal characteristics is the likelihood given the

individual is in the primary sector divided by the entire likelihood for

that observation.

     7Again we note that the measured returns to schooling and

education in the primary sector are larger than in the OLS equation.

Also, the discrimination coefficient is roughly 40% smaller.

     8For example see Plore (1980a), Edwards (1979) and Gordon, Edwards

and Reich (1982).

     9Reich [1984] does.
                                                                             30



                                     APPENDIX 1

          Estimation of the Switching Model with Unknown Regimes



    Consider the system composed of wage equations for each sector and an

equation determining 11tendency to be in the primary sector.


                          in W1 =               +
                                      X131          cli                    (Al)



                          in W1 =               +                          (A2)
                                      X12           C21



                                =         +                                (A3)
                                    Z1r       C3i



whre W1 is the individuaPs wages, X1 and                  are vectors of

explanatory variables,              and r are vectors of

parameters, .       and          are normally distributed error

terms and y is a latent variable measuring tendency to be in the

primary sector. (Al) is the wage equation if the individual Is in the

primary sector; (A2) is the wage equation if the individual is in the

secondary sector and (A3) is the switching equation.

   We do not observe y. However, If y* > 0, the Individual's wage

is determined by (Al); otherwise it is determined by (A2). Equivalently,

the Individual works in the primary sector If and only if



                          C3j    > —Z1r                                    (A4)
                                                                                31



      The likelihood function for the problem is therefore given by:



              Pr(c31 > Z1rIZ,X1,c11).f(c11)                                   (A5)

              +
                   Pr(c3i   < ZiFIZj,Xi,c2i).f(c2j)



The log—likelihood is thus:



                                       013
              N
                                -   Zr-—c
                                       a   ii
                   in ([1si
                                       2                • • (c1,a11)          (Ab)
             1=1
                                                 .5

                                      "l 1




                            a
                     - r-—c
              +
                            2
                                             •
                                                      (c,a)}
                        022



where 4(.) and (.)              are the normal density and cumulative

distribution, respectively and                         is the covariance of
                                                 0k
and    Cki; 033 is normalized to equal one. Maximum likelihood

estimates for r,            2 and the a'S can be obtained using

standard search algorithms provided that care is taken to prevent the

program from iterating into regions for which the likelihood function is

unbounded.

      It is easy to see that if                       equals I2 and 013
equals 023, then cli equals c21 and the likelihood
                                                                         32


function reduces to the standard normal density. It is therefore

possible to test for the existence of two regimes by comparing the

log—likelihood values for OLS and unknown regime estimates by performing

a likelihood ratio test.

       The likelihood functions used here were maximized using the Berndt,

Hall, Hall and Hausman (1974) algorithm. While the nonlinearty of the

         mrI nurrtnr diffiriilf' .. did nM vnrinr. nu riiffirii1fic
with    unboundedness. All unconstrained specifications converged to

interior solutions from OLS starting values.
                                                                         33


                                REFERENCES



Appelbaum, Elie and Chin Lin, "Ex Ante and Ex Post firms and Stochastic

     Equilibrium Price Fluctuations," (mimeo), Irvine, CA, 1982.

Berger, Suzanne and Michael J. Piore, Dualism and Discontinuity in

    Industrial Societies. New York: Cambridge, 1980.

Berndt, E.K.., B.H. Hall, R.E. Hall, and J.A. Hausman, "Estimation and

    Inference in Non—Linear Structural Models," Annals of Economic and

    Social Measurement, October 1974, Vol. 3, #4: 553—65.

Bibb, Robert and William H. Form, "The effects of industrial,

    occupational and sex stratification on wages in blue—collar

    markets." Social Forces, June 1977, Vol. 55, No. 4: 974—96.

Bowles, Samuel, "The Productive Proces in the Competitive Economy:

    Wairaslan, Neo—Hobslan, and Marxian Models," Dept. of Economics, U.

    Mass., Amherst, (mimeo) 1983.

Buchele, Robert, Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation

    Perspective on the Work Experience of Young Men. Doctoral

    Dissertation, Harvard, May 1976a.

Buchele, Robert, Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation

    Perspective on the Work Experience of Middle-Aged Men. Unpublished

    paper submitted to the Secretary of Labor's Conference on the

    National Longitudinal Survey of the Pre—Retirement Years, l976b,

    Boston.

Cain, G., "The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories to Orthodox

   Theory." Journal of Economic Literature. December 1976, Vol. 14,

   No. 4: 1215—57.
                                                                         34


Carnoy, M., and R. Rumberger, "Segmentation in the U.S. Labor Market:

    Its Effects on the Mobility and Earnings of Whites and Blacks."

    Cambridge Journal of Economics. June 1980, Vol. 4, No. 2: 117-32.

Dickens, William 1., "The Effect of Company Campaigns on Certification

    Elections: Law and Reality Once Again." Industrial and Labor

    Relations Review, July 1983, Vol. 36, No. 4.

Doeringer, Peter B. and Michael 3. Piore, Internal Labor Markets and

    Manpower Analysis. Lexington, MA: LexIngton, 1971.

Edwards, Richard, Contested Terrain, New York: Basic Books, 1979.

Farber, Henry S. and Daniel H. Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions: The Role

    of Relative Wages and Job Characteristics," Journal of Political

    Economy, Vol. 88, No. 2 (April 1980), p. 51.

Goldfeld, Steven M. and Richard E. Quandt, "Techniques for Estimating

    Switching Regressions, in Goldfeld and Quandt, eds. Studies In

    Non—Linear Estimation. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger (1976).

Gordon, David M., Class, Productivity and the Ghetto. Ph.D. thesis,

    Harvard University, 1971.

Gordon, David M., Richard C. Edwards, Michael S. Reich, Segmented Work,

    Divided Workers: The Historical Transformation of Labor in the

    United States. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Hodson, Randy D., Labor Force Participation and Earnings in the Core,

    Perlpheral,jjd State Sectors of Production. M.A. Thesis, Department

    of Sociology, University of Wisconsin, Madison. 1977.

Kahn, Shulamit, Occupational Safety and Worker Preferences, unpublished

   doctoral dissertation, MIT, 1983.
                                                                        35


Leigh, Duane E., "Occupational Advancement In the Late 1960s: An

    Indirect Test of the Dual Labor Market Hypothesis." Journal of Human

    Resources, Spring, 1976, Vol. 11, No. 2: 155—171.

Oster, Gerry, "A Factor Analytic Test of the Theory of the Dual Economy,"

    Review of Economics and Statistics. February 1979, Vol. 61, No. 1:

    33—51.

Osterman, Paul, 'An Empirical Study of Labor Market Segmentation."

    Industrial and Labor Relations Review. July, 1975, Vol. 28, No. 4:

    508—523.

Piore, Michael 3. "Dualism as a Response to Flux and Uncertainty," in

    Suzanne Berger and Michael 3. Piore Dualism and Discontinuity in

    Industrial Societies, New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1980a.

Piore, Michael 3. "The Technological Foundations of Dualism," in Suzanne

    Berger and Michael 3. Piore Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial

    Societies, New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, l980b.

Piore, Michael 3.   "Labor Market Segmentation: To What Paradigm Does It

    Belong?" American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 73 (May

    1983): 249—253.

Reich, Michael, "Segmented Labor: Time Series Hypotheses and Evidence,"

   Cambridge Journal of Economics, forthcoming 1984.

Rosenberg, Samuel. "An Empirical Test of the Dual Labor Market

   Hypothesis." Unpublished manuscript, Williams College, 1976.

Rosenberg, Samuel. "A Survey of Empirical Work on Labor Market

   Segmentation." U.C. Davis, Department of Economics Working Paper

   138, Cavis, CA. November 1979.
                                                                       36


Schiller, Bradley R. "Relative Earnings Mobility in the United States."

    American Economic Review, December 1977, Vol. 67, No. 5: 926—941,

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stlglitz, "Equilibrium Unemployment as a

    Worker Discipline Device," Woodrow Wilson School of Public and

    International Affairs Discussion paper in Economics #28, April 1982.

Stigler, Geroge J., and Gary S. Becker. "De Gustibus Non Est

    Disputandum." American Economic Review, March 1977, Vol. 67, No. 2:

    76-90.

Stoft, Steve, "Cheat Threat Theory: An Explanation of Involuntary

    Unemployment," Boston University (mimeo) May 1982.

Viscusi, W. Kip.    jnentHazards:AnInvest1gjon of Market

    Performance, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard, 1979.

Weiss, Andrew. "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible

   Wage Expectations." Journal of Politiçjjonom, June 1980, Vol.

   88, No. 3: 526-538.

Wright, Eric 0. Class Structure and Income Determination. New York:

   Academic Press, 1979.

Zucker, Lynne 6. and Carolyn Rosenstein. "Taxonomies of Institutional

   Structure: Dual Economy Reconsidered," American SocIoioqjcal

   Review, December 1981, Vol. 46, No. 6: 869—83.
