                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FUNDING AND ASSET ALLOCATION IN
                     CORPORATE PENSION PLANS:
                    AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION

                            Zvi Bodie

                           Jay 0. Light

                          Randall M$rck

                      Robert A. Taggart, Jr.


                      Working Paper No. 1315




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 19814




This paper is part of a study of the United States pension system
currently being conducted by the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This study has been funded by a grant from the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. We are grateful to Roger
Ibbotson, Krishna Palepu and Myron Scholes for helpful suggestions
on an earlier draft. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research project in Pensions. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1315
                                                    March 1984



            Funding and Asset Allocation in Corporate Pension Plans:
                           An Empirical Investigation



                                    ABSTRACT

         This paper contrasts and empirically tests two different views of
corporate pension policy: the traditional view that pension funds are inaged
without regard to either corporate financial policy or the interests of the
corporation and its shareholders, and the corporate financial perspective
represented by the recent theoretical work of Black (1980), Sharpe (1916),
Tepper (1981), and Treynor (1971), which stresses the potential effects of a
firm's financial condition on its pension funding and asset allocation
decisions. We find several pieces of evidence supporting the corporate
financial perspective. First, we find that there is a significant inverse
relationship between firms' profitability and the discount rates they choose to
report their pension liabilities. In view of this we adjust all reported
pension liabilities to a common discount rate assumption. We then find a
significant positive relationship between firm profitability and the degree of
pension funding, as is consistent with the corporate financial perspective. We
also find some evidence that firms facing higher risk and lower tax liabilities
are less inclined to fully fund their pension plans. On the asset allocation
question, we find that the distribution of plan assets invested in bonds is
bi—modal, but that it does not tend to cluster around extreme portfolio
configurations to the extent predicted by the corporate financial perspective.
We also find that the percentage of plan assets invested in bonds in negatively
related to both total size of plan and the proportion of unfunded liabilities.
The latter relationship shows up particularly among the riskiest firms and is
consistent with the corporate financial perspective on pension decisions.


                                      Zvi Bodie
                                      School of Management
                                      Boston University
                                      704 Commonwealth Avenue
                                      Boston, MA 02215
                                      (617) 353—)4l60

                                      Jay 0. Light
                                      Harvard Business School
                                      Soldiers Field Road
                                      Boston, MA 02163
                                      (6ii) 495--6358

                                      Randall Mrck
                                      Harvard University
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138

                                      Robert A. Taggart, Jr.
                                      Harvard Business School
                                      Soldiers Field Road
                                      Boston, MA 02163
                                      (617) I956)423
          Funding and Asset Allocation in Corporate Pension Plans:

                         An Empirical Investigation



     Financial aspects of corporate pension funds have increasingly attracted

the attention of corporate managers, government officials and academics. For

example, practitioners have been debating such topics as corporations' right

to terminate overfunded plans and retrieve surplus assets (Hawthorne 1983,

Louis 1983, Smith 1983), the contribution of corporate securities and

leaseholds to pension funds in lieu of cash (Webman 1983) and the burden of

unfunded liabilities on the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Colvin

1982, Munnell 1982). Among academics, interest has centered on the tax and

incentive aspects of corporate pensions. Models of optimal capital structure

have yielded new implications for plan funding and investment (Black 1980,

Tepper 1981), while advances in option pricing theory have illuminated the

perverse incentives created by PBGC insurance (Sharpe 1976, Treynor 1977).

     In view of this widespread interest, it is surprising that little is

yet known about the empirical relationships between pension funding and

asset allocation on the one hand and such indicators of firms' financial

condition as profitability, risk and tax—paying status on the other. The

purpose of this paper is to begin filling this gap by presenting some initial

evidence and examining the ability of current theory to explain it.

     In Section I we outline two different perspectives on corporate pension

decisions, the traditional perspective and the corporate financial perspective,

the latter of which includes the recent theoretical work on corporate pensions

mentioned above. In Section II, we review the small body of previous

empirical evidence.    In Section III, we discuss a significant empirical
                                    —2--



problem, namely that firms have considerable latitude in reporting their

pension liabilities and may thus obscure the true cross—sectional relationship

between funding status and financial condition.

     In Section IV we discuss our data sources and present our results. We

find that there is indeed a significant inverse relationship between firms'

profitability and the discount rates they choose to report their pension

liabilities. In view of this we adjust all reported pension liabilities to

a common discount rate assumption. We then find a significant positive

relationship between firm profitability and the degree of pension funding,

as is consistent with the corporate financial perspective. We also find some

evidence that firms facing higher risk and lower tax liabilities are less

inclined to fully fund their pension plans. On the asset allocation question,

we find that the distribution of plan assets invested in bonds is bi—modal,

but that it does not tend to cluster around extreme portfolio configurations

to the extent predicted by the corporate financial perspective. We also

find that the percentage of plan assets invested in bonds is negatively

related to both total size of plan and the proportion of unfunded liabilities.

The latter relationship shows up particularly among the riskiest firms, and

is consistent with the corporate financial perspective on pension decisions.



I.   Alternative Perspectives on Pension Funds

     A. The Traditional Perspective

         Defined benefit pension funds are segregated poois of capital that

collateralize the future liabilities explicit (and perhaps implicit) in
                                     — 3...




defined benefit plans. Viewed from what we shall call the "traditional

perspective," pension funds are entirely separate from the corporation and

its shareholders and should be managed without regard to either corporate

financial policy or the interests of the corporation and Its shareholders.

     From this perspective, funding decisions should be based solely upon the

expected future stream of employee pension liabilities, irrespective of

corporate financial condition and/or policy. Likewise, asset allocation

decisions within the fund should be made solely in the best interests of the

beneficiaries. Unfortunately, it is quite unclear what asset allocation

policy would be best for beneficiaries. For example, If the defined benefit

liabilities were really fixed such that beneficiaries would not and could

not share in any surplus of pension assets over liabilities, then the

beneficiaries would want a well—funded plan to be invested in the least

risky assets, presumably fixed income securities. If, on the other hand,

the beneficiaries were able to participate in the ownership of such a

surplus, as Miller and Scholes (1981) and Bulow and Scholes (1983) have

argued, then the optimal asset allocation would be much less clear and, in

principal, could include virtually any mix of stocks and bonds.

     B. The Corporate Financial Perspective

         In recent years, academic theorists have built an alternative

perspective from which pension decisions are viewed as an integral part of

overall corporate financial policy. From this perspective, defined benefit

liabilities are just one more set of fixed financial liabilities of the firm.

Pension assets, while collateral for these liabilities, are really just

assets of the firm in that the surplus/deficit belongs to the firm's
                                      —4---




shareholders. This integrated perspective is then concerned with how to

manage the firm's extended balance sheet, including both its normal assets

and liabilities and its pension assets and liabilities, in the best interests

of the shareholders. This view explicitly ignores the interests of the

beneficiaries, in part because their defined benefits are insured by the

PBGC anyway. From the corporate financial perspective, then, the beneficiaries

are protected by the government, and the corporate pension decisions become

what amount to a game between the corporation and various government agencies

and interests, a game that can be and should be thought of as an integral

part of corporate financial policy.

     The tax effects are the first, and for most companies, the most

important part of this game. In closely related papers, Black (1980) and

Tepper (1981) argued that the unique feature of pension funds from this

integrated perspective is their role as a tax shelter. Because firms can

effectively earn a pre—tax rate of return on any assets held in the pension

fund and pass these returns through to shareholders much as if the pension

fund were an IRA or Keogh plan, the comparative advantage of a pension fund

lies in its ability to be invested in the most heavily taxed assets.

     Presumably this means that pension funds should be invested entirely In

taxable bonds, as opposed to coon stock, real estate or other assets that

are in effect taxed at lower marginal tax rates for most shareholders.    Black

and Tepper further point out that if (and, by the way, only if) the pension

fund is invested in more heavily taxed assets such as bonds, the corporation

should fund its pension plan to the maximum extent allowed by the IRS so as

to maximize the value of this tax shelter to shareholders. The tax effects
                                      —5—


of pensions should therefore induce corporations to follow extreme policies——

 fully funded (indeed overfunded) pension plans with the pension assets

invested entirely in taxable bonds.

     A second effect, which we label the "pension put" effect, is associated

with the work of Sharpe (1976) and Treynor (1977). Briefly, the PBGC's

insurance of pension benefits gives the firm a put option——it can shed its

pension liabilities by giving the PBGC the assets in the pension plan plus

thirty percent of the market value of its net worth. As with any option, the

value of this put increases with the risk of the underlying asset. Thus,

as long as the PBGC neither regulates pension fund risk, nor accelerates its

own claim at the first sign of financial distress, the firm has an incentive

to undermine the PBGC's claim. It can do so and maximize the value of its

put option by funding its pension plan only to the minimum permissible

extent and investing the pension assets in the riskiest possible securities.

These are, of course, the exact opposite policies from those suggested by

the tax effects described above.

     It is possible to combine these two effects, the tax effect and the PBGC

put, in a joint model, as discussed by Harrison and Sharpe (1983), Bulow

(1983), Chen (1983), and Westerfield and Marshall (1983). Thus the firm can

be viewed as facing a tradeoff——by overfunding and investing in bonds it

maximizes tax benefits, but by underfunding and investing in risky assets

it maximizes the value of the pension put. However, it can be shown that

this tradeoff does not produce a set of unique interior optimal Dolicies,

but rather implies that each firm should be following one of two very

different extreme policies. If the firm is profitable and relatively safe,
                                     —6—


the pension put will probably have negligible value. Hence the firm should

fully fund its pension plan and invest entirely in the most heavily taxed

securities. On the other hand, if the firm is both unprofitable and risky,

the tax shelter may be superfluous, and the pension put may be quite valuable.

In order to maximize its value, the firm should underfund its plan to the

greatest extent possible and invest entirely in the riskiest securities.

     A third effect, which we label the "financial slack" effect, has

emphasized the pension fund's usefulness as a source of corporate liquidity

or as a store of temporarily excess corporate funds. The view that firms

will maintain some financial slack has a long informal history based on the

notion that they do not wish to be caught having to rely on external

financing at "unfavorable" times. A more formal version of this idea has

recently been developed by Myers and Majiuf (1983), who posit that a firm's

managers are likely to have better information about its prospects than

outside investors. In that event, there is an adverse selection problem,

since managers have an incentive to issue more stock when they believe that

it is overpriced, and consequently, investors will react negatively to news

of a stock issue. Managers therefore maintain some financial slack in order

to avoid the necessity of a stock issue.

     Such slack could be kept in the form of either liquid assets and unused

debt capacity or pension assets. The latter is advantageous from a tax

standpoint, but liquid assets and unused debt capacity are presumably

substantially more accessible, particularly In the short run. While firms

have increasingly attempted to tap their excess pension assets in recent

years (Hawthorne 1983, Louis 1983, and Smith 1983), the legality and
                                     —7—


regulatory status of these attempts has yet to be clearly defined. One

might therefore expect firms to trade tax benefits against accessibility

in deciding how much of their financial slack to keep in the pension fund.

As Tepper (1983) has shown, this can, in principal at least, lead to an

interior optimum with partial funding. The stronger are a firm's earnings

and the greater its need for tax shelter, the greater will be its tendency

to build financial slack in the form of additional pension assets, and vice

versa.

     Together, these different aspects of corporate pensions (the tax shelter,

the PBGC put, and the accessibility of financial slack) form what we shall

call a corporate financial perspective on pension policy.

     C. Distinguishing Among the Perspectives

         The two perspectives discussed above are not, of course, mutually

exclusive theories or prescriptions for pension fund policies. The traditional

perspective emphasizes the separate and segregated role of pension funds and

their relationship to the beneficiaries' interests. The corporate financial

perspective emphasizes instead the integral role of pension decisions in

overall corporate financial policy and its relationship to the shareholders'

interests. Clearly, both sets of interests could be determinants of actual

corporate pension decisions.

     In addition, it is difficult to develop meaningful empirical tests

that would distinguish clearly between the two different perspectives. We

can, however, make some generalizations in that regard. Suppose, for example,

that our cross—sectional tests reveal that companies' pension funding seems

to be importantly determined by variables describing the companies' past

and present financial condition and/or their tax—paying status. We would
                                     —8—


interpret this as evidence that funding was being determined in part by the

corporate financial perspective, particularly if a stronger financial

condition and tax—paying status appeared to be associated with greater

funding. If, on the other hand, the degree of funding seemed to be independent

of corporate financial condition (or if weaker financial companies actually

funded more), we would interpret this as evidence that funding was being

determined by the interests of beneficiaries, as in the traditional persDective

on pension decisions.

     Distinguishing between the two perspectives on the basis of empirical

tests of asset allocation is more difficult, particularly because it is not

at all clear what asset allocation policy or sets of policies would be

consistent with our traditional perspective. Roughly speaking, if the

observed frequency distribution of asset allocation across firms is quite

bi—inodal with most firms at one extreme or another, we would interpret this

as evidence that the corporate financial perspective is driving asset

allocation decisions. In addition, if risky firms with underfunded plans

tend to invest in stocks and safe firms with overfunded plans in bonds, we

would interpret this as evidence that the corporate financial perspective was

influencing asset allocation decisions. We will discuss these alternative

interpretations in more detail in Section IV of the paper.


II. Existing Evidence

     Before proceeding to our own empirical work, it is useful to review the

small body of evidence on corporate pensions that currently exists. Friedman

(1983) has conducted the most extensive empirical study to date, using IRS

Form 5500 data for a broad sample of firms for the year 1977. This source
                                       —9—


provides data on pension funding and pension asset allocation for the firms

in the sample, and Friedman supplemented it with financial data from the

Standard and Poor's Coinpustat tape.

     One of the primary questions that Friedman addressed was whether

corporate pension plans can be viewed as an integral part of the overall

corporate financing decision. In the terminology of Section I above, he

looked for evidence that the corporate financial perspective is an appropriate

one from which to view pension decisions. Accordingly, he estimated a number

of relationships of the following form: on the left hand side of the equation

appeared some aspect of the pension decision such as unfunded liabilities

or the proportion of pension assets invested in bonds; on the right hand

side appeared some measure of conventional financing, such as ordinary

balance sheet liabilities, plus one other control variable. Among the

control variables used were a number of measures of firm profitability, risk

and tax—paying status.

     Friedman concluded that pension decisions are indeed related to

other aspects of the corporate financing decision.   He found that

unfunded pension liabilities and the proportion of pension assets invested

in bonds are both positively related to ordinary balance sheet liabilities.

He also found that a reverse relationship holds, with balance sheet leverage

depending positively on unfunded pension liabilities, regardless of the

control variable used.

     Such interrelationships would be predicted by the corporate financial

perspective. From that perspective, the channels through which pension fund

decisions affect firm value are also conditioned by the overall financing

decision. Balance sheet leverage affects the firm's tax—paying status, the
                                    —10—


risk borne by both the PBGC and the firm's employees, and the firm's

available borrowing power. Hence the pension and capital structure decisions

are tied to the same set of underlying factors. Viewed from the corporate

financial perspective, the results that we report below, therefore, concerning

the linkages between pension decisions and the firm's tax—paying status,

profitability and risk, should be thought of as reduced form relationships

from a larger system.

    While there is some evidence of the related nature of pension and

other financing decisions in Friedman's results, the picture becomes

clouded when we attempt to identify different effects. The positive

relationship between unfunded pension liabilities and ordinary debt, for

example, suggests that whatever financial risk firms assume through their

pension funds is magnified by their financing decisions.   This could be

interpreted as an indication that firms with unfunded pension liabilities

try to maximize the value of the pension put through balance sheet leverage.

However, Friedman's asset allocation results appear to contradict this

conclusion. There, greater balance sheet leverage seems to be offset by

more conservative investment of pension assets.

     The picture that emerges from Friedman's control variables is also

clouded. Higher risk, as measured by earnings variability, is associated

with pension investment strategies that are more heavily weighted toward

bonds. This is consistent with the relationship between leverage and pension

asset allocation and could be interpreted as evidence that pension portfolios

are managed to protect the beneficiaries, as predicted by the traditional

perspective. However, Friedman also found a positive relationship between
                                    —11—


firm profitablity and unfunded pension liabilities, which is hard to reconcile

with the traditional perspective. In addition, he could find no relationship

between firms' tax—paying status and either their funding or pension investment

decisions. Overall, then, Friedman's results do not strongly favor one

perspective to the exclusion of the other and indeed convey the feeling that

corporate pension decisions are not well understood.

     The only other extensive empirical work on the subject that we are

aware of is by Westerfield and Marshall (1983). Using quarterly SEC data

for approximately 400 corporations over the period 1972—77, they studied

pension asset allocation. They could not attribute any significant change

in asset allocation to passage of the Employee Retirement Income Security

Act (ERISA) in Setember of 1974, nor could they find a significant link

between the asset mix and the variability of the PBGC's claim on the firm.

They did find that the proportion of pension assets invested in stock was

positively related to unfunded liabilities in the post—ERISA period, which

is consistent with the pension put effect. However, this relationship was

not statistically significant.

     In sunmary, existing results do not clearly identify the appropriate

perspective from which to view corporate pension decisions. Nevertheless,

other avenues of inquiry have yet to be explored. There are additional

sources of data that can be examined and the data can also be adjusted in

different ways. One such adjustment concerns the discretion that firms

currently have to choose a discount rate for reporting their pension
               1
liabilities.
                                     —12—


III. The Choice of a Discount Rate for Reporting Pension Liabilities

     Suppose, as current theory suggests, that there is a relationship

between firms' financial condition and their optimal funding decisions. In

order to report the funding levels they have chosen, firms must select

discount rates pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)

Rules 35 and 36. But suppose further that they choose these rates in a

manner that varies systematically with their financial condition. If

empirical work is conducted using reported funding measures, the true cross—

sectional relationship between financial condition and uniformly—calculated

measures of funding status could be obscured.

     Firms must choose a discount rate for both funding purposes and reporting

purposes, and there is reason to believe that both of these rates may vary

inversely with firm profitability. Changes in the rate used for funding

purposes may allow the firm to loosen the Internal Revenue Service's constraint

on maximum funding. A decrease in the assumed rate, for example, increases

the pension liability measure and allows further funding to take place. The

IRS would presumably impose limits on this practice, but it is clear that it

is not forbidden altogether. Unfortunately, it is not possible to trace

this effect empirically, since the rates used for funding purposes and for

FASB 35 and 36 reporting   purposes may   differ and data are available only

for the latter rates. To the extent that the two rates are correlated,

however, as they seem to be, reductions in reported rates may reflect

reductions in funding rates that are made to achieve tax savings.

     At the opposite end of the funding spectrum, increases in assumed

discount rates will reduce reported pension liabilities and this may allow

firms to loosen the Department of Labor's constraint on underfunding. Such
                                     —13—


an effect, of course depends on the presumption that the DOL is either

deceived by or reacts passively to these discount rate changes.

     Firms may also wish to change their assumed discount rates in order to

manage the flow of information to shareholders and/or employees. By altering

the discount rate chosen for funding purposes, a firm can effectively smooth

its reported earnings over time, a practice that was evident in Friedman's

(1983) empirical results. Furthermore, by altering the discount rate chosen

for reporting purposes, a firm can attempt to obscure its management over

time of financial slack, reported earnings per share and/or the value of its

unfunded liabilities, It might hope, for example, to obscure this pro

from investors who might otherwise interpret reduced funding as negative

information on the firm's current or prospective financial condition. It

might also hope to obscure this process from employees, for example, to limit

labor unions' efforts to bargain for the financial slack being held in the

form of overfunding.

     Whether changes in the discount rate are aimed at real funding constraints,

then, or simply investors' and/or employees' perceptions of the firm, we

might expect an inverse relationship between the rate chosen and the firm's

profitability. When earnings are strong, the firm might want to build up

financial slack without making that fact too obvious, so there should be a

tendency to choose lower discount rates. When earnings are weak, the reverse

might be true. In the empirical work that follows, we test this proposition

and also adjust reported pension liabilities to a common discount rate to

correct for any systematic biases.
                                   —14—


IV. Empirical Tests

    A. The Data

         The aim of our empirical work was to seek regularities in the

funding and asset allocation of pension plans across a broad spectrum of

U.S. corporations. In particular, we wanted to see if pension fund decisions

were related to various measures of firms' financial condition, as suggested

by the corporate financial perspective. Thus we were looking for significant

relationships between firms' funding levels and their profitability, tax-

paying status and risk and between their allocation of pension assets and

their risk. It was our hope that this would allow us to assess not only

the plausibility of the corporate financial perspective as a whole but also

the strength of the tax, pension put and financial slack effects.

     The first group of variables for which we needed data consisted of

pension fund characteristics for a sample of firms. We chose to take the bulk

of this data from FASB Statement No. 36 filings for the year 1980. Figures

were available for 939 corporations, ensuring a fairly broad cross section,

and, of particular importance for our purposes, this source included data on

the interest rate assumptions used by these firms in reporting their pension

liabilities.

     To measure the levels of pension funding for these firms, we first took

reported pension liabilities and adjusted them to a common discount rate to

correct for any systematic tendencies toward over— or underreporting. We

chose 10% for our common rate, since this was approximately the rate used by

the PBGC around this time to value the liabilities of terminated plans

(Munnell, 1982). In the absence of detailed information on the time profile
                                    —15—


of different firms' pension liabilities we made the adlustment simply by

multiplying each firm's reported liabilities by the ratio of the assumed

discount rate to 10%. We used two measures of pension liabilities, adjusting

both in the same manner. These were the present value of vested pension

benefits and total accrued (that is,vestedplusunvested) benefits. We then

divided total pension assets (reported in the FASB 36 filings) by each of

these liability measures to arrive at two measures of the level of pension

funding.

     The FASB 36 data did not include a breakdown of pension assets by

security type. We were able to obtain asset allocation data from Greenwich

Research Associates for a sample of firms, 369 of which overlapped with our

FASB 36 sample. As our measure of asset allocation we used the proportion

of total pension assets invested in fixed income securities, which include

cash and short—term investments, bonds, guaranteed investment contracts and

insured pension plans.2 We also obtained Greenwich data on the proportion

of pension plan participants already retired for each firm. Under the

traditional perspective, the allocation of pension assets might be affected

by demographic characteristics of the participant pool, and we wished to test

this possibility.

     The second type of variable for which we needed data was firm profitability.

We chose to measure this as 1980 inflation—adjusted return on net assets, or

inflation—adjusted operating profits divided by the replacement cost of the

firm's assets. These inflation—adjusted data for 1980 were available from

FASB Statement No. 33 filings, but only for 508 of the 939 firms in our

original sample.
                                     16—


    The choice of this profitability measure was dictated primarily by

two considerations. First, if we interpret our equations as reduced form

equations from a larger system, it is appropriate to consider the profitability

measure that is driving the full system. Presumably the overall financial

structure decision is affected by real profitability rather than some

profitability concept that is subject to inflationary distortions. In

addition, the reduced form notion suggests that operating profit, which does

not already reflect the firm's leverage choice, is the most appropriate

profitability measure.3 Second, the financial slack effect would seem to

depend on a real profitability measure. Inflationary distortions, such as

those stemming from inventory profits or understated depreciation, do not

truly add to the firm's capacity to build financial slack. While the inflation—

adjusted data have these advantages, however, one cost should also be noted.

Ideally, several years worth of data might be used to smooth out short—run

profitability fluctuations that may have little impact on the firm's

decisions. Unfortunately the FASB 33 data are not available for years prior

to 1979.

     The third type of data we needed was measures of tax—paying status.

The chief difficulty here is that taxes reported on firms' financial

statements may differ markedly from the taxes they actually pay. However,

only the reported figures are available, since the IRS does not disclose

actual payments on a disaggregated basis. We decided to try two, admittedly

imperfect, measures.

     The first of these is the firm's tax loss carryforward (divided by

inflation—adjusted assets as a scaling factor). This variable is reported
                                    —17—


on the Standard and Poor's Compustat tape for 502 of the firms in our

original sample, and it reflects their actual ability to make use of

additional tax shields. The larger is the size of the carryforward, the

less likely is the firm to be in a tax—paying position in the immediate

future, and hence the less valuable Is the tax advantage from pension

funding.

     A second measure of tax—paying status is the firm's total reported

taxes minus the change in deferred taxes over the previous year (again,

scaled by Inflation—adjusted assets).4 Substracting the change in deferred

tax liabilities provides an approximate adjustment for such practices as

using straight line depreciation for reporting purposes and accelerated

depreciation for tax purposes. The data needed to construct this measure

were also available on the Coinpustat tape, this time for 490 of the firms in

our original sample.

     The fourth variable that we needed to measure was risk. The same

argument could be made here that we are really estimating a reduced form

relationship and that we are thus interested in an exogenous, or operating

risk measure. However, the value of the pension put option depends on the

firm's total risk, including financial as well as operating risk and

unsystematic as well as systematic risk. Since we were particularly interested

in trying to isolate any pension put effect that might exist, we chose as

our primary risk measure the firm's 1980 Standard and Poor's bond rating.

This reflects an assessment of risk based on a composite of historical data

and future expectations. Data were collected for 457 of our firms, and the

ratings were coded from one to ten, with lower numbers representing lower
                                   —18—


ratings and presumably greater risk.

     Since risk is a notoriously difficult concept to measure, we also tried

three other risk variables. The first of these is the firm's unlevered beta,

which reflects the systematic risk of its assets. Levered beta estimates

were collected for 439 of our firms from data provided by Merrill Lynch and

these were then adjusted for firms' market value debt—equity ratios.5 The

value of common stock was obtained from stock market data while the market

value of preferred stock was estimated by capitalizing each firm's preferred

dividends for 1980 at the Standard and Poor's preferred dividend yield. The
                                                                      6
market value of debt was estimated using the current Baa bond rate.       An

alternative measure of operating risk can be based on total, rather than

systematic variability. For this, we used a standard deviation of detrended

return on net assets over a ten—year period. Since we did not have inflation—

adjusted data for such a lengthy period, it was necessary to use book figures

from the Compustat tape to measure this variable. In addition, the

requirement of ten consecutive years of data reduced the available subsample

for this variable to 221 firms. Our final risk measure, which reflects

financial as well as operating risk, is the standard deviation of monthly

returns on the firm's stock, computed over the period of January 1979 —

December 1980. Data were available from the Center for Research in Security

Prices for 506 of our firms.

     The names and definitions of all of these variables are listed in Table

1. We also show some summary statistics for the different variables to

indicate the range of values represented in our sample. We turn now to our

estimation.
                                      —19—


     B. The Assumed Discount Rate

         The first hypothesis we tested concerns the relationship between

firm profitability   and the discount rate chosen for reporting pension
liabilities. A simple regression of the assumed discount rate against
inflation—adjusted   return on net assets, as reported in Table 2, indicates

a strong negative correlation between the two variables. That is, more

profitable firms tend to choose lower discount rates and thus, in relative

terms, to overstate their pension liabilities. This result suggests that

it may be important to adjust reported liabilities to a common basis if the

true relationships between pension funding and other variables are to be

uncovered.

     We also tested the constancy of the relationship between R and RONA.

In particular, as the value of the put to the PBGC increases, one might

expect firms to increase their assumed values of R at an even faster rate

in order to conceal the PBGC's true exposure. To examine this possibility,

we created a dummy variable, PBGC, which takes on a value of one if the pension

put is "in the money" and zero otherwise. The pension put is deemed to be

in the money if a firm's unfunded vested pension liabilities, calculated at

reported discount rates, exceed thirty percent of the firm's market value

of equity. The results of this experiment are also reported in Table 2.

The dummy variable has a significant coefficient and the effect is in the

hypothesized direction: companies that have the PBGC in the riskiest position

tend to increase their assumed discount rates by even greater amounts than

other firms.
                                      —20—


        C. Pension Fundj
           Next, we investigated the relationship between pension funding

(calculated   on a uniform basis) and profitability, tax—paying status and
risk. As a preliminary step, we computed the simple correlation coefficients
reported in Table 3. The limitations of this measure are well known.
However, it does allow us to examine relationships between the
                                                               variables

using   as much of our sample as possible, in contrast to the regression

analysis, in which data requirements forced considerable cuts in sample

size.

        One of the stronger results in the table is the positive correlation

between funding and RONA. This is consistent with the corporate financial

perspective under which pension decisions are related to firm profitability.
                                                                   and the
Also of note is the strong negative correlation between funding
                                             As mentioned in Section III.A,
percentage of plan participants retired.

we collected data on this variable with an eye toward its possible influence

on asset allocation, and thus its strong correlation with pension funding

came as a surprise. We believe, as will be discussed in further detail

below, that this variable is serving as a proxy for the firm's long run

profitability.
        Pension funding also appears to be strongly related to tax—paying
status,    particularly the T/A variable. The results for both CFWDIA and T/A

are in the directions predicted by the tax and financial slack effects: that

is, heavier tax burdens are associated with higher funding levels.

        Finally, the bond rating variable is positively correlated with funding,

which is consistent with the pension put effect. Riskier firms, as indicated
                                    —21—


by lower bond ratings, tend to exhibit lower funding levels. Correlations

among the different risk measures are shown in Table 4, and in general all

four measures tend in the same direction (low values of BRAT denote higher

risk, and thus BRAT should be negatively correlated with the alternative

measures). The relation between bond rating and unlevered beta, however,

is quite weak.

     With an eye toward multicollinearity problems in the regression analysis

it is also worth noting in Table 3 the correlations among the explanatory

variables. As might be expected, RONA is related to both bond rating and the

measures of tax—paying status, while bond rating and tax—paying status are

in turn related to one another. These relationships suggest that it may be

difficult to separate the different effects on funding.

     We next regressed the level of pension funding against profitability,

tax—paying status and risk. The results when funding is measured as pension

assets over vested pension liabilities are reported in Table 5.   We obtained

very similar results when funding was measured in terms of total accrued

liabilities, and these results are not reported. Both measures of tax—paying

status are used in Table 5, and risk is measured in terms of both bond rating

and unlevered beta. The results using SDRONA and SDMR were qualitatively

similar and are not reported.

     The strongest effect that emerges in Table 5 is that of profitability.

Inflation—adjusted return on net assets has a uniformly positive and

significant association with the level of pension funding. This is consistent

with the corporate financial perspective on pension decisions, and the

direction of the effect is simultaneously consistent with the tax, pension

put and financial slack effects.
                                    —22—


     This finding is also in contrast to Friedman's (1983) results, which

showed a negative relationship between profitability and funding. As

discussed in Section II, Friedman used a different data source, a different

year, reported instead of uniformly—calculated measures of pension liabilities

and a different specification, so it is difficult to attribute the difference

in results to any one factor. We did, however, run the same regressions

using reported pension liabilities to calculate our funding measures, and

we found that the positive relationship persisted between funding and

profitability.

     The tax effect in Table 5 is consistently in the direction predicted

by both the tax arbitrage and financial slack theories, but its statistical

significance is generally much lower than that of the profitability effect.

Whether tax—paying status is measured in terms of carryforwards or reported

tax payments adjusted for the change in deferred tax liabilities, an

increase in the tax burden is associated with an increase in funding. In

view of the correlations between profitability and taxpaying status reported

in Table 3, it is not surprising that the tax effect is difficult to

distinguish

     Finally, the effect of risk in Table 5 is neither consistent across

equations nor very significant statistically. When risk is measured by

bond rating, greater risk is associated with less funding, consistent with

the pension put effect. When risk is measured by unlevered beta, on the

other hand, higher risk is associated with higher funding levels. Since

neither of these effects is statistically significant, no clear picture

emerges of the true influence of risk on pension funding.
                                    —23—


     Perhaps, however, it is unreasonable to expect the pension put and tax

effects to leave strong traces across the entire sample of firms. As

pointed out in Section I.B, for example, the influence of risk on the value

of the pension put might be expected to appear strongly only for the riskiest

firms. To examine this possibility, we split our sample and performed the

same regression for those firms whose bond rating was below average relative

to the sample as a whole. This regression, using T/A as the tax variable,

is reported in the first column of Table 6. Lower bond ratings (higher

risk) are still associated with lower funding levels, this time in a more

significant fashion. To the extent that there is an identifiable pension put

effect, it appears to be very nonlinear, as theory would suggest. The fact

that the explanatory power of the equation increases substantially relative

to the full sample regression also indicates that the effects we are seeking

to identify do not fall along a single straight line for a broad cross

section of firms.8

     In the same vein, we split our sample by values of T/A to see if the

tax effect would make a stronger showing among firms facing the heaviest

tax burdens. Results from the same regression performed over those firms

having above—average values of T/A are reported in the second column of

Table 6. For this subsample, the estimated coefficient of T/A is quite

large and more statistically significant than those reported in Table 5.

    Looking at Tables 5 and 6 together, the profitability variable appears

to be doing most of the work in the full sample regression. The tax and

risk variables have relatively insignificant effects. However, when the

sample is split into pieces, these latter effects show up more strongly
                                    —24—


among firms that deviate from the average. The pension put effect appears

to have some plausibility for the high—risk subsample, while the tax effect

is more pronounced for the high tax—paying subsample. In addition, the

effect of profitability is attenuated in these subsamples. It may be that

profitability is simply a proxy for some combination of tax and risk effects

that best explains variations in funding for the sample as a whole. At

the edges of the sample, however, where the tax and risk effects become

separated, the explanatory power of profitability declines, and the tax

and risk effects are more readily identifiable.

     The suspicion that our RONA measure of profitability may be acting as

a proxy for other variables receives further support when we add PRET, the

percentage of plan participants retired, to our list of explanatory variables.

The results of this experiment (performed over the largest sample of firms

for which data on all the variables was available) are reported in Table 7.

Comparing these results with equation 3 in Table 5, we see that the

estimated coefficients of T/A and BRAT remain very similar in size and

significance. However, in the presence of PRET, the effect of RONA

virtually disappears. At the same time the explanatory power of the

equation triples (although the sample size is cut in half).

     Taken together, then, the smaller—sample results of Tables 6 and 7

convey the strong impression that RONA is a very noisy measure of firms'

financial condition. In addition, the results in Table 7 raise the

question of how PRET's apparently strong effect should be interpreted.

Our feeling is that this variable is a measure of firm or industry life

cycle and hence of long—run financial condition. Firms with the highest

ratios of retired to active workers are most likely to be in a phase of
                                    —25—


maturity or even decline. They are likely to exhibit slower growth and

lower profitability than other firms, and thus the finding that higher values

of PRET are associated with lower levels of pension funding is consistent

with the corporate financial perspective.9

     The results thus far suggest that the corporate financial perspective

is a plausible one from which to view pension funding decisions. A potential

weakness of the tests conducted, however, is that pension variables have

been measured on a firm—wide basis, whereas many firms administer more than

one plan. It is possible that different perspectives should be applied in

analyzing the funding levels of different pension plans within the same firm.

     For example, one of the rationales offered in Section I for the

corporate financial perspective was that promised benefits are insured by the

PBGC and thus firms need not feel constrained to adopt funding levels that

the beneficiaries would prefer in the absence of insurance. In fact, however,

the extent of the insurance coverage is limited.10 Different pension plans

within the same firm, then, might be funded differently depending on the

degrees of insurance coverage for their respective participants. Plans for

hourly workers, who are more likely to have complete insurance coverage,

might be managed from a corporate financial perspective. On the other hand,

plans for salaried workers, who are more likely to have promised benefits in

excess of insurance limits, might be managed from the traditional perspective.

    To perform a rough examination of this possibility, we obtained funding

data on over 10,000 different pension plans (each with more than 100
                                                 11
participants) from the IRS Form 5500 for 1980.        For each plan, we had data

on pension assets, the present value of vested benefits and the discount

rate assumption, so we were able to compute vested funding (PA/VPL), where
                                    —26—


total pension liabilities have been adjusted to a 10% discount rate as in

the company—wide data above. Unfortunately, it was not possible to determine

with complete accuracy whether a given plan was for hourly workers, salaried

workers or both. Rather, the plans had been grouped into four mutually

exclusive categories, corresponding to the formula used in calculating

benefits. The first of these is the fixed benefit plans which pay a fixed

percentage of final compensation. The second is the unit benefit plans

which pay some percentage of final compensation times years of service. The

third category is the flat benefit plans, which simply pay a stated dollar

amount, while the fourth category consists of all other plans.

     A simple test for differences in funding behavior is an analysis of

variance, which tests for differences in mean funding across the four

categories. This test is reported In the form of a dummy variable regression

in Table 8.   The F statistic value overwhelmingly rejects the hypothesis

that there are no significant differences in funding across plan types. In

addition, flat benefit plans appear to be significantly less funded than

other types of plans. While not all hourly workers' plans are flat benefit

plans, it is our understanding that flat benefit plans have hourly workers

as their predominant participants. Thus there is some evidence that plans

for workers whose benefits are more likely to be fully insured also tend to

be less well funded on the average. This in turn suggests that whether the

traditional or the corporate financial perspective is a more accurate

description of pension decisions may vary by type of plan. Further

investigation of this issue would be worthwhile if a more accurate breakdown

of plans by type of participant could be obtained.
                                    —27—


     P. Pension Asset Allocation

         Finally, we investigated the asset allocation among our sample of

corporate pension funds and its dependence upon various characteristics of

the firm and the pension plan.

     Figure 1 shows the frequency distribution for our asset allocation

variable, the percentage of pension fund assets invested in fixed income

securities (Fl), for all 539 firms for which data was available. Recall that

the corporate financial perspective on asset allocation implies that pension

funds should be invested at either one of two extremes. In particular, because

the vast majority of the plans in this sample are considerably overfunded, this

perspective implies that most funds should be invested entirely in fixed income

securities (because these securities are presumably more heavily taxed).

     The data in Figure 1 show that the distribution of asset allocation

across firms is, in fact, bimodal. On the one hand, this data does hint

that firms divide into two groups, much as the corporate financial perspective

suggests they should. And ten percent do invest entirely in fixed income,

the extreme allocation that should be chosen by most firms.'2 Unfortunately,

however, the remaining ninety percent hold decidedly mixed portfolios with

a mode of forty—five percent of their pension assets invested in fixed

income securities. These interior or non—extremal asset allocations cannot

be explained by the corporate financial perspective on pension fund decisions.

     To glean some insight into the possible determinants of asset allocation,

we computed the correlation coefficients reported in Table 9. To simplify

and condense the presentation of our results in this section, we will report

using only one measure of funding, the ratio of assets to vested liabilities

(PA/VPL); one measure of risk, the bond rating (BRAT); and one measure of tax
                                    —28—


status (T/A))3 While, again, the problems with simple correlation

coefficients are well known, the values in Table 9 are interesting.

Surprisingly, the asset allocation does not depend upon the tax variable

(T/A). Nor does it depend upon the percentage of pension plan members who

are retired (PRET), our proxy for the demographics of the plan members and

thus the shape of the future pension liability stream. Equally surprisingly,

the asset allocation does depend upon the dollar value of vested liabilities,

our proxy for the size of the company's pension plan and fund)4 Also, the

asset allocation appears to depend importantly upon the degree of funding

(PA/VPL), unlike the results reported earlier in Friedman (1983).

     While at first glance the dependence upon size is surprising, we believe

it can be explained by an important difference between the implicit character

of large and small pension plans. Other studies, particularly Clark, Allen

and Sumner (1983) and Greenwich Research Associates (1983), have shown that

large defined benefit pension plans have given frequent and sizable post—

retirement benefit increases to their participants It appears that large

corporations tend to treat the "defined benefits" of their pension plans as

contractually—stipulated minimums or floors for the benefits paid to retirees,

but they voluntarily and regularly increase benefits beyond these floors. To

some extent this may reflect their efforts to award real dollar as opposed to

nominal dollar benefits to their retired employees. To some extent it may

reflect an attitude of sharing the surplus of pension assets (over liabilities)

with retired employees, as if their plans were more like defined contribution

plans. In any case, though, the pension benefits of large corporations are

clearly not fixed in practice in the nominal dollar terms that the legal

language of most pension contracts would imply.
                                    —29—


     The smaller pension plans associated with smaller companies, in contrast,

have only given very infrequent post—retirement benefit increases and many of

them have never given any increase. For example, in a typical year in the

mid—1970's fewer than ten percent of the retirees of small pension plans

received post—retirement increases, whereas more than three—quarters of the

retirees of large plans received such increases (Clark, Allen and Sumner 1983).

Apparently, small firms treat their pension claims much more as fixed nominal

dollar liabilities of the corporation, as the corporate financial perspective

on pensions assumes. We believe that this may well explain why small companies

tend to invest a larger percentage of their pension funds in fixed income assets.

     Perhaps more importantly, the corporate financial perspective on pension

funds would suggest that asset allocation should be related to funding and

risk. For that small fraction of companies where th value of the PBCC put

is appreciable, the plans should hold a larger fraction of their assets in

stocks; otherwise they should invest in bonds. Companies with low bond ratings

that are underfunded might thus be expected to hold more stocks and less bonds,

and vice versa.

     Table 10 reports some of the regression results which attempt to explain

asset allocation as a function of these different variables. In equation 1

with two explanatory variables, funding has a statistically significant

effect in the hypothesized direction. That Is, underfunded companies do

Indeed hold fewer bonds. Surprisingly, though, when bond rating is introduced

as an independent variable in equatIons 2 and 3, it enters with a negative

sign. Riskier companies hold fewer bonds and more stocks, the opposite

of what we might expect if companies were exploiting the PBGC put.

This is the same dependence that Friedman (1983) found, a "risk—offsetting
                                    —30—


effect" between the asset mix of the pension fund and the risk of the company.

     Table 11 reports the results of a similar regression for that subsample

of thirty higher—risk firms whose bond ratings were BB+ or lower. For this

group of companies the PBGC put effect and its dependence upon funding might

be more clearly observed. As the coefficients and      demonstrate, funding

(PA/VPL) is an even more important determinant of asset allocation within

this subsample, as we would expect)5 The measures of statistical significance

for both size and funding have an adjusted t—ratio of just about 2.

     Table 12 presents an alternative look at this same data. Confirming

the results of Table 11, among all higher risk firms the underfunded plans

hold riskier portfolios (fewer bonds, and more stocks). Furthermore, among

all underfunded plans, the higher risk firms own riskier portfolios. In our

entire sample there were actually only three firms that were credible candidates

for having a valuable PBGC put in that they had both underfunded pension

plans and a bond rating less than BBB—. Interestingly, these firms tended to

hold rather risky portfolios, just as the corporate financial perspective

suggests they should.

     The significance of these data are questionable, however, for both the

obvious reason that three is not an overwhelming sample size and because of

the subsequent history of these three firms.        Upon looking closely at

these firms, we discovered that two of the three firms have subsequently

switched their pension asset mixes to virtually one hundred percent

bonds using a bond dedication framework.     Moreover, they did so under

circumstances where the probabilities of financial distress were clearly

increasing not decreasing. Their subsequent asset mix decisions, then, were
                                   —31—


quite inconsistent with attempting to exploit the value of the PBGC put.

     To summarize the empirical findings on asset allocation, there is an

interesting dependence upon size which we believe can be explained by the

quite different ways that large and small firms seem to regard their

employees' "defined benefits." In addition, underfunded plans tend to

hold more equities and less fixed income securities. Finally, we found some

very sketchy evidence that the extreme subset of companies with both lower

ratings and unfunded pension plans tend to hold more of their pension assets

in equities, exactly what the corporate financial perspective on pension

decisions would suggest. The subsequent history of these firms, however,

makes us reluctant to conclude we have found solid evidence of such behavior.


V.   Conclusion

     When we look at our results in their entirety, we believe that we have

found several pieces of evidence supporting the corporate financial perspective

on pension fund decisions. There appears to be a real sense, then, in which

corporations manage their pension funds as an integral part of overall

financial polity.

     First, the reporting of pension fund liabilities is systematically

linked to company profitability through the choice of a discount rate. More

profitable firms tend to choose lower discount rates and thus to report

greater pension liabilities. Second, the level of pension funding is

positively related to companies' long—run profitability. This may be a

combined reflection of tax, risk and financial slack effects. Third, a

significant fraction of firms invest their pension assets entirely in fixed
                                       —32—


income securities, and the proportion of assets allocated to fixed income

securities is positively related to the level of funding.

     However, the individual effects comprising the corporate financial

perspective are more elusive. In our full sample of firms, the tax effect

and the pension put effect do not leave strong traces. Rather, these effects

are more clearly discernible only at the edges of our sample: a significant

positive relationship between tax—paying status and funding shows up among

firms with the heaviest tax burdens; a negative relationship between risk

and funding shows up among the riskiest firms; and there is sketchy evidence

of a tendency for the firms with the most valuable PBGC puts to invest their

pension funds in riskier assets.

     Our results also indicate that the traditional and corporate financial

perspectives on pension decisions are far from mutually exclusive. Across

firms, our asset allocation findings suggest that the corporate financial

perspective may be more appropriate in describing small pension plans, while

larger plans appear to take on some of the characteristics of the traditional

perspective. Moreover, even within the same firm, different plans may be

more appropriately viewed from one perspective or the other depending on

their level of PBGC insurance coverage.

     Clearly, the present study represents only an initial attempt to gain

a working empirical knowledge of corporate pension funds. As more years of

data become available, it would be desirable to check the robustness of our

results across different periods and to examine the determinants of changes

in pension funding and asset allocation over time. On the theoretical

front, it   is   apparent that much remains to be understood about the underlying
                                    —33—


labor contracts of which pension plans are a part. A better understanding

of the differences in these contracts across firms of different size or

across categories of employees within the same firm may shed considerable

further light on corporate pension decisions.
                                        TABLE 1
                         Summary Characteristics of the Data


                                                                       Sample Size
                            Standard        Minimum        Maximum      for this
Variable         Mean       Deviation        Value          Value       Variable

PA/TPL          1.480           .431            .554        2.956          908

PA/VPL          1.687           .601            .578        6.230          908

   R              .071          .012            .040         .130          908

   Fl             .536          .239         0.0            1.0            369

  PRET            .173          .095         0.0             .500          297

  RONA            .069          .063         —.293            .402         492

 CFWD/A           .003          .020         0.0              .280          502

  T/A             .050          .058         —.154            .603          490

 BETAU            .953          .444            .068        4.260           439

 SDRONA           .032          .021            .004          .148          234

  BRAT           7.797         1.311         1.0           10.0             457

  SDMR            .140          .066            .034          .469          506




Where
    PA = Reported        pension assets;
   TPL         Total pension liabilities, adjusted to common 10% discount rate;
   VPL =       Vested pension liabilities, adjusted to common 10% discount rate;
        R = Discount     rate assumed by firm   in   reporting pension liabilities;
       Fl = Fraction     of pension assets invested in fixed income securities;
  PRET = Percentageof pension plan participants who have already retired;
        A =    Non—pension corporate assets, valued at replacement cost;
  RONA =       Inflation—adjusted return on net assets (inflation—adlusted
               operating earnings divided by A);
  CFWD     =   End—of—year magnitude of tax loss carryforwards;
        T =    Reported total taxes minus the change during 1980 in deferred
               tax liabilities;
 BETAU = Unlevered beta;
SDRONA = Standard deviation around trend of book return on net assets;
  BRAT = Standard and Poor's Bond Rating (10 = AAA, 1 = D);
  SDMR = Standard deviation of market return on firm's stock.
                        TABLE 2

           Assumed Discount Rate Regressions




                              Dependent Variable
Independent
Variables                    R                     R


                            0.07                0.07
CONSTANT                   (.0007)             (.0007)
                           t=l00.0             t=l00.0


                           —0.025              —0.017
RONA                       (.007)              (.007)
                           t=—3.6              t=—2.4


                                                0.017
PBGC                                           (.006)
                                                t=2.8


R2                          .02                    .05



No. of
                            515                  515
Observations




Standard errors and t—statistics in these and
other regressions have been corrected for
heteroskedasticity using White's (1980)
procedure.

PBGC =      1 if vested pension liabilities, valued
            at reported discount rate, exceed 307
            of market value of firm's equity;

       =    0 otherwise.
                                            TABLE 3

           Simple Correlations Between Funding and Explanatory Variables


               PA                                      CFWD         T
              VPL         RONA             FRET          A          A         BRAT


           (Vested       (Profit—     (%   Retired)    (Carry—    (Taxes      (Bond
           Funding)      ability)                     forwards)    Paid)     Rating)



     PA       .868         .203            —.238       —.104        .197          .123
    TPL      fl=.000l     TT=.000l         TI=.000l    TI=.020    fl=.000l   fl=,009
             N=908        N=492            N=297       N=502      N=490      N=457
  (Total
Funding)
                            .192           —.331       —.096       .184           .090
     PA                    TI=.000l        fl=.000l    fl=.032    II=.000l   fl=.056
                           N=492           N=297       N=502      N=490      N=457


                                           —.359       —.123       .693           .173
    RONA                                   rI=.000l    TI=.006    T1=.000l   rI=.007
                                           N=195       N=492      N=458      N=240

                                                        .019      —.180           .085
    FRET                                               fl=.792    n=.013     Ti=.251
                                                       N=199      N=191      N=183

                                                                  — .076      -   .151
    CFWD                                                          T1=.lOl     fl=.018
     A                                                            N=467       N=247


                                                                               .296
     I                                                                        TT=.0001
      A                                                                       N=243




    TI =   Probability of finding a sample correlation greater than that reported
           under the null hypotheses that the true correlation is zero.

    N =    Number of observations used in computing this correlation.
                                        TABLE 4

                          Correlation Matrix of Risk Measures

                          BETAU              SDRONA                 SDMR

                        (Unlevered          (Std. Dev.           (Std. Dev.
                           Beta)          Book Return)          Mkt. Return)


                           —.048                  —.347           —.254
  BRAT                     n=.477                 TI=.000l        TI=.003
                           N=224                  N=260           N=140
  (Bond
Rating)
                                                   .176            .198
  BETAU                                           rr=.0006        =.OO3



                                                                    .266
  SDRONA                                                          TI=.000l
                                                                  N= 206




  II =    Probability of finding a sample correlation greater than that reported
          under the null hypotheses that the true correlation is zero.

  N =     Number of observations used in computing this correlation.
                                   TABLE 5

                         Pension Funding Regressions

                Dependent Variable = PA/VPL (Vested Funding)


                                                 Equation
Independent
 Variables                 1                 2                 3         4


                         1.279          1.352                1.282     1.304
CONSTANT                (0.160)        (0.068)              (0.172)   (0.065)
                        t=8.0          t=19.8               t=7.5     t=20.l


                         1.704          1.739                1.323     1.714
RONA                    (0.481)         (0.348)             (0.554)   (0.523)
                        t=3,5          t=5.0                t=2.4     t=3.3
(Profitability)

                        —0.504         —1.635
CFWD
                        (0.514)         (0.938)
  A                                    t=—1.7
                        t=—1.0
(Carryforwards)
                                                             1.177     0.370
T                                                           (0.767)   (0.662)
                                                            t=1.5     t=0.6
(Taxes Paid)
                         0.020                               0.016
BRAT                    (0.020)                             (0.022)
                        t=l.0                               t=O.7
(Bond Rating)

                                       0.097                           0.100
BETAU                                  (0.064)                        (0.064)
                                      t=1.5                           t=l.6
(Unlevered Beta)

R2                       .04            .07                  .05       .08



No. of                   240            360                  226       338
Observations




Numbers in parentheses are standard errors, calculated according to ite (1980).
                                     TABLE 6

                    Pension Funding Regressions for Subsamples

                  Dependent Variable = PAIVPL   (Vested Funding)


                                 Subsample: Firms                Subsample: Firms
Independent                     with Below—Average                   with
 Variables                         Bond Rating                Above—Average T/A

                                      0.684                           1.049
CONSTANT                             (0.347)                         (0.291)
                                     t=2.0                          t=3.6


                                      1.221                           0.359
RONA                                 (0.684)                         (1.004)
                                     t=l.8                           t=0.4
(Profitability)                                   -




                                      1.792                           2.925
T
                                     (1.277)                         (1.367)
                                     t=l.4                           t=2.l
(Taxes Paid)

                                      0.122                           0.031
BRAT                                 (0.061)                         (0.032)
                                     t=2.0                           t1.0
(Bond Rating)



R2                                     .09                             .07



No. of                                                                  81
                                        74
Observations




Numbers in parentheses are standard errors calculated according to White (1980).
                       TABLE 7

     Percentage of Plan Participants Retired as a
            Determinant of Pension Funding


                                          Dependent
Independent                               Variable:
 Variables                         PA/VPL (Vested Funding)


                                             1.685
CONSTANT                                     (0.334)
                                             t=5.O


                                             0.016
RONA                                         (0.893)
                                             t=O.02
(Profitability)
                                             —1.980
PRET                                         (0.626)
                                             t=—3.2
(/   Retired)

                                              1.190
T
                                             (1.030)
                                             t=1.2
(Taxes Paid)

                                              0.018
BRAT                                         (0.036)
                                             t=0.5
(Bond Rating)

R2                                             .17




No. of                                         108
Observations



Numbers in parentheses are standard errors calculated
according to White (1980).
                           TABLE 8

              Differences in Funding by Plan Type

        Dependent Variable = PA/VPL (Vested Funding)


                                                Estimated
Independent                                    Coefficient
 Variables                                  (Standard Error)

                                                   1.793
CONSTANT                                          (0.045)
                                                  t=39.8

                                                     0.106
FIXED                                               (0.053)
                                                  t=2.0


                                                     0.025
UNIT                                                (0.046)
                                                    t=0. 5


                                                  —0.335
FLAT                                                (0.055).
                                                    t=—6. 1



R2                                                    .012


F                                                   40.83


No. of
                                                    10,124
Observations



FIXED = 1 if fixed benefit plan, 0 otherwise;

 UNIT = 1 if unit benefit plan, 0 otherwise;

    FLAT = 1 if flat benefit plan, 0 otherwise.
                                      TABLE 9

           Simple Correlations Between Asset Allocation (Fl)

                          and Explanatory Variables


                PA/VPL        T/A          BRAT         VPL        PRET

                (Vested      (Taxes         (Bond      (Vested
               Funding)       Paid)       Rating) Liabilities) Retired)
Fl               .139         —.025         —.107       —.136      —.082
                fl=.007       fl=.700       TT=.119     fl=.009    fl=.160
(/ Invested
                N=369         N=243         N=215       N=369      N=292
In Fixed
Income)
                               .184             .090    —.096      —.331
PA/VPL                        rr=.000l      rI=.056     n=.004     ri=.000l
                              N=490         N=457       N=908      N=297


                                             .296       —.108      —.180
T/A                                         rI=.000l    11=.017    1T=.013
                                            N=243       N=490      N=191


                                                         .162       .085
BRAT                                                    T1=.0005   fl=.251
                                                        N=457      N=183


                                                                     .091
VPL                                                                n=.1l8
                                                                   N=297




II =   Probability of finding a sample correlation greater than that
       reported under the null hypotheses that the true population
       correlation is zero.

N = Number of observations used.
                                  TABLE 10

                     Asset Allocation Regressions

                                 Full Sample

         Dependent Variable =    Fl   (% Invested in Fixed Income)




                                                 Equation
Independent
 Variables                 1                         2                     3



                         44O                       .556                  .539
CONSTANT                (.041)                    (.101)                (.100)
                        t=l0.7                    t=5.5                t=5.4


                     —3.58 x l0                                      —2.25 x l0
VPL                  (2.01 x 10 )                                    (1.49 x 10 )
                        t=—l.8                                         t=—l.5
(Vested
Liabilities)
                         .064                      .054                 .051
PA/VPL                  (.025)                    (.035)               (.0351)
                        t=2.6                     t=l.5                t=l.5
(Vested Funding)

                                                  — .0187              —.0151
BRAT                                              (.0117)              (.0119)
                                                  t=—l.6               t=—l.3
(Bond Rating)


R2                       .04                       .02                   .04




No. of                                                                  215
                         369                       215
Observations




Numbers in parentheses are standard errors calculated according to
White (1980).
                                TABLE 11

Asset Allocation Regressions for a Sample of Thirty Higher Risk Firms

                    With Bond Ratings of BB+ or Lower

       Dependent Variable =    Fl   (%   Invested   in Fixed Income)


                                                           Estimated
      Independent                                         Coefficient
       Variables                                       (Standard Error)


                                                             .272
      Intercept                                             (.188)
                                                            t=l.4


                                                         -1.74 x 10
      VPL                                                 (.89 x       iO)
                                                            t=—2.O
      (Vested   Liabilities)

                                                             .214
      PA/VPL                                                (.114)
                                                            tl.9
      (Vested Funding)



      R2                                                         .14




      No. of
      Observations                                               30
                                  TABLE 12

          The Average Asset Allocation (%    of   Plan Assets Invested

in Fixed Income Securities) for Different Regions of Funding and Bond Rating




                                                  Funding

                                Overfunded                   Underfunded
                              (PA/TPL > 1.0)                (PA/TPL <   1.0)


                  BBB—
                                     .48                          .50
                  or
                 Above
                                      N=172                        N=l3

   Bond Rating



                 BB+
                                     .61                          .34
                 or
                 Below
                                      N=27                         N=3
                                   FIGURE 1



      0.1 -

     0.09-                                                                 //
     0.08-                        //
                                  _/
                                  //                                        //
                                                                             //
     0.07-                        //
                                  //                                          //
>'
o
C

0
V
U.
L
     0.06-
   J-J                     /
                           7//f/f
                           //////
                                  //7
                                   /
                                                                           /
                                                                           //
                                                                               /

                     ///////
V
>                                                                          /
     0.04-

                     ///////7                                               //
     0.03-
                    7////////                                              //
     0.02-
     0.01-          /////////
                    /////////
              _____ ////////i
                    /////////
                                                      I   I   I I
                                                                  r71

                                                                   I
                                                                   I
                                                                            //
                                                                             /
              5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100
                 % of Pension Assets Invested in Fixed Income Securities




              Frequency Distribution of Pension Portfolio Allocation

                                     539 Firms

                        Greenwich Research Associates Data
                                  Footnotes



1.   Friedman (1983) discussed the potential difficulties resulting from

     the discount rate choice, but he did not have the data to make any

     adjustments.


2.   The measure of pension assets in the denominator of this fraction is

     not the same as the figure for total pension assets in the FASB 36

     filings. In measuring asset allocation we deleted "real estate

     investments" and "miscellaneous assets," because it wasn't clear

     whether these were more like fixed income investments or more like

     common stock. The real estate category, for examnie, could include

     real property but could also include mortgages. We also deleted

     investments in the sponsoring company's stock, since these might be

     related to factors other than the desired risk and return position of

     the pension portfolio. The denominator of our asset allocation variable,

     then, is fixed income securities (as defined in the text) plus investments

     in the stock of other companies.


3.   Unfortunately, our earnings measure is not entirely purged of leverage

     effects. Our measure is equal to inflation—adlusted, after—tax net

     income plus interest payments. Without further data, we were unable

     to adjust taxes to the levels that would have been paid in the absence

     of any debt.


4.   This measure of tax—paying status has been used by Zimmerman (1983).
5.   The adjustment we used was to multiply levered betas by the ratio of

     preferred plus common stock to debt plus preferred plus common stock.

     This adjustment treats preferred stock as equity. We did not include

     corporate taxes in our adjustment, as would be consistent with a

     Miller (1977) model of capital structure equilibrium.


6.   More specifically, short—term liabilities (net of financial assets)

     were taken at book value. The market value of long—term debt was

     estimated from the book value by assuming a ten percent average

     coupon rate and a ten-year average maturity. Estimated debt service

     payments were then discounted at the current Baa rate. This is

     similar to the procedure followed in Feldstein and Morck (1983).


7.   In view of the relationship between profitability and assumed discount

     rates reported in Table 2, it might have been argued that we induced

     a correlation between funding and RONA through our adjustment to a

     common discount rate. The fact that the same correlation persists

     in the unadjusted data provides evidence against this argument.


8.   Even further sample—splitting may be justified. When we confined our

     sample to firms whose bond ratings were lower than BBB— (that is, lower

     than investment grade), we obtained an R2 of .22 for a regression using

     PA/VPL as a dependent variable over a subsample of 32 firms. The

     estimated coefficient of BRAT in this regression was 0.110 with a

     t—statistic of 2.5.
9.   FRET could of course be subject to alternative interpretations. One

     possibility is that firms with greater proportions of retired workers

     simply have less flexibility to alter their actuarial assumptions and

     thus fewer possibilities for effectively overfunding their pension

     plans. Since this interpretation implicitly rests on the notion that

     firms are managing their financial slack, it too is consistent with

     the corporate financial perspective. There may be other possible

     interpretations of FRET as well, but it is difficult to see how the

     findings in Table 7 could be said to favor the traditional perspective

     over the corporate financial perspective. Although the traditional

     perspective might predict that demographic characteristics of the

     participant pool are important to firms' pension decisions, it is not

     clear under that view why greater proportions of retired workers should

     be associated with lower funding levels.


10. As of 1982, vested pension benefits were guaranteed by the PBCC up to

     a maximum of $16,568 per year.


11. We wish to thank David Kennell of ICF, Inc. for his help in obtaining

     this data.


12. We did investigate the character of the firms that invested entirely

     in fixed income. They tended to be somewhat smaller, somewhat safer

     (as measured by their unlevered betas) and somewhat better funded,

     but they were not extraordinarily different from the full sample of

     firms on any of these dimensions. "Insured funds" accounted for 13.7%

     of their fixed income assets, as opposed to 9.2% of the fixed income

     assets in the full sample.
13.   Other versions of these same basic variables were tested and yielded

      quite similar results, though often with less statistical significance.


14.   Other potential proxies for size (for example, the dollar value of

      pension assets) produce the same results, confirming that size really

      is the important thing being captured by this variable.


15.   There is an alternative explanation for this dependence upon funding.

      Conversations with corporate financial officers in the field suggest

      that at least some of them may believe that underfunded plans should

      "reach" for greater expected returns, while overfunded plans, in contrast,

      should minimize risks and focus upon preserving their capital. Indeed,

      several pension consulting firms recommend such policies explicitly as

      part of their overall asset allocation service.   In more formal terms,

      such behavior would be consistent with a preference or utility function

      for net pension wealth (assets minus liabilities) that is unusually

      sharply bent around zero, a behavior analogous to some observations of

      individual behavior in other quite different decision—making contexts.
                                  References



Fischer Black. "The Tax Consequences of Long—Run Pension Policy."

     Financial Analysts Journal 36 (July—August 1980), 25—31.


Jeremy I. Bulow. "Pension Funding and Investment Policy." Unpublished

     paper, presented at the American Finance Association Annual Meetings,

     San Francisco, California, December 1983.


_______________ and Myron Scholes. "Who Owns the Assets in a Defined

     Benefit Pension PlanV' In Z. Bodie and J. Shoven, eds. Financial

     Aspects of the United States Pension System. Chicago: University

     of Chicago Press, 1983.


Andrew H. Chen. "Taxes, Insurance and Corporate Pension Policy." Unpublished

     paper, presented at the Johnson Symposium on Taxes and Finance,

     University of Wisconsin—Madison, August 1983.


Robert L. Clark, Steven C. Allen and Daniel A. Sumner. "Inflation and

     Pension Benefits." Final Report for the Department of Labor Contract

     No. J—9—P—l—0074, unpublished, June 1983.


Geoffrey Colvin. "How SickCompanies Are Endangering the Pension System."

     Fortune 106 (October 4, 1982), 72—78.


Martin   Feldstein and Randall Morck. "Pension Funding Decisions, Interest

    Rate Assumptions and Share Prices." In Z. Bodie and J. Shoven, eds.

     Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System. Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Benjamin N. Friedman. "Pension Funding, Pension Asset Allocation and

    Corporation Finance: Evidence from Individual Company Data." In

    Z. Bodie and 3. Shoven, eds. Financial Aspects of the United States

    Pension System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.


Greenwich Research Associates. "Large Corporate Pensions: 1983."

    Unpublished, 1983.


3. Michael Harrison and William F. Sharpe. "Optimal Funding and Asset

    Allocation Rules for Defined Benefit Pension Plans." In Z. Bodie

    and 3. Shoven, eds. Financial Aspects of the United States Pension

     System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.


Fran Hawthorne. "Raiding the Corporate Pension Fund," Institutional

     Investor 17 (December 1983), 101—113.


Arthur N. Louis. "Tapping the Riches in Corporate Pension Plans." Fortune

     108 (December 26, 1983), 129—134.


Merton H. Miller. "Debt and Taxes." Journal of Finance 32 (May     1977),
     261—275.


_______________ and Myron S. Scholes. "Pension Funding and Corporate

     Valuation." Unpublished paper, University of Chicago, 1981.


Alicia H. Munnell. "Guaranteeing Private Pension Benefits: A Potentially

     Expensive Business." New England Economic Review (March—April 1982),

     24—47.
Stewart C. Myers and Nicholas S. Majluf. "Corporate Financing and

     Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do

     Not Have." Unpublished paper, Sloan School of Management, M.I.T.,

     March 1983.


William F. Sharpe. "Corporate Pension Funding Policy." Journal of

      a-nt aLt L S = S L. L. U LI L) LII S I_. 0 _.J
                                                       (T..,-. 107A\
                                                                 I U / , 1Q_1Q
                                                         %SI S C S _




Randall Smith. "Firms Increasingly Tap Their Pension Assets to Use Excess
     Funds." Wall Street Journal 202 (November 29, 1983).


Irwin Tepper. "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy." Journal of

     Finance 36 (March 1981), 1—13.


________________                 "Pension Funding Strategies and the Management of

     Corporate Capital." Unpublished paper, presented at the American

     Finance Association Annual Meetings, San Francisco, California,

     December 1983.


Jack Treynor. "The Principles of Corporate Pension Finance." Journal of

     Finance 32 (May 1977), 627—638.


Nancy Webman. "Funds Play a Growing Role as Corporate Financing Aid."

     Pensions and Investment Age 11 (June 13, 1983), 3.


Randolph Westerfield and William Marshall. "Pension Plan Funding Decisions

     and Corporate Shareholder Value: A New Model and Some Empirical

     Results." Unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania, 1983.
1-lalbert White. "A Heteroskedasticity—Consistent Covariance Matrix

     Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity." Econometrica

     48 (May 1980), 817—838.


Jerold L. Zimmerman. "Taxes and Firm Size." Journal of Accounting and

     Economics, forthcoming.
