PIONEERS, SUBMARINERS, OR THICKET-BUILDERS:
WHICH FIRMS USE CONTINUATIONS IN PATENTING?
                Deepak Hegde
               David C. Mowery
                Stuart Graham
            WORKING PAPER 13153
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PIONEERS, SUBMARINERS, OR THICKET-BUILDERS:
                  WHICH FIRMS USE CONTINUATIONS IN PATENTING?

                                           Deepak Hegde
                                          David C. Mowery
                                           Stuart Graham

                                        Working Paper 13153
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13153


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




We thank Bronwyn Hall and Bhaven Sampat for access to the Compustat database, and data on patent
expiration and examiner-inserted citations respectively. We are grateful to Robert Barr and participants
at the Spring 2007 Seminar on Innovation (University of California, Berkeley) for their helpful comments.
Support for this research was provided by the Andrew W. Mellon and Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundations.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Deepak Hegde, David C. Mowery, and Stuart Graham. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pioneers, Submariners, or Thicket-builders: Which Firms Use Continuations in Patenting?
Deepak Hegde, David C. Mowery, and Stuart Graham
NBER Working Paper No. 13153
June 2007
JEL No. O3,O31,O32,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

The continuations procedure within the U.S. patent system has been criticized for enabling firms to
manipulate the patent review process for strategic purposes. Changes during the 1990s in patent procedures
affected the incentives of applicants to exploit the continuations process, and additional reforms in
continuations currently are being considered. Nonetheless, little is known about applicants' use of
the three major types of continuations -- the Continuation Application (CAP), the Continuations-In-Part
(CIP), and Divisions -- to alter the term and scope of patents. This paper analyzes patents issued from
the three types of continuations to U.S. firms during 1981 - 2004 (with priority years 1981 - 2000),
and links their frequency to the characteristics of patents, assignees and industries. We find that CIPs
are disproportionately filed by R&D-intensive, small firms that patent heavily, and are more common
in chemical and biological technologies. Patents resulting from CIP filings contain more claims and
backward citations per patent on average, and cover relatively "valuable" inventions. In contrast, CAPs
cover less valuable patents from large, capital-intensive firms that patent intensively, particularly in
computer and semiconductor patents. We also analyze the effects of the 1995 change in patent term
on continuation applications and find that the Act reduced the use of continuations overall, while shifting
the output of CAPs toward "less important" patents.

Deepak Hegde                                         Stuart Graham
Walter A. Haas School of Business                    College of Management
University of California at Berkeley                 Georgia Institute of Technology
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                              800 West Peachtree Street, N.W.
hegde@haas.berkeley.edu                              Atlanta, GA 30332
                                                     stuart.graham@mgt.gatech.edu
David C. Mowery
Walter A. Haas School of Business
Mail Code 1900
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
mowery@haas.berkeley.edu
1.     Introduction

A large literature spanning economics, law, and strategic management has considered the

strategic use by firms of intellectual property, including patents. Among the topics

covered by this literature are the causes of increased patenting (Kortum & Lerner 1999,

Hall 2005), firms’ decisions to acquire patents in fields in which company executives

state that patents do not aid in appropriating the returns to innovation (Hall & Ziedonis

2001), and the incidence and outcomes of patent litigation among firms (see Hall &

Ziedonis 2007, as well as Somaya 2003). The use by firms of patent examination

procedures has received less attention from scholars, despite widespread

acknowledgement by patent attorneys and other “IP professionals” of the importance of

such procedures in the patent strategies of firms. This paper examines the characteristics

of firms using one such procedural strategy, the patent continuation, to shed light on

motives for and effects of this strategy.

       The continuation procedure allows inventors to restart the examination of their

patent application, retaining the filing date of a previous application that discloses the

same invention. Inventors can use continuations to revise their claims to reflect

technological developments affecting their invention after their initial application or to

respond to an examiner’s arguments and comments. According to the U.S. Patent Office,

the procedure, which has been a part of the U.S. patent system since 1863, is intended to

“lead to a well-designed set of claims that give the public notice of precisely what the

applicant regards as his or her invention” (Federal Register 2006 p 48).




                                               3
        Continuations are unique to the U.S. patent system1 and have been criticized by

economists and members of the patent bar because of their potential for strategic

manipulation, notably in so-called “submarine patents” that are issued following long

periods of examination and revision through continuation applications (Graham &

Mowery 2004). 2 Other critics claim that continuations are used by applicants to badger

examinees into granting patents of dubious quality, so-called “junk patents,” by

repeatedly filing continuations on a single application (Quillen & Webster 2001). But

patent attorneys and industry groups defend the use of continuations (see for example,

Biotechnology Industry Organization, 2006) to protect the high-risk investments of

“pioneering inventors” in “young” fields of invention that are subject to uncertainty.

Indeed, proposed changes in Japan’s patent examination system include procedures that

resemble continuations. A quasi-official Japanese patent policy research organization

argues that the introduction of continuations into Japanese patent procedures “will

promote front-runners to strategically obtain patents” (I IP Bulletin 2005, p.2-5).

        Not for the first time in patent policy, however, the debate over the use, abuse,

benefits, and costs of the continuation procedure has been conducted in an evidentiary

vacuum. The limited empirical work on continuations to date (Graham 2004, Graham &



1
  Continuation applications have been available to patentees in the United States since 1863. In
Godfrey v. Eames, 68 U.S. 317 (1863), the U.S. Supreme Court interpreted the Patent Act of
1836 to allow continuation applications, in that case when the original application was abandoned
on the same day that the new continued application was filed. The use of continuing applications
was also upheld by the Supreme Court in Crown Cork & Seal Co. v. Gutmann Co., 304 U.S. 159
(1938) and General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co., 304 U.S. 175 (1938).
2
  The closest parallels in other patent systems are the Divisional available in the European and
Japanese Patent Offices, and the option allowing for the selective prosecution of claims from a
search report by the German Patent Office (Quillen & Webster 2001). Since the 18-month
publication requirement has been a part of the European Patent Convention since its inception,
the opportunity for inventors to “hide” technology advances by using Divisions has been strictly
limited.


                                                4
Mowery 2004) has focused on interindustry differences in the incidence of continuations.

Little if any work has analyzed the characteristics of the patents or patentholders that

exploit the continuation procedure in the U.S. patent system. We do not know, for

example, whether continuations are more likely to be filed in relatively “young”

technological fields, or whether these applications more frequently cover “pioneering”

inventions, as the Biotechnology Industry Organization asserts. This paper analyzes the

characteristics of U.S. corporate patents that are subject to the three major types of

continuations (see below for definition and discussion of these three types) and examines

the use of all three types among publicly listed firms and technological fields during the

1981-2004 period.

       The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the role of

continuations in the patent examination process, discussing procedural differences among

the three types of continuations: the Continuation Application; the Continuation-In-Part;

and the Division. Section 3 describes the construction of our data, compares the

characteristics of continued patents with those of patents not subject to continuations, and

analyzes variations in the use of each practice among technology classes. Section 4 deals

with the continuations propensity of U.S. corporate patentees and Section 5 analyzes the

effects of the change in patent term that became effective in 1995 (see below for further

discussion) on the incidence and characteristics of continuations. Section 6 summarizes

and discusses the implications of our findings.




2.     Continuations: Provisions and Practice

2.1     The patent review process and continuations



                                              5
          The USPTO patent review process starts with the inventor filing an application

containing a written description of her invention. This description is formalized in legal

language by “claims” that define the invention covered by the application. The examiner

compares the claims against existing knowledge or “prior art” to determine whether or

not the application meets the standards of patentability. This “patent prosecution”

process may result in the application being accepted or rejected in its entirety or (more

likely) the rejection of one or more claims by the examiner. The applicant can respond to

a rejection of claims by disclosing additional information showing that her claims are

valid, or by narrowing them to accommodate prior art and/or the examiner’s suggestions.

The examiner reviews this response and may allow the patent claim, suggest

modifications, or issue a “final rejection” of the application.3 This entire process can go

through several rounds, each of which lasts 2-3 years on average, and has been

characterized as a “give-and-take-affair” between the applicant and the examiner (Merges

1997).4

2.2       Types of Continuations


3
  A determined applicant faced with a “final rejection” can pursue several options, including a
Request for Continued Examination (RCE), which may or may not contain amendments to the
original application, so long as it discloses the same invention. This application is treated like a
new application, giving the applicant another chance for her claims to be allowed, amended, or
even reviewed by a different examiner, while preserving the “priority date” of the original patent
application (Lemley & Moore 2004). In the U.S. system, however, the
continuation/divisional/CIP routinely is assigned to the examiner who handled the parent case.
Exceptions occur if the examiner has retired from the USPTO or has been promoted to a position
that does not include examining patent applications. Another exception occurs if the Office of
Initial Patent Examination had classified the child application into a very different patent
classification than the parent application. In that case it would go to a different art unit and thus
to a different examiner. Applicants do not have a say in deciding who prosecutes their application
(Personal communication with Carl Oppedahl, patent lawyer, January 21, 2006).
4
  The applicant also can seek an interview with the examiner, where she tries to persuade the
examiner of the patentability of her claims, or appeal the rejection to the Board of Patent Appeals
and Interferences and if unsuccessful there, to the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia
or to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.


                                                  6
        Continuations permit an applicant to refile a pending patent application,5 with or

without substantial modifications, by renewing at least some portion of the original

application. There are three types of “continuations”: the “Continuation Application”

(abbreviated hereafter as the CAP), the “Continuation-In-Part (CIP),” and the

“Division.”6 The Continuation Application discloses the identical invention claimed in

the prior “parent” non-provisional application before the parent application was patented

or abandoned. The disclosure presented in the CAP must be the same as that of the

original application; i.e., the continuation should not include anything that would

constitute new matter if inserted in the original application.7 The CIP includes a

substantial portion or all of the parent application and adds matter not disclosed in that

application, although the benefit of early priority is awarded only for the original

disclosures contained in the new application. A Division or divisional application occurs

when the original application contains more than one independent invention. In such a

case, the USPTO allows the applicant to “elect” one of the disclosed inventions for

continued examination. The other inventions disclosed in the parent application can be

withdrawn and pursued in new applications called Divisions. A new application can be

filed as a divisional application and benefit from the early filing date of the parent

application only if it discloses and claims subject matter disclosed in the “original” or

“parent” application.




5
  35 USC § 120 (1991). Benefit of earlier filing date in the United States.
6
  The continuation and continuation-in-part are authorized under 35 USC § 120 “Benefit of earlier
filing date in the United States.” Divisions are authorized under 35 USC § 121 “Divisional
applications.”
7
  The fee required to request a continuing application is no higher than that for filing a first
application—$710 in 2001, and $355 for small entities. 37 C.F.R. 17(e).


                                                7
          All three types of continuations introduce a delay in the prosecution and final

issue decision for a U.S. patent application and permit the applicant to adopt the date of

the application that is still pending within the Patent Office.8,9 So long as the original

“parent” application and the follow-up continuation application disclose the same

invention, the applicant can preserve the parent application’s filing date. Because an

application may be continued any number of times, and because there is no limit to the

number of times that a parent application may be abandoned, continuations can be used

to prevent the patent examiner from reaching a decision on a patent application. Strings

of continuations may thus develop, with issue decisions being postponed for decades.10

Prior to 1999, all U.S. patent applications remained secret until the issue of the patent,

enabling applicants to maintain the secrecy of their application throughout this extended

period.

          Revisions in U.S. patent law that became effective in 1995 changed the term of

patent protection from 17 years from the date of patent issue to 20 years from the

application date. This change sought (among other things) to reduce the incentives for

inventors to pursue “submarine” patents. An inventor seeking a “submarine” patent


8
  In case of the CIP, only those claims that are carried over from the original application receive
the benefit of the priority date.
9
  The application must meet certain conditions. Under 35 USC § 120, a patent application is
entitled to adopt the filing date of a “parent” application when (1) both applications disclose the
same invention; (2) both applications are filed by the same inventor; (3) both applications are
simultaneously co-pending; (4) the earlier application meets the disclosure requirements of 35
USC § 112; and (5) the later application contains a specific reference to the earlier application.
Sampson v. Ampex Corp. (1971, DC NY), 333 F. Supp. 59, aff’d. (2nd Cir. NY) 463 F2d 1042.
The language of 35 USC § 120 was initially adopted in the Patent Act of 1952, and legislative
history suggests that the section was intended to write existing legal practice on the issue into the
statute. In re. Henriksen, 55 C.C.P.A. 1384 (1968).
10
   See, for instance, Jerome Lemelson’s U.S. patent 5,283,641, Apparatus and methods for
automated analysis, issued February 1, 1994. The priority date of this patent was December 24,
1954, and there were no fewer than eleven continuations in this patent’s chain while it languished
in the patent office for 39 years.


                                                  8
submitted an application, thereby establishing a priority date for her invention, and filed

numerous continuations on the initial application, which remained secret throughout the

period of USPTO review of repeated revisions (continuations) in the original application.

Even after the 1995 changes in patent term, continuations offered some strategic benefits

to an applicant by allowing an extended period of secrecy prior to the issue of a patent,

but this benefit was reduced by 1999 legislation mandating the publication of most patent

applications 18 months after their submission.11 The “publication” requirement,

however, has not removed all of the benefits of continuations. Applicants can still make

changes to individual claims reported in the published disclosure, and thus can use the

continuation procedure to extend the period of secrecy during review by at least 18

months for these individual claims (Glazier, 1997).12

        The effects of these changes in U.S. IPR policy on continuations are unclear, for

several reasons. The 1995 change in patent term forced patentees using the continuations

procedure to forego some portion of the patent term in exchange for a longer period of

pendency. But this tradeoff may be of far less significance in technologies for which

product life cycles are short (e.g., software) than in sectors exhibiting longer product life

cycles, such as drugs and chemicals. Moreover, the 1999 Act allows applicants to “opt

out” of the 18-month publication requirement for patents filed solely in the United States,

11
   The US patent law now requires the publication of all applications after 18 months, but
applicants are granted automatic exemptions from this requirement by filing a statement that they
have no intention of filing the application in a foreign jurisdiction that requires an 18-month
publication of its patent applications.
12
   For example, an applicant may use the continuation procedure to make subtle changes in one or
more claims consistent with the original disclosure, but not identical to the original published
claims. The continuation may thus delay issue of the patent while the applicant observes the uses
to which the technology is put in the marketplace, and alters the claim accordingly. Thus, when
the patent ultimately is allowed to issue, the technology disclosed in the patent may be of no
surprise to competitors, but the precise boundaries of the claims may be a surprise, thus allowing
the patentee to demand royalties from competitors infringing on the altered claim.


                                                9
meaning that some “submarine incentives” may remain for applicants who do not file

applications outside of the United States. The U.S. remains a huge market, and the

ability of applicants to recapture their foreign-filing rights has yet to be tested in the U.S.

courts. The effects of the publication requirement on post-1999 applicants’ use of

continuations therefore may be limited. Indeed, as late as 2005, well after the 1995 and

1999 reforms, continuation filings accounted for 30% of all applications received by the

PTO (Federal Register 2006).13

        Despite extensive debate over the benefits, costs, uses, and abuses of

continuations, there exists little if any analysis of the characteristics of patents subject to

continuations and the characteristics of the assignees of continued patents. Nor has the

overall importance of continuations before 1995 in U.S. patenting or the effects of the

1995 statutory changes on the incidence and characteristics of continuations been

examined. We address the following questions in our analysis of continuation

applications:


        1. How do important characteristics (number of claims, forward and backward

citations, payment of patent-renewal fees) of issued patents subject to continuations

and/or continuations of different types compare with those of corporate patents overall?


        2. Are continuations concentrated in “emerging” fields of inventive activity,

which may be subject to greater uncertainty concerning claims or feasibility? To what

13
  During 2005, the PTO received approximately 317,000 nonprovisional applications, of which
about 63,000 were continuing applications and about 52,000 were requests for continued
examination. Thus, about thirty percent (63,000 + 52,000)/(317,000 + 52,000) of the Office’s
patent examining resources must be applied to examining continued examination filings that
require reworking earlier applications instead of examining new applications (Federal Register
2006, p 50). Recent proposals for patent reform (dated 2006) seek to curtail the practice by
limiting applicants to two continuations per application.


                                               10
extent are assignees using the practice to patent inventions in fields in which they have

not previously been active (and therefore may be more likely to revise their applications),

i.e., fields in which they might be described as recent entrants or as “pioneers?”


       3. What are the characteristics (e.g., patenting intensity, capital intensity, size) of

corporate assignees of continued patents, and have these characteristics changed since the

1995 changes in patent term? Do the characteristics of assignees differ among

continuation types?




3.     The data

Our empirical analysis utilizes U.S. utility patents granted between 1981 and 2004 from

the NBER patent database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2001), and the United States

Patent and Trademark Office. We gathered the continuations history of each patent from

the “Related Patent Data” on the wrapper of patent documents, which reports the type of

continuation applied for and their application dates. From the latter, we calculated the

“priority date” as the date on which the first in a series of continuation applications was

filed in office. For patents that were never subject to the continuations procedure

(referred to below as “ordinary” patents), the first and only application date is the priority

date. Next, we separated patents that were subject to only one type of continuation (the

CAP, CIP, or Division) from those that resulted from multiple continuation types

(referred to below as “Combination” continuations).

       The USPTO assigns patents to one of nearly 500 technology classes. We used the

NBER classification developed by Hall et al. (2001) to aggregate the 500 classes into 36

two-digit technological subcategories for use in our regression analyses, and further


                                              11
combined these 36 subcategories into 6 main categories: Chemical; Computers and

Communications; Drugs and Medical; Electrical and Electronics; Mechanical; and Others

(the subcategories that are aggregated to the main categories are apparent from Table 4).

3.1    The frequency of continuations

       Since we are primarily interested in the continuations behavior of U.S. firms, we

exclude other assignees (foreign, government, individual and unassigned applicants) in

our patent dataset. Patents assigned to U.S. corporations are more likely to have

undergone a continuations procedure than those in any other assignee category (see

Graham 2004 for a comparison of the continuations propensities of different assignee

classes). Indeed, U.S.-owned corporations and small businesses are assigned 44% of all

patents in our dataset, but 55% of the patents with a history of at least one continuation

application.14 Table 1 summarizes the use of the three different types of continuations

(the share of each type as a share of all corporate-assigned continued patents) by year of

issue during 1981 – 2004 for the 1,122,935 patents that were assigned to U.S.

corporations.



                                        Table 1 here



       Continuation applications take longer on average to issue than applications that

are not continued. Patents that were not subject to continuations are granted 2.2 years

from the date of first application (standard deviation of 1.1), but applications subject to

the procedure pend for 4.4 years (s.d. of 2.3) on average. The longer pendency for

14
  This category is identified by assignee code number 2 in the USPTO patent records. Over 96%
of patents in this category are assigned to corporations (Hall, et al. 2001). Note that some
universities patent under university-owned foundation and corporations.


                                              12
continued patents introduces a truncation bias that makes it problematic to infer trends in

continuation applications from patents issued during the later years of our study.15 We

deal with this truncation problem by using the priority year or date of first application for

the patents in our dataset, and limit our analysis to the 966,020 patents applied for during

1981 – 2000 and issued during 1981 – 2004.16



                                          Figure 1 here



        Figure 1 depicts trends in continuation types by priority year. Continuation

applications were common between 1981 and 2000 -- 29% of all corporate-assigned

patents applied for during the period included at least one continuation in their review.

The practice peaked in the half-decade preceding 1995, with nearly 40% of applications

during the period issued via continuations. For the entire 1981 – 2000 period, CAPs were

the most common type of continuations, accounting for 30% of all patents within these

data that had been through the continuations procedure at least once. The shares of CIP’s

and Divisions are slightly smaller, at 28% and 22% respectively. Within our U.S.-firm

sample, 20% of all continuation patents are “Combinations,” i.e. including more than one

type of continuation in their prosecution history.

15
   In other words, ceteris paribus, a patent that was applied for in 2003 and was not subject to a
continuations procedure is more likely to show up among patents issued in or before 2006 as
compared to a patent that was first applied for in the same year, but was subject to continuations
after.
16
   63% of continuation patents (but 96% of “ordinary” patents) issue with a pendency period of 4
years or less and 94% of continuation patents issue with a pendency period of 8 years or less.
Nearly 37% of the continuation patents with a priority date of 2000 have not issued by 2004, and
6% of continuation patents with a 1996 priority date have not issued by that year. Figure A1 in
the Appendix plots the distribution of “pendency,” lags between priority and issue years, for
continuation and ordinary patents. Table A1 disaggregates mean pendency lags by continuation
type.


                                                13
3.2        Characteristics of continued patents

          We next compare the characteristics of patents resulting from the three types of

continuations with each other and with ordinary patents. The characteristics are: the

number of claims, the number of backward and forward citations, and the payment by the

patentholder of patent renewal fees four years after issue. We briefly describe each of

these variables before presenting our findings.

          (i) Claims: The claims in a patent define in formal language the novel technical

features of the invention, and delineate the breadth of its “scope” or the technological

space being protected. Controlling for technology class, the number of claims in a patent

is correlated with its economic value (Lanjouw & Schankerman 2004). Lanjouw &

Schankerman (2001) also found that litigated patents had a significantly higher average

number of claims than did a control group of non-litigated patents. For this study, we use

the number of claims for patents granted between 1981 and 1997.

          (ii) Backward citations: Inventors are required to be assiduous in their

identification of relevant prior art in their applications. The patent examiner further

verifies that all appropriate previous patents have been cited. These “backward

citations,” along with claims, delineate novelty in the applicant’s invention and the rights

granted in the patent. Backward citations reveal various aspects of the technological

lineage of inventions. A patent with a large number of backward citations to patents

assigned to other entities indicates that the inventor is operating in a crowded

technological area with a number of “nearby” patents and competitors. 17 Patents that

include a large share of “self citations,” i.e. citations to an assignee’s own patents in these

backward citations, are more heavily based upon the inventor’s own prior inventive work,
17
     Citing a number of backward references also makes a patent harder to challenge in court.


                                                  14
rather than those of competitors, and may not indicate a crowded inventive landscape.

Patents with a large number of backward citations that are dispersed across different

patent classes arguably span a broader spectrum of prior art, and scholars characterize

patents with more broadly dispersed backward citations as representing more “original”

inventions than patents that draw mainly on prior art within the same class (Jaffe &

Trajtenberg 2002).

       We obtained the number of prior patents cited by each patent in our study, the

percentage of these references that were self-citations, and the technology classes of the

cited patents. From the latter, we calculated a Herfindahl index of backward reference

concentration which is 0 when all backward citations are to patents from a single class

(low “originality”) and 1 for the case of perfect dispersion.

       Beginning with patents applied for in 2001, the USPTO distinguished between

applicant- and examiner- inserted citations in patents on the wrapper of the issued patent.

Data on post-2001 patents reveal that the PTO is responsible for as much as 40% of all

prior patent references in an “average” patent, potentially reflecting the different

incentives of applicants and examiners in representing “prior art.” Indeed, if applicants

use the continuations procedure to strengthen their applications (either by redefining

claims in CAPs or by inserting new ones in CIPs), then the resulting patent should

contain a higher proportion of citations inserted by applicants than is true for a non-

continuation patent.

       (iii) Forward citations: Citations to a patent made in subsequent patents indicate

that the invention or information in the cited patent contributed to the development of

later inventions. Forward citations are commonly used in empirical analysis as indicators




                                              15
of the technological importance of patents. Since citations arrive after a patent has been

granted, they can arrive at any point of time in the patent’s life, and it is likely that older

patents will accumulate more citations. This truncation problem means that patents

granted in more recent years will appear to be less technologically important, on average.

Restricting forward citations to those appearing in patents issuing within four years after

the issue of the cited patent addresses this problem, while allowing us to examine forward

citations for patents granted as late as 2002.

         (iv) Patent Renewals: Patent renewal fees were introduced in the United States in

1982 for patents applied for after that year. Patentholders are required to pay renewal fees

to maintain their patents at 4, 8, and 12 years after the grant date. Patent renewals are

used as indicators of the private value of patents, based on the premise that owners are

willing to renew their patents only when the expected value of the patents exceeds the

cost of maintaining them (Lanjouw et al. 1998). We collected patent expiration data

through 2005 that covers the renewal decisions of patentees four years after the issue of

the patent for all patents between 1981 and 2001.

3.2.1    Descriptive statistics on continuations and patent characteristics

         Table 2 displays differences in the mean number of claims, backward citations,

the share of backward references that are self-cites, the technology-class dispersion of

backward citations (“originality”), forward citations, and 4-year nonrenewal rates for

patents subject to continuations. In all of these cases, patents assigned to U.S.

corporations that did not undergo continuations (“ordinary” patents) are the reference

group.




                                                 16
                                         Table 2 here



        The first two columns compare “ordinary” patents with patents that were subject

to continuation applications. The next four columns distinguish among different types of

continuation patents. Patents issuing from continuations contain higher numbers of

backward citations, on average, and these backward citations are drawn from a broader

set of technology classes, suggesting that continued patents may indeed be more

“original” (all of the above differences are by comparison with “ordinary” patents, and

are significant at p<0.001).18 Patents issued during 2001- 2004 to corporate assignees

that resulted from continuations also have smaller shares of examiner-inserted citations to

prior art (20%) than do continued patents (55%). Table A2.1 in the Appendix tabulates

the median number of all backward citations for 291,482 U.S. corporate utility patents

issued between 2001 and the median percentage of citations originating from

examiners.19

        Patents resulting from CIPs contain significantly more backward self-citations

(relative to ordinary and CAP patents), suggesting that they are used in patents that

disproportionately build upon the assignees’ prior work. CIPs produce patents with 26%

more claims than “ordinary” patents, reflecting their use by applicants to bring in

additional material in the form of new claims. CIPs also receive the highest number of

forward citations within four years of their issue (a mean of 2.7 citations per patent, as

18
   The originality measure tends to be highly directly correlated with the number of backward
references. Our “originality” result holds, even on controlling for the number of backward
citations.
19
   While examiners insert more citations on average in certain technologies (accounting for 46%
of all backward citations for all patents in Computers and Communications, but only 19.5% in
Drugs and Medicine) our result regarding differences between continuation and ordinary patents
is robust to technology-specific differences.


                                               17
compared to 2.3 citations/patent in the control sample, p<0.001) , and are less likely to

expire after 4 years of issue as compared to “ordinary” patents. These results suggest that

patents emerging from the CIP are of higher private and technological “value.”

       The average CAP patent has a significantly larger average number of backward

citations and claims, but does not differ significantly from the mean “ordinary” patent in

its proportion of backward self-cites. Divisional patents have significantly fewer forward

citations, fewer claims, and lower renewal rates by comparison with the reference group

patents. This result may reflect a tendency for Divisions to be carved out of parent

applications (mostly in response to an examiner’s restriction requirement), and claims in

Divisions may not have been considered sufficiently important by the applicant to

warrant a separate application in the first place.

       The remainder of our discussion focuses on CAPs and CIPs (these are the two

most frequently used types of continuation applications and are the focus of recent

proposals for continuations reforms), rather than on Divisions and Combinations. We

exclude Divisions and Combinations from our analysis because Divisions are filed at the

behest of the PTO (in response to “restriction requirements”) and are less likely to be

used strategically by applicants. “Combination” continuations are difficult to interpret,

since by definition this heterogeneous class of continuations could involve multiple

motives.

3.3    Technological differences

       The economic value and importance of patents vary considerably among

technologies, and these differences are widely asserted to influence the patenting

strategies of firms (Cohen, Nelson & Walsh 2001; Levin, Nelson, Klevorick, & Winter




                                              18
1987). Pharmaceutical and chemicals-related patents are typically rated by industry

executives as indispensable for capturing the returns to innovations, but patents in

semiconductors and electronics are rated as far less important for manufacturers (Hall &

Ziedonis 2001). Since continuations are an important element of firms’ patent strategies,

the next few paragraphs examine differences in the intensity, trends, and characteristics

of continued patents across technological sectors.

       Table 3 lists the share of “ordinary” patents and of the four different types of

continuations for each of the 36-class and the 6-category technology groupings.



                                      Table 3 here



Patents in the “Drugs and Medicine” and the “Chemicals” technology classes are among

the most intensive users of continuations. Continuations overall accounted for 46% of

the patents issued in “Drugs and Medicine” for priority years 1981-2000, and 36% of

those issued in “Chemicals” during the same period. CIPs (30% of patents issuing from

continuations) and Combinations (30% for Drugs and Medicine and 22% in Chemicals)

account for the majority of continuations in these two technology classes. The intensive

use of CIPs in these classes contrasts with the Computers and Communications sector,

where CAPs account for 50% of all continuations. Semiconductor patents differ from

other technology classes in their high Divisional propensity (40% of all continuations in

this technology are divisions). This considerable variation among technological fields in

the use of different continuation types and trends nevertheless does not preclude




                                             19
significant interfirm differences in the use of continuations, the focus of the following

section.




4.      Continuations and corporate-assignee characteristics

Continuation applications produce patents that differ from “ordinary” patents, and the

nature of these differences depends on the type of continuation. In this section, we

combine our findings regarding differences in the characteristics of continued patents

with an analysis of the influence of observable elements of firm structure and their patent

portfolios on continuations activity, by utilizing Compustat data on publicly traded U.S.-

owned corporations.

4.1     Data on assignee characteristics

        A challenge in linking patent-level information with Compustat’s variables is the

fact that firms patent under various names, and assignee names may not accurately reflect

the ownership of patents. We used the NBER PTO-Compustat correspondence file to

assemble a set of unique patenting entities by identifying firm acquisitions, mergers,

name changes, and majority-owned subsidiaries between 1981 and 2000.20 This yielded

matches for 2,263 patent assignees to 1,273 unique Compustat firms that collectively

owned 363,308 patents, representing 38% of all patents assigned to U.S.-owned

businesses between 1981 and 2000. Since firms enter and exit the data during the period

of observation, with some instances of multiple entry and exit, our sample is an

unbalanced panel.

20
   Note that the NBER file is not current and reflects the ownership status captured in 1989. The
file was constructed by assembling U.S. patents assigned to unique firms by identifying name
changes, subsidiaries, and merger and acquisition information from a variety of sources
(Lexis/Nexis business directories, 10-K filings, and the Directory of Corporate Affiliations).


                                                20
        The continuations behavior of publicly traded large firms represented in

Compustat (and hence our analysis) differs from that of privately held firms. For

instance, our “in-sample” patents assigned to public companies were more likely to have

issued from CAPs and Divisions, but less likely to have used CIPs and combinations of

continuations than the “out of sample” patents assigned to non-publicly listed U.S. owned

entities. These differences are statistically significant, i.e. we can reject the null

hypothesis of equality of sample means (based on a t-test that assumed unequal

variances) at conservatively defined significance levels.21 The results of our Compustat

analysis accordingly may not be representative of the broader corporate patent assignee

population’s continuations behavior.

4.2 Variables

        What observable attributes of firms affect their continuations behavior? Lacking

direct evidence on corporate motives, we test the influence on corporate assignees’

continuations behavior of firm-level variables such as R&D intensity, capital intensity

and patent intensity.

        Continuations raise the legal and patent-prosecution expenses of patent applicants,

and therefore should be more common among firms for which patents are relatively

important as a means of appropriating the returns to innovation or for strategic purposes.

The patenting intensity of firms therefore should be positively related to their propensity

to pursue continuations. We measure the patent intensity (PATINT) of a firm as the ratio

of its patent applications that issue to R&D expenditures for each year in our sample and

hypothesize that more patent-intensive firms are likely to rely on continuations.


21
  Table A4 of the Appendix compares the frequency of continuation types of our in-sample
patenting entities and those omitted because of the lack of Compustat data.


                                               21
        How does patent intensity affect choice among continuations? Predicting

continuations choice as a function of patent intensity requires a more precise

characterization of motives than our data currently support. Nonetheless, we consider

(and test) two broad views of the motives for continuations use by corporate assignees.

        One interpretation of continuations (as represented by the Biotechnology Industry

Organization 2006, for example) portrays them as associated with the innovative

activities of firms that specialize in R&D, relying on strong patent rights to trade their

technologies (Arora 1995, Merges 1998). According to Arora et al. (2001), these

specialist firms (“technology traders”) include design firms in semiconductors (a group

emphasized in Hall and Ziedonis, 2001), specialized chemical or biomedical R&D firms,

or suppliers of intermediate technological inputs (common in aerospace and instruments).

We define technology traders or specialists as firms for which patents are important and

R&D investment is high. If technology specialists favor a particular type of continuation,

ceteris paribus, we should observe a positive coefficient for the interaction of patent-

intensity and R&D-intensity (RDINT, defined as R&D expenditures normalized by

employment)22 in predicting the choice of that continuation type.

        We further test whether the “pioneering” inventions of technology specialists are

more likely to issue from continuations by including an interaction term that captures the

multiplicative effect of patent importance (proxied by the forward citations received by a

firm’s patents within four years of issue), R&D-intensity, and patent-intensity. A finding

that continuations use is positively correlated with the combined effect of R&D intensity,




22
   Alternative estimations that normalized capital-intensity and R&D intensity by sales rather
than employment did not change our results.


                                                22
patenting intensity, and the quality of firms’ patents supports the “pioneering inventor”

characterization of continuations users.

        A second characterization of the motives for continuations associates their use

with the “defensive” patent strategies of firms in industries in which patents have been

characterized as less important mechanisms for appropriating the returns to R&D (Hall &

Ziedonis 2001 in semiconductors, Bessen & Hunt 2004 in software).23 One “defensive”

patenting strategy relies on the accumulation of large patent portfolios for exchange with

other firms through cross-licensing as a means of avoiding costly litigation and

potentially, the shutdown of manufacturing capacity. According to Hall and Ziedonis

(2001), the patenting behavior of U.S. semiconductor firms since the mid-1980s is

consistent with this interpretation. Firms with large investments in manufacturing

facilities are more likely to adopt a defensive patenting strategy, in this view, as a means

of avoiding “holdup” through litigation. We test the importance and influence on

continuations choice of this form of defensive patenting by including a variable that

interacts sunk costs and patent intensity. Sunk costs are proxied by firms’ capital

intensity (CAPINT), i.e. capital investments (measured as the book value of a firm’s

property, plant, and equipment) normalized by employment. With suitable controls, we

can interpret a positive coefficient on this interaction term as supporting a prediction that

continuations are used by defensive patenters.

        Since these “defensive patenters” are more concerned with the quantity rather

than the quality of their patent portfolio, this form of defensive patenting should be

associated with lower average patent quality. We therefore include another multiplicative


23
  The Quillen & Webster (2001) assertion that continuations are used by certain applicants to
acquire a large number of “junk patents” is consistent with this less benign view of continuations.


                                                23
interaction of patent importance, capital-intensity and patent-intensity. A negative

coefficient for this interaction variable is consistent with the use of continuations by

defensive patenters to acquire patents of lower average value (see Gallini 2002 or Shapiro

2001). A positive coefficient suggests that continuations are used in the more important

inventions of these firms. Table 4 summarizes the interpretation of our key interaction

variables and the implications of their coefficient signs for our competing interpretations

of the motives for continuations.



                                               Table 4 here



        Our earlier discussion of the characteristics of patents issuing from the different

types of continuations suggests that CAPs will be associated with “defensive patenting”

strategies. That is, we expect the interaction of capital-intensity and patent-intensity to

have a positive and significant coefficient, and the interaction of this variable with patent

value should have a negative coefficient in explaining the probability of CAP filings.

The data presented earlier on the characteristics of patents issued from CIPs, however,

lead us to expect their use to be correlated with characteristics of “pioneering inventions”

(high-value patents) and use by “technology traders” (high levels of R&D- and patent-

intensity).24




24
  The characteristics of “submarine” patenters are more difficult to statistically pinpoint, although
anecdotes suggest that firms following submarine strategies are more likely to be small and use
all three types of continuations. Jerome Lemelson’s famous “submarine” U.S. patent 5,283,641
covering “Apparatus and methods for automated analysis” used all three types of continuations.
We therefore make no predictions about corporate characteristics and continuations use by
“submarine” patenters.


                                                 24
       Our analysis of corporate characteristics and continuations behavior includes two

other variables that capture differences in the position of individual patents within firms’

patent portfolios. We measure the “centrality” of a patent to a firm’s portfolio by

computing the share of the patent’s technology class in the “flow” of patents issuing to a

firm each year. The value of TECHSHARE is bounded above at one, e.g., when a firm’s

patents are all assigned to the same technology class within our 36-category taxonomy.

TECHSHARE controls for the differential use of continuations by firms in patents that are

more (or less) common in firms’ current portfolios. We also capture a time dimension of

firms’ technological focus by computing the difference in years between the year of a

given patent’s application year and the year in our dataset in which the firm was first

assigned a patent in the same class. Hence, TECHTIME measures the patenting

experience of firms in different technology areas, which may be imperfectly correlated

with the age of firms.

       We control for other attributes that may influence continuations behavior. Firm

size is measured as the log of employment (EMP) and can affect continuations behavior

because of economies of scale and fixed costs associated with patent activity (e.g., the

cost of maintaining an in-house staff of patent attorneys). Industry-, technology- and

time-specific dummies control for unobserved variation in technological opportunity and

other factors (e.g. changes in patent law, technological, and economic trends) that affect

applicants’ decisions to file continuations. The age of firms (AGE) is also included to

distinguish effects due to experience and learning that are not captured by firm size.

       In summary, we are testing the influence of the following explanatory variables

on the continuations choice of a patent:




                                             25
        (i) the patenting intensity of firms, calculated as annual log number of patents/ M$

of annual R&D

        (ii) the capital intensity of firms (log book value of plant, property and equipment

in M$/1000 employees)

        (iii) the R&D intensity of firms (log annual R&D expenditure in M$/1000

employees)

        (iv) the quality of the invention, measured by forward citations received within 4

years of its issue.

        (v) multiplicative interaction of (i) & (ii).

        (vi) multiplicative interaction of (i) & (iii).

        (vii) multiplicative interaction of (i), (ii) & (iv).

        (viii) multiplicative interaction of (i), (iii) & (v).

Our control variables include:

        (i) the technological relevance of a firm’s application to its current focus captured

by the share of its technology class in the firm’s patent portfolio.

        (ii) the patenting experience of a firm in a particular technological area, calculated

as the difference between a patent’s application year and the year of the firm’s first

application in that class.

        (iii) the size of firms measured by log employment.

        (iv) log of firm age.

        (v) industry-specific dummies (13 categories, based on 2-digit SIC class).

        (vi) technology-specific dummies (26 categories, based on NBER technology

classification).




                                                 26
       (vii) application-year dummies.

       Table 5 summarizes descriptive statistics for the variables in our analysis. The

median Compustat firm in our sample has about 4,000 employees, spends $14.5 million

annually on R&D, has capital assets totaling $ 250 million, and successfully applies for 6

patents a year.



                                             Table 5 here



4.3    Model specification and results

       We analyze the choice of continuation (j = {0, 1,2,3,4} representing choices of

“no continuation”, CAP, CIP, Divisional or a “combination”) as being determined by a

mix of invention- and firm-level attributes (‘x’ represents the vector of these factors).

The conditional probability ‘y’ of each continuation type can be estimated by specifying

a multinomial logit (MNL) choice model. Note that since the probabilities sum to unity,

P(y = 0 | x) is determined once we know the probabilities for j = 1,…, 4. The conditional

response probability for continuation type ‘j’ is given by (Wooldridge 2004):



                              exp(xβ j )
        P ( y = j | x) =                     , j = 1,.......,4
                           ⎡    4
                                         ⎤
                           ⎢ ∑ exp(xβ h )⎥
                            1 +
                           ⎣ h =1        ⎦



The effect of each ‘x’ on P(y = j), that is, the conditional probability of the type of

continuation ‘j’, is given by the corresponding β j . The estimations are carried out by

maximum likelihood methods and results are reported in Table 6.


                                               27
                                           Table 6 here



        The absolute values of the estimates are not particularly meaningful, and we

accordingly focus on the relative size, signs, and statistical significance of coefficients for

the independent variables in Table 6. All coefficients convey ceteris paribus effects and

should be interpreted as reflecting the effects of the relevant independent variable relative

to patents that did not undergo any continuation (j=0). Since this is a nonlinear model,

the effect of any independent variable depends on the values at which the other

independent variables are held constant. Table A5 in the Appendix reports changes in

choice probabilities when a particular ‘x’ changes from ½ of one standard deviation

below its mean to ½ of one standard deviation above, with the values of all other

independent variables held at their means (we also report changes in probability when the

‘x’ of interest changes from its minimum value in our sample to its maximum).25

         The interaction terms significantly influence the choice among continuation types

in ways that are broadly consistent with our priors. Firms that perform R&D and patent

intensively --- traits that are characteristic of technology specialists --- are the most likely

to use CIPs, but this interaction term is negatively associated with CAPs and Divisions.

As expected, the interaction of capital-intensity and patent-intensity (defining defensive

patenters) positively affects the probability that CAPs (and Divisions) are used, but is

negatively related to CIP filings. The “value” of a patent affects continuation choice, as


25
  It is also important to note that computing the exact interaction effects require taking the cross-
derivative of the expected value of ‘y’ with respect to the interacted variables. These issues mean
that interpreting interaction terms is not a straightforward exercise here, and that the interaction
effect may even have different signs for different values of covariates.


                                                 28
CIPs are associated with high-value patents and CAPs associated with patents that

receive a below-average number of forward citations. This effect is mediated by the

capital- and patent-intensity of firms. A combined increase in the levels of the two

variables (associated with defensive patenters and captured by the triple interaction of

FCITES, lnCAPINT and lnPATINT on CAP probability) reduces the quality of associated

CAP patents even further.

       The uniformly negative sign on TECHTIME means that for all types of

continuations, the longer the time elapsed between the application and a firm’s first

patent in the same technological area, the less likely it is to be continued. In other words,

the more recently a firm has become active in patenting within a given technology class,

the more likely that it uses any of the four types of continuations (at 99% confidence

levels). Patents in areas central to a firm’s annual flow of patents (TECHSHARE) also

are associated with a higher likelihood of using any of the available continuations

procedures. The size of firms (employment) is inversely related to CIP filings, but

positively correlated with the probability of CAPs and Divisions. These results are

broadly consistent with the view that CIPs are more likely to be used by small,

technology specialist firms, while CAPs are used by large corporate patentees in

defensive strategies.

       In regressions that are not reported here, we estimated the continuation choice

probabilities for patents in each of the five major technology classes (we omitted

“Others” because of the vast heterogeneity in this class). The effects of explanatory

variables were comparable to the combined technologies fixed-effects model, with the

following noteworthy differences. The interaction of sunk costs and patenting intensity




                                             29
had a greater positive influence on CAP probabilities in Computers and Communication,

Electrical and Electronics, but was negligible for Chemicals, Drugs and Medicine patents.

The computers and electronic sectors also provided considerable support for the

“defensive patenting” characterization of CAP use.




5.     The effects of the 1995 change in patent term on

continuations behavior

As we noted earlier, legislation passed in December 1994 changed the term for patents

issuing after June 1995 to twenty years from application date, from the former term of 17

years from issue date. Here, we probe the effects of the law on the practice of

continuations by asking three questions: (a) did the law reduce the use by corporate

assignees of continuations?; (b) given that one motive for the 1995 change was curbing

the “strategic” use of continuations, did the “quality” or “value” of the average patent

resulting from continuations change after 1995?; and (c) how if at all did the 1995 change

in patent term affect the characteristics of the corporate assignees using continuations?

       The time trends depicted in Figure 1 are similar for all four classes of

continuations -- the use of all continuation types grew through 1994 and decreased

thereafter.26 We find that the frequency of CAPs increased for patents in all major

technology categories with a priority date between 1988 and 1993 (See Figures A2.1-2.3

in the Appendix for charts depicting the use of different continuation types in each of our


26
  The truncation problem (see Footnote number 17) does impact calculations regarding the exact
magnitude of decline post-1995. However, since we know from the distribution of pendency lags
that priority year 1996 under-represents continuations by 6%, PY1997 by 10% and so on, we are
confident that the post-1995 drop persists even after accounting for truncation.


                                              30
five major technology classes), followed by a sharp decline after 1994. This pattern is

especially pronounced for patents in the Computers and Communications industry --

nearly 25% of all patents first applied for in 1993 in this technology class were subject to

CAPs, a share that drops to 9% in 1996. The share of CIPs and that of Divisions for all

main technology categories, however, are more stable during the period.27

        Other changes in patent application procedures after 1995 make it difficult to

conclude that the 1995 change in patent term is the sole cause of the observed decline in

CAPs. Conversations with patent attorneys revealed that the patent term change in 1995

was accompanied by the introduction of a new procedure called the “Continued

Prosecution Application” (this CPA was superseded for utility patents by the Request for

Continued Examination or RCE in 2003) that allowed applicants to keep the prosecution

of an application alive even after “final rejection” by the examiner. Before 1995, an

applicant facing a “final rejection” from the Patent Office was required to abandon the

application before filing what was called a “File Wrapper Continuation” (FWC) for

continued prosecution. The USPTO treated the FWC identically to the Continuation

Application (CAP) and as a consequence, our pre-1995 CAP patents may include those

issuing from FWCs, a group that after 1995 is excluded by virtue of being included in the

CPAs. Without controlling for the FWC/CPA/RCE conflation, it is difficult to ascribe

the decline in CAPs entirely to the change in patent term. Nonetheless, comparing the

average “importance” of patents issuing from continuations, and their corporate owners

before and after 1995 can yield valuable insights on the changed use/abuse of the




27
  We investigated the decline in use and quality of patents issuing from continuations more
formally. The results are in Table A6 of the Appendix.


                                               31
practice, and provide a benchmark for current “continuations reform” proposals (Federal

Register 2006).

5.1     Changes in corporate characteristics for post-1995 users of

continuations

        We use our Compustat sample and the continuations choice model described in

Section 4.1 to investigate changes in the attributes of corporate users of continuations

after 1995. To estimate the effects of the policy change, we divide our Compustat sample

into a pre-1995 panel that excludes patents with priority year 1995 and a post-1995 panel,

and compare differences in the coefficients of independent variables across the two sets

of estimates.28 Table 7 presents the results.



                                              Table 7 here

        The coefficients on FCITES show that patents issuing from CAPs are cited less

frequently than “ordinary” patents after 1995, in contrast to pre-1995 CAP patents, which

are not statistically different from ordinary patents.29 This decline in the importance of

post-1995 CAPs is not affected by the FWC/CPA/RCE problem described earlier.

Applicants that might have resorted to a CAP in response to a “final rejection” of an

application (arguably covering claims of questionable technological value) are present in




28
   An alternate approach interacting application year dummies with each of the right hand
variables was estimated with similar results, but we do not report them here.
29
   Patents applied for between 1981 and 2000 appear in this analysis only if they were granted by
2002. To negate biases due to truncation, we have employed a 4-year “window” for forward
citations for all patents in the dataset in order to minimize truncation bias. The “4-year window”
includes forward citations from the same year as the issue of a patent and three subsequent years.
The last year for citing patents in this analysis (for patents issued in 2002) is hence 2005.


                                                32
the pre-1995 panel, but are excluded from post-1995 observations.30 The 1995 change in

patent term may have reduced the willingness of applicants with more valuable

inventions to accept a curtailed patent term in exchange for the benefits of continued

prosecution. We also find a striking increase in the direct effect of the interaction of

capital- and patent-intensity (β(CAPINT     X PATINT))   on the likelihood of CAP filings during

the 1995-2000 period. R&D-intensive firms that patent heavily (the relevant coefficient

here is β(RDINT   X PATINT))   are less likely to use CAP and CIP filings after 1995.31

        The above results suggest that post-1995 CAPs are more likely than pre-1995

CAPs to be used for relatively unimportant patents, and to be used by defensive patenters.

Examining the extent of self-citations in backward citations for post-1995 patents issuing

from continuations provides additional evidence on the post-1995 use of CAPs in the

“defensive” patenting strategies of firms. This is because, a high proportion of backward

self-cites may be one consequence of a patenting strategy that seeks to accumulate

“thickets” of patents that overlap each other and hence cite each other. Figure 2 shows

that patents issuing from post-1995 CAPs contain a significantly higher proportion of

backward self-citations than any other group of patents, while CAPs prior to 1995 cited

their own patents less frequently than patents issuing from any other type of

continuation.32


30
   This drop in quality of post-1995 CAPs holds for the larger sample of U.S.owned businesses as
can be seen in Table A6 of the Appendix.
31
   We also examined the effects of firm-attributes on continuations choice for each of the five
major patent technology classes (corresponding MLNM estimates are presented in Tables A7.1 -
7.5 of the Appendix). Defensive patenters (coefficient on the interaction of patent intensity and
capital intensity) are more likely, and technology traders (coefficient on the interaction of
research intensity and capital intensity) are less likely to choose CAPs in their patents after 1995
in all sectors.
32
   We examined this result in an OLS specification with the percentage of backward citations that
are self-citations as the dependent variable before and after 1995, and the 4 different continuation


                                                   33
                                               Figure 2 here



6.      Conclusion

The continuations procedure allows applicants to alter the timing and scope of their

issued patents in response to technological developments and the patenting activity of

competitors. Despite their widespread use in the U.S. by corporate assignees (nearly 30%

of all issued patents during 1981-2004 can be attributed to continuations), and despite the

various patent policy reforms addressing the use and abuse of continuations, the

procedure has received little attention from scholars of patent strategy. By examining the

characteristics of patents resulting from the three types of continuations between 1981

and 2004, and their U.S. owners, we have tried to provide some preliminary evidence on

the role of continuations in U.S. firms’ patenting behavior.

        Continued patents pend for twice as long as patents without continuations in their

review history, and contain 50% more references to patented prior art (mostly attributable

to applicants). Our findings on the differences in the various characteristics of patents

issuing from the three types of continuations are consistent with the procedural

differences among the types. The “Continuation in Part” allows inventors to insert

additional material to a pending patent application and produces patents with the highest

number of claims, forward citations, and renewal probability. Patents in Drugs,

Medicine, and Chemicals --- industries in which patents are widely rated as important

mechanisms for capturing value from innovation --- are relatively frequent users of CIPs.

types as regressors. The estimates (in TableA9 of the Appendix) which included technology-
class controls confirmed the statistical significance of the increased selfcitations of CAP patents
in backward cites post-1995.


                                                 34
CIPs are also more likely to be filed by the smaller firms in our sample and are associated

with patents of high value.

       One view of continuations argues that the procedure supports “pioneering”

inventors, allowing them to secure an early priority date while revising their claims

during review of their applications in technologies where patents are important to

appropriate the returns to R&D. Our results on CIPs appear consistent with this view.

But the economic and technological significance of patents resulting from CIPs, as well

as the tendency for these continuations to be used by smaller R&D-intensive firms, also

could be associated with the use by applicants of CIPs in submarine patenting strategies.

Our statistical tests are unable to distinguish the motives of applicants, and further

research with data on the composition of firms’ R&D, licensing, and litigation activity (to

identify pioneering inventors and submariners) is needed.

       The “Continuation Application” is a second application for the same invention

claimed in a prior application, and produces patents that are qualitatively

indistinguishable from “ordinary” patents. The CAP extends the pendency period of an

application without providing for substantial changes, and is the most common type of

continuation within the Computers, Communication, and Semiconductor patents that

utilize the procedure (accounting for nearly half of all continuations filed in these

technologies during 1981-2000). These technologies are characterized by rapid change,

short technology cycle times, and the relative unimportance of patents as a means of

recouping R&D investments. CAP applicants, particularly those filing applications after

1995, disproportionately cite their own previous patents as prior art. These observations,

combined with our findings that CAPs are frequent among the low-value patents of firms




                                              35
that patent intensively and have large sunk costs, can be interpreted as supporting various

forms of the “defensive patenting” interpretation of CAPs’ role in patent strategy.33

        What implications do our analyses have for the patent and continuation reforms

recently discussed by the Patent Office and the U.S. Congress? Our results do not

support a definite characterization of the CIP as prone to abuse before or after 1995, but

they do suggest that skepticism concerning the benefits of the CAP is warranted.34

Hence, reform of the continuations process can benefit from a reexamination of the

purported benefits of the CAP, combined with more careful monitoring of the links

among patent value, firm characteristics, and litigation for patents issuing from CIPs.




33
   This characterization is consistent with the views of a number of members of the patent bar and
rationalizes applicants’ use of continuations in accumulating low value or “junk” patents.
34
   One element of these reform proposals is a rule that would require second or subsequent
continuations of an application to “include a showing as to why the amendment, argument, or
evidence presented could not have been previously submitted” (Official Gazette of the USPTO
2006). Although such petitions might impose significant additional burdens on the patent office,
they could aid patent examiners to evaluate CIPs more effectively. Our results do, however,
undermine the case for the “Continuation Application.”


                                                36
References

Arora, Ashish. (1995). “Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights and the
Market for Know-How,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1995, 4, p 41-
59.

Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri and Alfonso Gambardella. (2001). Markets for
Technology. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Bessen, James and Hunt, Robert M. (2004). “An Empirical Look at Software Patents,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Working Paper: No. 03-17/R, 2004.

Biotechnology Industry Organization. (2006). In response to call for Comments on
Proposed Changes to Practice for Continuing Applications, Requests for Continued
Examination Practice, and Applications Containing Patentably Indistinct Claims, Notice
of proposed rulemaking by the USPTO. May 02, 2006. Accessed online (May 05, 2007)
at: http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/dapp/opla/comments/fpp_continuation/bio.pdf

Cohen, W., R. Nelson and J. Walsh. (2001). “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why Firms Patent and Why They Do Not in the
American Manufacturing Sector.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper, 7552.

Federal Register. (2006). Proposed Rules. Vol. 71, No. 1, January 3, 2006, p 48-52.

Gallini, Nancy T. (2002). “The Economics of Patents: Lessons from Recent U.S. Patent
Reform,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 2, p 131-54.

Glazier, S. (1997). Patent Strategies for Business. Washington, D.C.: LBI Institute.

Graham S.J. (2004). “Patenting in the Shadow of Secrecy: Innovators’ Uses of U.S.
Patent Office Continuation Practice, 1975-2002,” Unpublished Dissertation. University
of California, Berkeley. p 6-66.

Graham, S. and Mowery D. C. (2004). “Submarines in Software? Continuations in U.S.
Software Patenting in the 1980s and 1990s,” Economics of Innovation and New
Technology, 2004, 13(5), p 443-456

Hall, Bronwyn H. (2005). “Exploring the Patent Explosion,” Journal of Technology
Transfer, 30, p 35-48.

Hall, B. H. and Ziedonis. R. (2001). “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical Study
of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979–1995,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 32:1, p 101–28.

Hall, B.H., Jaffe A. and Trajtenberg, M. (2001). “The NBER Patent Citations Data File:


                                            37
Lessons, Insights, and Methodological Tools,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper, 8498.

Hall, B. H. and Ziedonis. R. (2007). “An Empirical Analysis of Patent Litigation in the
Semiconductor Industry,” Working paper prepared for the 2007 American Economic
Association annual meeting, Chicago, IL, 4-7 January.

Hickman, B.D. and Palermo, C.J. (2006). “USPTO examination reform – current
proposals and rational alternatives.” The CIPA Journal, April 2006, p 1-3.

IIP bulletin. (2005). “Desirable forms of Divisional Patent Application System and Patent
Amendment System,” Institute of Intellectual Property, 14, p 2-9.

Jaffe, A. B. and Lerner. J. (2004). Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken
Patent System is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Lanjouw, J. O. and Schankerman. M. (2001). “Characteristics of Patent Litigation: A
Window on Competition,” RAND Journal of Economics, 32(1), p 129-51.

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman. (2004). “Patent Quality and Research
Productivity: Measuring Innovation with Multiple Indicators,” Economic Journal.
114:495, p. 441–65.

Lanjouw, J. O., Pakes A. and Putnam. J. (1998). “How to Count Patents and Value
Intellectual Property: Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data,” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 44:4, p. 405–33.

Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg. (2002). Patents, Citations and Innovations: A
Window on the Knowledge Economy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Kortum, S. and Lerner, J. (1999). “What is behind the recent surge in patenting?”
Research Policy, 28, p 1-22.

Lemley M. A. and Moore K. (2004). “Ending Abuse of Patent Continuations,” Boston
University Law Review, 84(1), p 63-123.

Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A.K., Nelson, R.R., and Winter, S.G. (1987). “Appropriating the
Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. 1987:3

Merges, R. P. (1997). Patent Law and Policy. Charlottesville: Michie.

Merges, Robert P. (1998). “Antitrust Review of Patent Acquisitions: Property Rights,
Firm Boundaries, and Organization,” in Robert D. Anderson and Nancy T. Gallini, eds.




                                            38
Competition Policy and Intellectual Property Rights in the Knowledge-Based Economy,
Calgary: University of Calgary Press, p 111–32.

Merges, Robert P., Menell, Peter S. and Lemley, Mark A. (2006). Intellectual Property
in the New Technological Age: 2006 Statutory Supplement, New York: Aspen Publishers.

Quillen, C. D. and Webster. O. H. (2001). “Continuing Patent Applications and
Performance of the U.S. Patent Office,” Federal Circuit Bar Journal, 1, p 1-21.

Quillen, C. D., Webster. O. H. and Eichmann, R. (2002). “Continuing Patent
Applications and Performance of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office – Extended,”
Federal Circuit Bar Journal, 1, p 25-55.

Shapiro, Carl. (2001). “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and
Standard-Setting,” in Adam Jaffe, Joshua Lerner, and Scott Stern, eds., Innovation Policy
and the Economy, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Somaya, D. (2003). “Strategic Determinants of Decisions Not to Settle Patent Litigation,”
Strategic Management Journal, 24, p 17-38.

Ziedonis, Rosemarie Ham. (2004). “Don’t Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for
Technology and the Patent Acquisition Strategies of Firms,” Management Science, 50
(6), p 804–20.




                                           39
    Tables and Figures


       TABLE 1: CONTINUATIONS AND TYPES OF CONTINUATIONS BY GRANT
                             YEAR (1981-2004)

                                   CAP                CIP               Divisional        Combination
                   All
Grant Year                         (% of Continued    (% of Continued   (% of Continued   (% of Continued
                   Continuations
                                   patents)           patents)          patents)          patents)
1981               77.17           22.17              31.61             30.03             16.19
1982               77.09           23.87              30.55             29.42             16.16
1983               77.75           26.66              30.25             27.61             15.48
1984               79.06           26.66              30.96             28.13             14.25
1985               79.89           26.11              33.8              26.51             13.57
1986               79.24           27.76              33.33             25.5              13.41
1987               77.82           30.57              33.36             22.22             13.85
1988               76.3            30.81              33.49             21.49             14.2
1989               75.48           32.41              31.08             21.22             15.28
1990               75.11           30.65              30.86             22.31             16.19
1991               74.98           29.13              31.5              22.43             16.94
1992               71.65           30.45              29.77             21.57             18.22
1993               69.81           31.67              28.76             20.35             19.22
1994               68.71           33.85              28.41             17.92             19.82
1995               66.77           35.28              27.48             16.96             20.27
1996               63.72           32.73              24.42             19.82             23.03
1997               61.66           31.68              23.18             19.07             26.07
1998               66.87           33.75              24.34             17.35             24.56
1999               70.88           29.01              26.46             21.18             23.35
2000               73.16           25.61              28.65             24.04             21.69
2001               72.66           25.65              27.62             25.89             20.84
2002               72.43           26.99              25.1              27.03             20.87
2003               73.39           26.49              25.8              26.73             20.98
2004               74.96           26.51              25.97             27.56             19.96
Total (1,122,935
                   72.41           29.34              27.79             22.85             20.02
patents)




                                                     40
                TABLE 2: CONTINUATIONS AND PATENT CHARACTERISTICS

                             “Ordinary”   Continuation   CAP       CIP       DIV       COMB.
Claims                       14.72        15.14          14.75     18.73     10.40     15.49
                             [11.11]      [13.8]         [12.12]   [16.15]   [9.39]    [14.97]
Backward Citations           11.10        17.64          16.02     16.82     15.05     24.01
                             [13.82]      [25.5]         [21.16]   [24.73]   [21.03]   [34.39]
% Selfcites (Backward)       12.97        14.92          13.31     14.24     16.7      16.29
                             [23.71]      [24.2]         [22.17]   [24.36]   [26.05]   [24.57]
“Originality”                0.39         0.45           0.44      0.43      0.46      0.48
                             [0.28]       [0.27]         [0.28]    [0.28]    [0.28]    [0.27]
Forward Citations            2.34         2.22           2.37      2.67      1.57      2.12
                             [3.68]       [3.79]         [3.78]    [4.30]    [3.00]    [3.78]
Pr. of expiry at 4 yrs.      0.13         0.11           0.11      0.11      0.12      0.09
                             [0.33]       [0.31]         [0.31]    [0.32]    [0.33]    [0.29]
Note: Standard errors in brackets




                                                   41
TABLE 3: CONTINUATIONS USAGE AND TECHNOLOGIES (PRIORITY YEARS 1981-2000)

                                               NO
CATEGORY          SUBCATEGORY                           CAP     CIP     DIV     COMB.
                                               CONTS.
                  Agriculture,Food,Textiles    61.33    7.52    12.75   8.66    9.75
                  Coating                      64.5     8.06    9.19    11.54   6.7
Chemical          Gas                          75.36    6.92    8.89    4.55    4.29
                  Organic Compounds            59.04    6.59    10.58   13.04   10.75
                  Resins                       59.06    7.95    11.32   11.84   9.83
                  Miscellaneous-chemical       66.91    7.81    10.22   8.55    6.51
                  Communications               80       8.89    5.68    2.7     2.74
Computers &
                  Computer Hard- & Software    76.75    12.42   4.68    3.11    3.04
Communications
                  Computer Peripherials        74.65    13.16   5.44    3.21    3.54
                  Information Storage          73.67    13.01   3.85    5.32    4.15
                  Drugs                        48.94    10.48   14.68   9.51    16.39
Drugs & Medical   Surgery & Med Inst.          61.13    11.77   12.05   5.46    9.59
                  Biotechnology                49.24    12.36   15.08   7.18    16.14
                  Miscellaneous-Drgs&Med       60.84    12.19   11.03   5.8     10.14
                  Electrical Devices           83.11    7.07    4.37    3.34    2.1
                  Electrical Lighting          79.09    6.92    6.23    4.33    3.43
Electrical &      Measuring & Testing          77.95    6.75    6.71    5.1     3.49
Electronic        Nuclear & X-rays             80.88    5.84    7.32    3.26    2.69
                  Power Systems                80.37    7.12    5.75    4.13    2.63
                  Semiconductor Devices        64.79    10.63   3.85    14.25   6.47
                  Miscellaneous-Elec           80.12    7.66    5.97    3.25    2.99
                  Mat. Proc & Handling         71.78    7.62    6.63    8.64    5.33
                  Metal Working                67.42    6.26    6.18    14.61   5.53
Mechanical        Motors & Engines + Parts     82.94    5.48    5.79    3.67    2.13
                  Optics                       80.89    5.99    5.66    4.08    3.38
                  Transportation               81.62    6.19    6.92    2.75    2.53
                  Miscellaneous-Mechanical     76.45    7.8     7.11    4.2     4.45
                  Agriculture,Husbandry,Food   69.79    8.5     9.92    5.24    6.56
                  Amusement Devices            72.15    8.07    9.96    3.07    6.75
                  Apparel & Textile            76.84    7.1     8.14    4.45    3.46
                  Earth Working & Wells        77.34    5.47    9.13    4.7     3.36
Others
                  Furniture,House Fixtures     78.24    7.34    7.62    3.11    3.69
                  Heating                      79.56    5.69    6.47    5.22    3.05
                  Pipes & Joints               79.54    6.68    6.95    3.84    2.99
                  Receptacles                  74.94    7.51    7.95    4.33    5.27
                  Miscellaneous-Others         73.4     6.98    8.33    6.47    4.82




                                                  42
            TABLE 4: INTERPRETATION OF INTERACTION TERMS AND IMPLICATIONS

      Coefficient                        Sign       Continuation used by:                      Implications

      β (RDINT    X PATINT)              +          Technology traders

      β(CAPINT    X PATINT)              +          Defensive patenters

                                                                                               Support for
                                                    Technology specialists for
                                         +                                                     “Pioneering
                                                    “important” patents
      β (FCITES   X RDINT X PATINT)                                                            inventors” hypothesis
                                                    Technology specialists for “less
                                         -
                                                    valuable” patents
                                                    Defensive patenters for more
                                         +
                                                    “important” patents
      β (FCITES   X CAPINT X PATINT)                Defensive patenters for less
                                                                                               Support for
                                         -                                                     “defensive patenting”
                                                    “important” patents
                                                                                               hypothesis




         TABLE 5: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS (BASED ON 9096 COMPUSTAT FIRM-YEAR
                                 OBSERVATIONS)

Variables                                                       Median      Mean       SD           Min       Max
Employment (in 1000s)                                           4.21        17.86      45.33        0.01      876.80
Capital Assets (M$ of property, plant, & equipment)             249.15      1986.56    6392.52      0.05      171895.80
Capital Int. (M$ of property, plant, & eqp/1000 emp)            59.75       88.13      99.95        0.06      1983.62
R&D (M $)                                                       14.53       119.79     392.68       0.00      5227.00
R&D Intensity (M $ / 1000 emp)                                  3.65        9.38       19.67        0.00      426.18
Number of patents                                               6.00        39.34      135.49       1.00      3873.00
Patent Intensity (Patents/M $ R&D)                              0.48        1.10       2.80         0.00      100.00
Tech Share (Share of patents from primary class)                0.57        0.50       0.35         0.00      1.00
Tech Time (Priority year - first P. year in tech class )        5.90        5.00       5.47         0.00      19.00
Age                                                             19.00       18.68      10.53        1.00      41.00




                                                           43
 TABE 6: MULTINOMIAL LOGIT ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATIONS DECISIONS
                    (PRIORITY YEARS 1981-2000)

Dependent variable: Continuation type
Explanatory variables                               CAP        CIP            DIV        COMB.
                                                    (j=1)      (j=2)          (j=3)      (j=4)
log patenting intensity (patents/M$ RD)             -0.545     0.258          -0.693     -0.052
                                                    [0.041]* [0.046]*         [0.049]*   [0.052]
log R&D intensity (M$/1000 employees)               0.167      0.071          0.269      0.408
                                                    [0.011]* [0.013]*         [0.013]*   [0.015]*
log capital intensity (M$/1000 employees)           0.146      -0.004         -0.012     -0.028
                                                    [0.014]* [0.017]          [0.017]    [0.019]
lnRDINT*lnPATINT                                    -0.016     0.058          -0.032     0.08
                                                    [0.009]    [0.009]*       [0.010]*   [0.011]*
lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                                   0.164      -0.064         0.205      0.054
                                                    [0.011]* [0.011]*         [0.012]*   [0.013]*
FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT                             0.005      0.003          -0.006     -0.006
                                                    [0.002]    [0.002]        [0.003]    [0.003]
FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                            -0.005     -0.003         0.006      0.002
                                                    [0.001]* [0.001]          [0.002]*   [0.002]
TECHSHARE(share of patents in subcat)               0.517      0.489          0.192      0.915
                                                    [0.036]* [0.042]*         [0.043]*   [0.048]*
TECHTIME (technology lag)                           -0.063     -0.033         -0.053     -0.095
                                                    [0.003]* [0.004]*         [0.003]*   [0.004]*
forward cites                                       -0.029     0.032          -0.09      -0.036
                                                    [0.002]* [0.002]*         [0.003]*   [0.003]*
log employment                                      0.02       -0.056         0.025      0.023
                                                    [0.007]* [0.008]*         [0.008]*   [0.009]
log age                                             -0.058     -0.002         0.034      -0.038
                                                    [0.011]* [0.012]          [0.012]*   [0.015]*
Constant                                            -3.037     -1.952         -1.991     -2.943
                                                    [0.157]* [0.177]*         [0.180]*   [0.207]*
Observations                                        356753
Model chi-square                                    58102.01
df                                                  312
Loglikelihood                                       -306334
Pseudo R2                                           0.09
N of observations                                   356753
Note: Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%;
Base class: no continuation (j=0); Industry-, Tech- & Patent vintage- effects included




                                                44
            TABLE 7: 1995-POLICY CHANGE & MLNM ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATION CHOICES
                                    (PY1981-1994 & PY1995-2000)

                                    PANEL-A (Patents with PY1981-1994)               PANEL-B (Patents with PY1995-2000)
Explanatory variables               CAP            CIP        DIV        COMB. CAP             CIP         DIV      COMB.
                                    (j=1)          (j=2)      (j=3)      (j=4)       (j=1)     (j=2)       (j=3)    (j=4)
lnPATINT                            0.502          0.518      -0.325     0.735       -1.779    0.485       -1.187   -0.976
                                    [0.051]*       [0.059]* [0.068]* [0.060]* [0.111]*         [0.121]* [0.110]* [0.185]*
lnRDINT                             0.195          0.156      0.279      0.421       0.173     -0.14       0.247    0.308
                                    [0.013]*       [0.016]* [0.017]* [0.017]* [0.022]*         [0.023]* [0.022]* [0.036]*
lnCAPINT                            -0.133         0          -0.21      -0.226      0.538     -0.026      0.27     0.455
                                    [0.018]*       [0.021]    [0.023]* [0.022]* [0.032]*       [0.037]     [0.032]* [0.053]*
lnRDINT*lnPATINT                    0.017          0.028      0.004      0.075       -0.127    0.006       -0.074   -0.097
                                    [0.010]        [0.011]    [0.014]    [0.012]* [0.017]*     [0.016]     [0.016]* [0.025]*
lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                   -0.118         -0.113     0.104      -0.163      0.502     -0.095      0.324    0.397
                                    [0.014]*       [0.015]* [0.017]* [0.015]* [0.023]*         [0.026]* [0.022]* [0.039]*
FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT             -0.001         0.01       -0.007     -0.005      0.002     -0.002      -0.016   -0.011
                                    [0.002]        [0.003]* [0.005]      [0.003]     [0.004]   [0.003]     [0.005]* [0.006]
FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT 0                         -0.003     0.004      0.006       -0.004    0           0.013    0
                                    [0.001]        [0.001]    [0.003]    [0.002]* [0.002]      [0.002]     [0.003]* [0.004]
TECHSHARE                           0.361          0.577      0.135      0.699       0.813     0.351       0.262    1.343
                                    [0.044]*       [0.052]* [0.059]      [0.055]* [0.068]*     [0.074]* [0.069]* [0.117]*
TECHTIME                            -0.03          -0.048     -0.022     -0.061      -0.059    -0.014      -0.06    -0.094
                                    [0.004]*       [0.005]* [0.006]* [0.005]* [0.004]*         [0.005]* [0.004]* [0.007]*
FCITES                              -0.003         0.054      -0.075     0.002       -0.075    0.013       -0.124   -0.11
                                    [0.003]        [0.003]* [0.005]* [0.003]         [0.004]*  [0.003]* [0.004]* [0.007]*
lnEMP                               -0.007         -0.028     -0.009     -0.021      -0.005    -0.138      0.065    0.013
                                    [0.008]        [0.010]* [0.011]      [0.010]     [0.013]   [0.014]* [0.013]* [0.021]
lnAGE                               -0.039         0.025      0.084      -0.02       0.039     -0.022      -0.002   0.093
                                    [0.013]*       [0.016]    [0.017]* [0.017]       [0.021]   [0.020]     [0.018]  [0.035]*
Constant                            -0.334         -1.544     -0.755     0.121       -4.143    -0.108      -2.787   -4.893
                                    [0.177]        [0.209]* [0.233]* [0.197]         [0.421]*  [0.338]     [0.326]* [0.810]*
Observations                        223047                                           133706
Model chi-square                    33506.82                                         23286.7
df                                  288                                              256
Loglikelihood                       -210694.85                                       -92891.79
Pseudo R2                           0.07                                             0.11
N of observations                   223047                                           133706
Note: Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%;
Base class: no continuation (j=0); Industry-, Tech- & Patent vintage- effects included




                                                              45
                                                                                       Figure 1: Continuation Types by priority year (1981-2000)


                                                   45


                                                   40
% of issued patents resulting from continuations




                                                   35


                                                   30


                                                   25


                                                   20


                                                   15


                                                   10


                                                    5


                                                    0
                                                    1981   1982   1983   1984   1985    1986   1987   1988   1989   1990 1991       1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
                                                                                                                    Priority Year


                                                                                                      CAP    CIP    Divisional   Combination




                                                                                                                      - 46 -
                                                            Figure 2: Backward Selfcites and Continuations (Priority Year 1981-2000)

                                 0.3

                                0.29

                                0.28

                                0.27

                                0.26
% Selfcites in backward cites




                                0.25

                                0.24

                                0.23

                                0.22

                                0.21

                                 0.2

                                0.19

                                0.18

                                0.17

                                0.16

                                0.15
                                       1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990       1991     1992    1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
                                                                                                          Priority year

                                                                                        Ordinary patent          CAP        CIP          DIV




                                                                                                      - 47 -
Appendix (Supplementary Results)

              TABLE A1: PENDENCIES AND NO. OF CONTINUATION FILINGS
                            (PRIORITY YEARS: 1981-2000)

                                             Pendency period            N of continuation filings
                                             Mean             Median    Mean       Median


                "Ordinary" patent            2.17             2         0.00       0
                                             [1.09]                     [0.01]
                CAP                          4.22             4         1.27       1
                                             [1.96]                     [0.70]
                CIP                          3.72             3         1.29       1
                                             [1.66]                     [0.77]
                DIV                          3.66             3         1.11       1
                                             [1.53]                     [0.41]
                COMBINATION                  6.43             6         3.11       3
                                             [2.72]                     [1.64]
                Note: Standard errors in brackets



               TABLE A2.1: EXAMINEE-INSERTED BACKWARD CITATIONS
                            (IN PATENTS ISSUED 2001-2004)

                                                                       Median % of
                                                    Median Cites
                                                                       examiner cites
                      "Ordinary" patent             9                  55.55
                      Continued patent              14                 20.58
                      CAP                           14                 22.20
                      CIP                           13                 25.00
                      DIV                           12                 25.00
                      COMBINATION                   20                 11.10




                                                         48
         TABLE A2.2: PATENT CHARACTERISTICS OF CONTINUATIONS,
                WITH TIME & TECHNOLOGY FIXED-EFFECTS

                                                      % B-
                       CLAIMS          BCITES                        ORIGINAL    FCITES     EXPIRY4
                                                      SELFCITE
CAP                     -0.249           5.465        0.067          0.028       -0.191     -0.017
                        [0.054]*         [0.065]*     [0.089]        [0.001]*    [0.013]*   [0.001]*
CIP                     4.025            6.145        0.291          0.025       0.496      -0.017
                        [0.057]*         [0.068]*     [0.092]*       [0.001]*    [0.014]*   [0.001]*
DIVISIONAL              -4.15            4.308        2.403          0.047       -0.641     -0.004
                        [0.066]*         [0.075]*     [0.102]*       [0.001]*    [0.015]*   [0.002]*
COMBINATION             0.964            14.681       1.419          0.058       -0.037     -0.041
                        [0.070]*         [0.079]*     [0.108]*       [0.001]*    [0.016]    [0.002]*
CONSTANT                15.401           5.857        16.354         0.279       1.659      0.118
                        [15987]          [0.103]*     [0.145]*       [0.002]*    [0.021]*   [0.003]*
Observations            614215           946294       925394         925389      965922     828858
R-squared               0.04             0.09         0.03           0.14        0.08       0.01
df                      6                23           23             24          23         23
Note: Standard errors in brackets ; * significant at 1% ;
Reference group: noncontinued or “ordinary” patents;
“Originality” regression includes significant “backward cites” control;
All regressions include patent vintage- and technology effects.



        TABLE A3.1: MEAN NUMBER OF CLAIMS AND CONTINUATIONS
                            (PY1981-PY2002)

                                          Computers &      Drugs &     Electrical &
      Claims                 Chemicals                                                Mechanical
                                          Communication    Medical     Electronic
      "Ordinary" patent      14.87        16.35            16.08       14.43          13.55
                             [11.05]      [12.55]          [12.42]     [10.47]        [10.39]
      CAP                     14.18       16.56            14.79       14.46          13.57
                              [11.09]     [13.94]          [11.83]     [11.49]        [11.5]
      CIP                     17.71       21.5             19.57       19.38          18.04
                              [16.57]     [18.44]          [16.61]     [15.45]        [15.05]
      DIV                     10.22       12.58            11.17       10.39          9.513
                              [9.07]      [11.89]          [10.06]     [8.97]         [8.79]
      COMB.                   14.02       17.84            16.16       16.14          14.91
                              [13.22]     [18.91]          [15.92]     [14.54]        [13.72]
      Note: Standard errors in brackets




                                                    49
           TABLE A3.2: MEAN BACKWARD CITES AND CONTINUATIONS
                              (PY1981-PY2002)

                                           Computers &     Drugs &   Electrical &
       Backward cites          Chemicals                                            Mechanical
                                           Communication   Medical   Electronic
       "Ordinary" patent       10.71       11.05           12.84     9.53           11.2
                               [13.62]     [15.46]         [19.67]   [11.43]        [11.41]
       CAP                     14.49       15.99           16.95     14.52          16.23
                               [19.63]     [21.64]         [25.25]   [18.44]        [18.21]
       CIP                     14.46       19.47           17.34     14.88          17.14
                               [23.83]     [29.99]         [27.93]   [19.77]        [20.82]
       DIV                     12.94       17.13           15        15.01          15.69
                               [17.96]     [24.79]         [23.91]   [19.76]        [19.78]
       COMB.                   19.15       33.53           21.53     23.49          24.18
                               [28.9]      [50.03]         [32.78]   [27.7]         [28.08]
       Note: Standard errors in brackets




TABLE A3.3: MEAN % BACKWARD SELFCITES AND CONTINUATIONS (PY1981-PY2002)


                                           Computers &     Drugs &   Electrical &
      %Backward self-cites     Chemicals                                             Mechanical
                                           Communication   Medical   Electronic
      "Ordinary" patent         18.73      11.46           12.82     12.22           12.8
                                [28.92]    [20.48]         [25.51]   [22.7]          [23.39]
      CAP                       17.35      12.06           14.28     12.78           12.28
                                [26.06]    [19.38]         [25.31]   [20.57]         [21.04]
      CIP                       19.88      11.13           13.37     12.41           12.94
                                [28.84]    [20.15]         [25.28]   [21.48]         [22.26]
      DIV                       22.2       12.7            18.33     14.16           13.6
                                [30.81]    [20.09]         [29.25]   [21.15]         [22.55]
      COMB.                     20.9       11.64           16.4      14.66           14.86
                                [28.43]    [18.69]         [26.1]    [20.51]         [22.14]
      Note: Standard errors in brackets




                                                 50
           TABLE A3.4: MEAN ORIGINALITY AND CONTINUATIONS
                              (PY1981-2002)

                                     Computers &     Drugs &   Electrical &
Original                 Chemicals                                            Mechanical
                                     Communication   Medical   Electronic
"Ordinary" patent         0.42       0.44            0.35      0.37           0.37
                          [0.29]     [0.27]          [0.27]    [0.28]         [0.28]
CAP                       0.47       0.48            0.38      0.42           0.42
                          [0.28]     [0.26]          [0.27]    [0.27]         [0.28]
CIP                       0.45       0.49            0.39      0.42           0.42
                          [0.29]     [0.27]          [0.27]    [0.28]         [0.28]
DIV                       0.48       0.48            0.37      0.48           0.47
                          [0.28]     [0.26]          [0.28]    [0.26]         [0.27]
COMB.                     0.5        0.53            0.42      0.5            0.49
                          [0.27]     [0.26           [0.27]    [0.26]         [0.27]
Note: Standard errors in brackets




      TABLE A3.5: MEAN FORWARD CITES AND CONTINUATIONS
                          (PY1981-2002)

                                     Computers &     Drugs &   Electrical &
Forward Cites            Chemicals                                            Mechanical
                                     Communication   Medical   Electronic
"Ordinary" patent         1.67       3.70            2.29      2.50           1.78
                          [2.64]     [5.17]          [3.82]    [3.62]         [2.73]
CAP                       1.58       3.83            2.00      2.39           1.70
                          [2.65]     [5.16]          [3.65]    [3.37]         [2.60]
CIP                       2.03       4.90            2.68      3.06           2.17
                          [3.13}     [6.72]          [4.58]    [4.31]         [3.38]
DIV                       0.99       3.08            1.46      2.27           1.31
                          [1.86]     [4.68]          [3.39]    [3.62]         [2.44]
COMB.                     1.48       4.06            1.91      2.81           1.96
                          [2.64]     [5.70]          [3.71]    [4.46]         [3.31]
Note: Standard errors in brackets




                                           51
             TABLE A3.6: MEAN EXPIRY PROBABILITY AND CONTINUATIONS
                                   (PY1981-2002)

                                                      Computers &     Drugs &   Electrical &
          % Expiry                    Chemicals                                                Mechanical
                                                      Communication   Medical   Electronic
          "Ordinary" patent        13.05              8.14            11.51     11.54          14.20
                                   [33.69]            [27.35]         [31.91]   [31.95]        [34.90]
          CAP                      12.71              7.50            9.88      9.63           12.72
                                   [33.31]            [26.33]         [29.83]   [29.50]        [33.32]
          CIP                      11.49              8.16            9.80      10.88          13.42
                                   [31.89]            [27.38]         [29.72]   [31.14]        [34.08]
          DIV                      14.19              7.66            12.15     9.60           12.97
                                   [34.89]            [26.59]         [32.67]   [29.46]        [33.60]
          COMB.                    10.90              5.74            7.90      8.68           10.23
                                   [31.17]            [23.26]         [26.99]   [28.15]        [30.31]
          Note: Standard errors in brackets




TABLE A4: TWO-SAMPLE T TEST (WITH UNEQUAL VARIANCE) FOR DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
                   COMPUSTAT AND NON-COMPUSTAT FIRMS

                                              CAP            CIP        DIV          COMB.       N
         Compustat matched patents            0.341          0.225      0.258        0.176       96509
         Omitted observations                 0.276          0.304      0.204        0.216       181300

         Difference                           0.065          -0.079     0.054        -0.040
         Pr(|T| > |t|) for Ha: diff != 0          0          0          0            0




                                                            52
          TABLE A5: MULTINOMIAL LOGIT ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATIONS DECISIONS

                                      CAP      CIP              DIV       COMB.     “Ordinary”
                         lnPATINT
                         Min->Max     -0.298   0.196            -0.650    0.020     0.731
                         SD/2 -+      -0.038   0.017            -0.034    0.001     0.055
                         lnRDINT
                         Min->Max     0.083    0.012            0.108     0.109     -0.313
                         SD/2 -+      0.010    0.001            0.013     0.011     -0.036
                         lnCAPINT
                         Min->Max     0.069    -0.005           -0.008    -0.007    -0.050
                         SD/2 -+      0.008    -0.001           -0.001    -0.001    -0.006
                         lnRDINT*lnPATINT
                         Min->Max     -0.064   0.094            -0.113    0.075     0.008
                         SD/2 -+      -0.004   0.007            -0.005    0.006     -0.005
                         lnCAPINT*lnPATINT
                         Min->Max     0.336    -0.511           0.513     0.013     -0.351
                         SD/2 -+      0.053    -0.021           0.047     0.004     -0.084
                         FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT
                         Min->Max     0.329    0.122            -0.660    -0.322    0.532
                         SD/2 -+      0.006    0.002            -0.005    -0.003    0.000
                         FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT
                         Min->Max     -0.990   -0.006           0.886     0.012     0.099
                         SD/2 -+      -0.011   -0.003           0.009     0.001     0.003
                         FCITES
                         Min->Max     -0.085   0.774            -0.069    -0.032    -0.588
                         SD/2 -+      -0.007   0.008            -0.018    -0.003    0.021
                         Pr(y|x)      0.081    0.052            0.056     0.030     0.781

Table A5 Notes: Pr(y|x)is the probability of observing each y for specified x values.
Min->Max: change in predicted probability as x changes from its minimum to its maximum.
 SD/2 -+: change in predicted probability as x changes from 1/2 standard deviations below base to 1/2 standard deviations
above. The base (mean) values and standard deviations of all ‘x’ are below.


                                                           lnRDINT*          lnCAPINT*       FCITES*lnRDINT
             x=        lnPATINT      lnRDINT   lnCAPINT
                                                           lnPATINT          lnPATINT        *lnPATINT
             mean(x)   -0.596        2.146     4.616       -1.536            -2.786          -3.797
             sd(x)=    0.976         1.033     0.750       2.571             4.612           14.897



                            FCITES*lnCAPINT
                  x=        *lnPATINT       TECHSHARE TECHTIME FCITES              lnEMP       lnAGE

                  mean(x)   -6.452             0.235        9.476        2.510     10.592      3.075
                  sd(x)=    24.857             0.216        5.660        3.856     1.513       0.688




                                                           53
                     TABLE A6: EFFECTS OF THE 1995 LAW --- PROBIT ESTIMATES

                                                CAP               CIP           DIV             COMB.
                                                dF/dx             dF/dx         dF/dx           dF/dx
                Fcites*y8185                    -0.0004           0.0066        -0.008          0.001
                                                [0.0004]          [0.0003]*     [0.0005]*       [0.0003]*
                Fcites*y8690                    0.0022            0.0047        -0.0053         0.002
                                                [0.0002]*         [0.0002]*     [0.0004]*       [0.0001]*
                Fcites*y9195                    0.0005            0.0037        -0.0022         0.0011
                                                [0.0001]*         [0.0001]*     [0.0002]*       [0.0001]*
                Fcites*y9600                    -0.0018           0.0033        -0.0029         0.0007
                                                [0.0002]*         [0.0001]*     [0.0002]*       [0.0001]*
                y8690                           0.0259            0.0215        0.0123          0.0308
                                                [0.0015]*         [0.0014]*     [0.0014]*       [0.0011]*
                y9195                           0.0643            0.0423        0.033           0.0347
                                                [0.0015]*         [0.0014]*     [0.0013]*       [0.0011]*
                y9600                           -0.0439           -0.0171       0.0016          -0.0485
                                                [0.0012]*         [0.0012]*     [0.0012]        [0.0008]*
                Observations                    722284            717299        701873          696606
                Model chi-square                21657.39          21494.78      20574.81        33835.29
                df                              42                42            42              42
                Loglikelihood                   -226588.03        -216147.02    -178480.46      -153361.51
                N of observations               722284            717299        701873          696606
                Note: Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%
                dF/dx is for discrete change of dummy variables (y8690, y9195 & y9600) from 0 to 1;
                 z and P>|z| correspond to the test of the underlying coefficient being 0

Table A6 Notes: The above are estimates of a model where, the binary dependent variable indicates whether the patent
was issued from a CAP or no continuation (for the CAP analysis). The right hand side variables include four-year
citations (fcites), 32-category technological category (Class) and application period (App). The coefficient on the
interaction term ( Appt ∗ Fcites ) enables us to test for changes in the relationship between patent quality and CAPs
during the 1981 – 2002 period. Instead of using dummies for the twenty application years and their corresponding quality
interaction terms, we grouped the years into four application periods (1981-85, 1986-90, 1991-95, 1995-2000), after
ensuring that this does not affect our key results.




                                                             54
TABLE A7.1: 1995-POLICY CHANGE & MLNM ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATION CHOICES (1981-
                      1994 & 1995-2000) FOR CHEMICAL PATENTS

                                     PANEL-A (Patents with PY1981-1994)              PANEL-B (Patents with PY1995-2000)
 Explanatory variables               CAP           CIP       DIV         COMB. CAP            CIP        DIV       COMB.
                                     (j=1)         (j=2)     (j=3)       (j=4)       (j=1)    (j=2)      (j=3)    (j=4)
 lnPATINT                            0.669         1         -0.393      1.07        -1.002   -0.139     -0.951   -0.183
                                     [0.124]*      [0.118]* [0.123]* [0.123]* [0.351]* [0.276]           [0.244]* [0.458]
 lnRDINT                             0.057         0.193     0.297       0.325       0.163    -0.142     0.302     0.054
                                     [0.032]       [0.030]* [0.032]* [0.032]* [0.071]         [0.063]    [0.054]* [0.093]
 lnCAPINT                            -0.209        -0.057    -0.223      -0.453      0.221    0          0.177    0.21
                                     [0.043]*      [0.040]   [0.042]* [0.043]* [0.106]        [0.089]    [0.080]  [0.145]
 lnRDINT*lnPATINT                    0.025         0.026     -0.094      -0.002      -0.025   0.029      -0.11     -0.319
                                     [0.026]       [0.025]   [0.026]* [0.025]        [0.050]  [0.041]    [0.034]* [0.059]*
 lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                   -0.189        -0.22     0.156       -0.248      0.239    0.022      0.264    0.264
                                     [0.028]*      [0.026]* [0.027]* [0.027]* [0.066]* [0.053]           [0.045]* [0.090]*
 FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT             0.004         0.016     0.018       0.001       0.04     0.006      -0.002    0.087
                                     [0.008]       [0.007]   [0.013]     [0.009]     [0.015]* [0.011]    [0.018]  [0.021]*
 FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT -0.005                   -0.007    -0.012      0           -0.026   -0.004     0.011    -0.059
                                     [0.004]       [0.003]   [0.007]     [0.004]     [0.008]* [0.006]    [0.010]  [0.011]*
 TECHSHARE                           0.342         0.525     -0.035      0.23        0.5      1.145      -0.114    0.879
                                     [0.107]*      [0.097]* [0.103]      [0.106]     [0.227]  [0.174]* [0.176]    [0.305]*
 TECHTIME                            -0.028        0.003     -0.03       -0.035      -0.048   -0.04      -0.07     -0.096
                                     [0.012]       [0.014]   [0.013]     [0.013]* [0.014]* [0.012]* [0.010]* [0.018]*
 FCITES                              -0.011        0.058     -0.198      -0.026      -0.067   0.01       -0.185   -0.209
                                     [0.009]       [0.006]* [0.012]* [0.009]* [0.014]* [0.010]           [0.014]* [0.032]*
 lnEMP                               -0.063        0.018     -0.008      -0.053      -0.072   0.014      -0.033    -0.028
                                     [0.019]*      [0.018]   [0.018]     [0.019]* [0.035]     [0.029]    [0.027]  [0.050]
 lnAGE                               -0.04         -0.018    0.12        -0.011      0.152    -0.015     0.032    0.149
                                     [0.027]       [0.027]   [0.029]* [0.029]        [0.053]* [0.039]    [0.034]  [0.076]
 Constant                            0.393         -2.961    -0.61       0.115       -3.496   -1.144     -1.268    -2.488
                                     [0.294]       [0.303]* [0.297]      [0.312]     [1.202]* [0.656]    [0.633]  [1.175]
 Observations                        55791                                           17729
 Model chi-square                    3744.16                                         1897.92
 df                                  148                                             116
 Loglikelihood                       -63061.2                                        -15472.5
 Pseudo R2                           0.03                                            0.06
 N of observations                   55791                                           17729
 Note: Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%;
 Base class is ordinary patents (j=0); Industry (SIC2)- and Patent vintage-effects included




                                                            55
TABLE A7.2: 1995-POLICY CHANGE & MLNM ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATION CHOICES (1981-
            1994 & 1995-2000) FOR COMPUTERS & COMMUNICATION PATENTS

                                      PANEL-A (Patents with PY1981-1994)            PANEL-B (Patents with PY1995-2000)
  Explanatory vars.                   CAP         CIP        DIV        COMB. CAP            CIP       DIV       COMB.
                                      (j=1)       (j=2)      (j=3)      (j=4)       (j=1)    (j=2)     (j=3)     (j=4)
  lnPATINT                            -0.204      -0.237     -0.804     -0.722      -1.646   1.438     -2.201    -1.138
                                      [0.123]     [0.197]    [0.260]* [0.207]* [0.200]* [0.254]* [0.299]* [0.455]
  lnRDINT                             0.348       0.159      0.047      0.327       0.221    -0.186    0.332     0.198
                                      [0.033]* [0.052]* [0.062]         [0.055]* [0.042]* [0.048]* [0.069]* [0.095]
  lnCAPINT                            0.045       0.017      -0.065     -0.124      0.477    0.017     0.409     0.366
                                      [0.039]     [0.060]    [0.078]    [0.065]     [0.054]* [0.071]   [0.079]* [0.132]*
  lnRDINT*lnPATINT                    -0.039      0.05       -0.016     -0.009      -0.365   -0.054    -0.094    -0.496
                                      [0.025]     [0.037]    [0.052]    [0.041]     [0.041]* [0.049]   [0.062]   [0.081]*
  lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                   0.096       0.042      0.187      0.244       0.641    -0.268    0.571     0.729
                                      [0.035]* [0.052]       [0.071]* [0.056]* [0.037]* [0.059]* [0.054]* [0.084]*
  FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT             0.007       0.005      0.021      0.014       0.01     0.002     -0.013    0.012
                                      [0.004]     [0.006]    [0.010]    [0.008]     [0.006]  [0.005]   [0.010]   [0.006]
  FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT -0.006                 -0.001     -0.011     -0.01       -0.008   -0.002    0.009     -0.017
                                      [0.002]* [0.004]       [0.006]    [0.005]     [0.004]  [0.003]   [0.007]   [0.004]*
  TECHSHARE                           0.448       0.171      -0.037     0.666       0.628    0.348     -0.018    1.222
                                      [0.089]* [0.166]       [0.183]    [0.163]* [0.108]* [0.147]      [0.160]   [0.261]*
  TECHTIME                            -0.047      -0.018     -0.011     -0.074      -0.035   -0.002    -0.051    -0.053
                                      [0.009]* [0.016]       [0.018]    [0.016]* [0.009]* [0.012]      [0.012]* [0.019]*
  FCITES                              -0.008      0.031      -0.025     -0.015      -0.072   0.013     -0.117    -0.071
                                      [0.004]     [0.006]* [0.010]      [0.008]     [0.006]* [0.005]   [0.010]* [0.012]*
  lnEMP                               0.089       -0.197     -0.16      -0.097      -0.047   -0.198    0.047     -0.194
                                      [0.017]* [0.029]* [0.032]* [0.030]* [0.023]            [0.031]* [0.035]    [0.055]*
  lnAGE                               -0.16       0.101      0.108      0.006       0.01     0.051     -0.106    0.055
                                      [0.033]* [0.058]       [0.074]    [0.066]     [0.044]  [0.056]   [0.066]   [0.107]
  Constant                            -4.396      -0.419     -2.996     -3.124      -4.246   -0.413    -33.491 -2.597
                                      [0.526]* [0.477]       [0.864]* [0.676]* [0.746]* [0.713]        [1.192]* [1.064]
  Observations                        42369       42369      42369      42369       49899    49899     49899     49899
  Model chi-square                    4456.22                                       5680.43
  df                                  148                                           116
  Loglikelihood                       -36050                                        -26444
  Pseudo R2                           0.06                                          0.1
  N of observations                   42369                                         49899
  Note: Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%;
  Base class is ordinary patents (j=0); Industry(SIC2)- and Patent vintage- effects included




                                                            56
TABLE A7.3: 1995-POLICY CHANGE & MLNM ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATION CHOICES (1981-
                   1994 & 1995-2000) FOR DRUGS & MEDICAL PATENTS

                                     PANEL-A (Patents with PY1981-1994)            PANEL-B (Patents with PY1995-2000)
  Explanatory vars.                    CAP        CIP       Div     Comb             CAP        CIP       Div     Comb
                                       (j=1)     (j=2)     (j=3)     (j=4)           (j=1)     (j=2)     (j=3)     (j=4)
  lnPATINT                               0.825      0.41    -0.043     0.969          -0.865    -0.609     0.012     0.176
                                     [0.128]* [0.142]* [0.188]     [0.124]*        [0.400]   [0.459]   [0.421]   [0.527]
  lnRDINT                               -0.022     0.125     0.101     0.456          -0.026     0.129     0.628     0.094
                                     [0.044]   [0.046]* [0.058]    [0.045]*        [0.088]   [0.101]   [0.101]* [0.111]
  lnCAPINT                              -0.009     0.013      0.07    -0.074           0.478    -0.103    -0.231     0.057
                                     [0.054]   [0.056]   [0.069]   [0.051]         [0.152]* [0.158]    [0.150]   [0.183]
  lnRDINT*lnPATINT                        0.09    -0.018     0.073     0.151           -0.22     0.127     0.016    -0.196
                                     [0.031]* [0.030]    [0.040]   [0.030]*        [0.054]* [0.064]    [0.053]   [0.067]*
  lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                     -0.238     -0.05     0.017    -0.254           0.339     0.066     0.022     0.122
                                     [0.033]* [0.036]    [0.046]   [0.032]*        [0.083]* [0.088]    [0.076]   [0.101]
  FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT                 0.01     0.003    -0.005    -0.007           0.015     0.014      0.03     0.057
                                     [0.007]   [0.006]   [0.010]   [0.007]         [0.015]   [0.012]   [0.019]   [0.025]
  FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT              -0.005    -0.001     0.007     0.004          -0.005     -0.01    -0.005    -0.019
                                     [0.004]   [0.003]   [0.005]   [0.004]         [0.010]   [0.008]   [0.013]   [0.016]
  TECHSHARE                             -0.678     0.218     0.004    -0.317           0.252    -0.446     0.529     0.284
                                     [0.110]* [0.111]    [0.139]   [0.107]*        [0.174]   [0.169]* [0.159]* [0.234]
  TECHTIME                               0.049    -0.073     0.013     -0.03          -0.035    -0.053    -0.037    -0.078
                                     [0.015]* [0.014]* [0.019]     [0.014]         [0.017]   [0.016]* [0.017]    [0.022]*
  FCITES                                 -0.01     0.019    -0.044    -0.053          -0.035    -0.009    -0.052     -0.04
                                     [0.007]   [0.006]* [0.011]* [0.008]*          [0.018]   [0.016]   [0.021]   [0.025]
  lnEMP                                 -0.193     0.032     0.036    -0.031           0.093     0.019     0.189     0.072
                                     [0.026]* [0.028]    [0.035]   [0.027]         [0.045]   [0.042]   [0.040]* [0.058]
  lnAGE                                 -0.073    -0.047    -0.146    -0.138          -0.058     0.038    -0.127    -0.006
                                     [0.038]   [0.038]   [0.045]* [0.035]*         [0.053]   [0.054]   [0.044]* [0.078]
  Constant                              -20.35 -22.956      -1.662    -1.475        -25.163 -19.431 -23.916 -23.473
                                     [1.075]* [0.599]* [1.193]     [1.151]         [1.556]* [0.000]    [1.522]* [1.515]*
  Observations                       21112     21112     21112     21112           9970      9970      9970      9970
  Model chi-square                   2432.93                                       1064.39
  df                                 148                                           108
  Loglikelihood                      -27776                                        -9911
  Pseudo R2                          0.04                                          0.05
  N of observations                  21112                                         9970
  Standard errors in brackets
  * significant at 1%
  Base class is ordinary patents (j=0); Industry(SIC2)- and Patent vintage- effects included




                                                              57
TABLE A7.4: 1995-POLICY CHANGE & MLNM ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATION CHOICES (1981-
              1994 & 1995-2000) FOR ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS PATENTS

                                      PANEL-A (Patents with PY1981-1994)            PANEL-B (Patents with PY1995-2000)
  Explanatory variables               CAP         CIP        DIV        COMB. CAP            CIP       DIV       COMB.
                                      (j=1)       (j=2)      (j=3)      (j=4)       (j=1)    (j=2)     (j=3)     (j=4)
  lnPATINT                            -0.068      -0.165     -0.611     -1.151      -3.025   1.079     -1.798    -2.198
                                      [0.136]     [0.185]    [0.227]* [0.244]* [0.260]* [0.355]* [0.265]* [0.510]*
  lnRDINT                             0.252       0.013      0.384      0.512       -0.133   -0.27     0.25      0.024
                                      [0.031]* [0.042]       [0.047]* [0.052]* [0.046]* [0.056]* [0.049]* [0.091]
  lnCAPINT                            -0.042      0.163      -0.183     0.024       1.021    0.121     0.728     1.246
                                      [0.044]     [0.062]* [0.066]* [0.071]         [0.078]* [0.092]   [0.070]* [0.146]*
  lnRDINT*lnPATINT                    -0.043      -0.02      0.023      0.103       -0.326   0.003      -0.085   -0.202
                                      [0.029]     [0.038]    [0.048]    [0.049]     [0.046]* [0.058]   [0.048]   [0.092]
  lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                   0.06        0.049      0.171      0.281       0.864    -0.229    0.474     0.725
                                      [0.039]     [0.051]    [0.065]* [0.068]* [0.058]* [0.084]* [0.057]* [0.115]*
  FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT             0.015       0.029      0.02       -0.012      0.018    0.013     -0.034    0.013
                                      [0.007]     [0.008]* [0.013]      [0.010]     [0.012]  [0.011]   [0.010]* [0.025]
  FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT -0.008                 -0.011     -0.006     0.01        -0.016   -0.009    0.02      -0.017
                                      [0.004]     [0.004]* [0.007]      [0.006]     [0.007]  [0.006]   [0.006]* [0.014]
  TECHSHARE                           0.505       0.354      0.452      0.861       0.694    0.144     1.496     1.602
                                      [0.102]* [0.141]       [0.151]* [0.145]* [0.143]* [0.214]        [0.136]* [0.219]*
  TECHTIME                            -0.038      -0.031     -0.003     -0.078      -0.059   -0.002    -0.054    -0.08
                                      [0.009]* [0.012]       [0.015]    [0.013]* [0.009]* [0.012]      [0.009]* [0.015]*
  FCITES                              0           0.066      -0.016     0.026       -0.083   0.018     -0.108    -0.104
                                      [0.006]     [0.006]* [0.008]      [0.007]* [0.009]* [0.007]* [0.007]* [0.017]*
  lnEMP                               0.045       -0.181     0.048      0.025       -0.019   -0.235    0.299     0.009
                                      [0.019]     [0.026]* [0.028]      [0.029]     [0.029]  [0.038]* [0.028]* [0.051]
  lnAGE                               -0.105      0.02       0.119      -0.014      -0.036   -0.142    -0.133    -0.044
                                      [0.034]* [0.050]       [0.057]    [0.061]     [0.053]  [0.053]* [0.046]* [0.098]
  Constant                            -2.051      -1.355     -2.933     -2.256      -6.194   -0.348    -31.893 -23.704
                                      [0.331]* [0.403]* [0.476]* [0.419]* [1.114]* [0.886]             [1.121]* [0.000]
  Observations                        45435       45435      45435      45435       32049    32049     32049     32049
  Model chi-square                    3045.44                                       7798.37
  df                                  148                                           116
  Loglikelihood                       -34803                                        -23249
  Pseudo R2                           0.04                                          0.14
  N of observations                   45435                                         32049
  Note: Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%
  Base class is ordinary patents (j=0); Industry(SIC2)- and Patent vintage effects included




                                                           58
TABLE A7.5: 1995-POLICY CHANGE & MLNM ESTIMATES OF CONTINUATION CHOICES (1981-
                     1994 & 1995-2000) FOR MECHANICAL PATENTS

                                      PANEL-A (Patents with PY1981-1994)            PANEL-B (Patents with PY1995-2000)
  Explanatory variables               CAP         CIP        DIV        COMB. CAP             CIP      DIV       COMB.
                                      (j=1)       (j=2)      (j=3)      (j=4)       (j=1)     (j=2)    (j=3)     (j=4)
  lnPATINT                            0.737       0.648      -0.041     1.102       -1.887    0.201    -2.131    -2.36
                                      [0.169]* [0.196]* [0.191]         [0.211]* [0.408]* [0.399]      [0.319]* [0.611]*
  lnRDINT                             0.135       0.091      0.23       0.647       0.281     -0.006   0.037     0.417
                                      [0.038]* [0.044]       [0.042]* [0.049]* [0.070]* [0.066]        [0.056]   [0.112]*
  lnCAPINT                            -0.385      -0.04      -0.214     -0.313      0.133     -0.211   0.501     -0.278
                                      [0.059]* [0.067]       [0.062]* [0.075]* [0.118]        [0.115]  [0.092]* [0.185]
  lnRDINT*lnPATINT                    0.076       0.044      0.022      0.136       0.02      -0.019   -0.086    0.342
                                      [0.032]     [0.034]    [0.036]    [0.043]* [0.069]      [0.057]  [0.052]   [0.115]*
  lnCAPINT*lnPATINT                   -0.191      -0.138     0.016      -0.176      0.462     -0.041   0.497     0.536
                                      [0.044]* [0.050]* [0.049]         [0.054]* [0.093]* [0.091]      [0.073]* [0.147]*
  FCITES*lnRDINT*lnPATINT             -0.002      0.014      -0.03      0.018       -0.018    -0.009   0.039     -0.085
                                      [0.011]     [0.009]    [0.014]    [0.014]     [0.021]   [0.015]  [0.020]   [0.040]
  FCITES*lnCAPINT*lnPATINT 0.004                  -0.002     0.018      0            0.013    0.006    -0.014    0.051
                                      [0.005]     [0.004]    [0.006]* [0.006]       [0.012]   [0.008]  [0.011]   [0.022]
  TECHSHARE                           0.187       0.63       -1         1.342       0.412     0.015    -0.758    1.186
                                      [0.144]     [0.161]* [0.178]* [0.166]* [0.268]          [0.238]  [0.235]* [0.386]*
  TECHTIME                            -0.031      -0.047     -0.031     -0.07        0.011    0.016    -0.027    0.007
                                      [0.012]* [0.013]* [0.012]         [0.014]* [0.015]      [0.013]  [0.011]   [0.022]
  FCITES                              0.019       0.089      -0.081     0.03        -0.064    0.007    -0.134    -0.195
                                      [0.009]     [0.008]* [0.014]* [0.010]* [0.014]* [0.012]          [0.013]* [0.036]*
  lnEMP                               -0.052      -0.085     -0.13      0.052       -0.228    -0.406   -0.213    -0.366
                                      [0.025]     [0.030]* [0.027]* [0.033]         [0.047]* [0.044]* [0.039]* [0.076]*
  lnAGE                               0.05        0.056      0.062      -0.046      0.086     0.121    0.131     0.313
                                      [0.038]     [0.044]    [0.042]    [0.046]     [0.065]   [0.061]  [0.054]   [0.118]*
  Constant                            0.273       -1.208     0.893      -2.63       -2.036    -19.288 -17.396 -20.149
                                      [0.407]     [0.482]    [0.430]    [0.728]* [1.257]      [0.944]* [0.000]   [0.000]
  Observations                        33171       33171      33171      33171       14532     14532    14532     14532
  Model chi-square                    2692.68                                       2207.54
  df                                  148                                           116
  Loglikelihood                       -27366                                        -9841
  Pseudo R2                           0.05                                          0.1
  N of observations                   33171                                         14532
  Note: Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%;
  Base class is ordinary patents (j=0); Industry(SIC2)- and Patent vintage - effects included




                                                            59
TABLE A8: % BACKWARD CITES THAT ARE SELF-CITES & CONTINUATIONS (PY1981-1994 &
                                PY1995-2000)

                  Dependent Variable: % of self-
                                                         1981-1994        1995-2000
                  cites in backward cites
                  CAP                                    -0.007            0.017
                                                         [0.001]*          [0.002]*
                  CIP                                    0.005             0.001
                                                         [0.001]*          [0.002]
                  DIVISIONAL                             0.031             0.016
                                                         [0.002]*          [0.002]*
                  COMBINATION                            0.011             0.021
                                                         [0.001]*          [0.003]*
                  CONSTANT                               0.192             0.115
                                                         [0.002]*          [0.001]*
                  N of Observations                      522858            331542
                  R-squared                              0.04              0.03
                  df                                     17                9
                  Note: Robust standard errors in brackets; * significant at 1%;
                  Base class is No Continuation;
                  All estimates include tech class- and patent vintage- effects




                                                   60
                           Figure A1: Lag density of ordinary & continued patents


     .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
  Density of ordinary patents
  0




                                   0     4             8               12               16         20
                                                               lag
  0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
  Density of continued patents




                                   0     4             8               12               16         20
                                                               lag




                                        Figure A2.1: CAP Use by Technology
              2025
% CAP patents
  10    15      5
                0




                                 1980        1985              1990                 1995           2000
                                                           Priority year

                                               Chemical                     Comp & Comm
                                               Drugs & Med                  E-trical & E-tronics
                                               Mechanical




                                                             61
                            Figure A2.2: CIP Use by Technology


        20    15
% CIP patents
     10 5
        0




                   1980        1985            1990                1995           2000
                                           Priority year

                                 Chemical                  Comp & Comm
                                 Drugs & Med               E-trical & E-tronics
                                 Mechanical




                          Figure A2.3: Divisional Use by Technology
        15 10
% DIV patents
5       0




                   1980        1985            1990                1995           2000
                                           Priority year

                                 Chemical                  Comp & Comm
                                 Drugs & Med               E-trical & E-tronics
                                 Mechanical




                                               62
