NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC EXPERIMENTS AND NEUTRALITY IN INTERNET ACCESS
Shane Greenstein
Working Paper 13158
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13158

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

The Searle Foundation provided support. I thank Scott Stern and Kristina Steffensen McElharen for
providing numerous comments and guidance throughout the writing. I am grateful for comments from
seminar audiences, and from Robert Cannon, Ben Jones, Brian Kahin, Paul Ohm, Bill Rogerson, Christian
Sandvig, Alicia Shems, Jim Speta, Phil Weiser, and Joel West. I am responsible for all errors. Contact:
greeenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu, 2001 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Economic Experiments and Neutrality in Internet Access
Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 13158
June 2007
JEL No. L5,L86,L96,O31
ABSTRACT
Economic experiments yield lessons to firms that can be acquired only through market experience.
Economic experiments cannot take place in a laboratory; scientists, engineers, or marketing executives
cannot distill equivalent lessons from simply building a prototype or interviewing potential customers
and vendors. The historical record illustrates that economic experiments were important for value
creation in Internet access markets. In general, industry-wide returns from economic experiments exceed
private returns, with several important exceptions. Those conclusions motivate an inquiry into whether
regulatory policy can play a role in fostering the creation of value. The net neutrality debate is reinterpreted
through this lens. A three part test is proposed for encouraging economic experiments from both broadband
carriers and providers of complementary services.
Shane Greenstein
The Elinor and Wendell Hobbs Professor
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

I. INTRODUCTION
While the commercial Internet today generates tens of billions of dollars in revenue a
year, the passage of time gives a false sense of inevitability to this accomplishment. Learning
and sheer serendipity shaped actions during the early days while value remained uncertain.
The firms that commercialized dial-up Internet access in the United States from the mid- to
late-1990s did not follow a prescribed road map, nor did those who deployed Wi-Fi from
1999 onward. No firm in a young market such as these could have planned for all events.
The commercial Internet is far from the only market where learning activities played
a role. Firms in technically-oriented markets frequently engage in learning as a necessary
consequence of – or as the unintended by-product of – participating in markets for goods and
services whose value undergoes change. Economic experiments pertain to any market
experience that alters knowledge about the market value of a good or service (Rosenberg,
1994; Stern, 2005). Stated succinctly, firms engage in economic experiments to reduce
uncertainties about market value.
The defining characteristic of this type of learning is that it involves experiences that
cannot take place in a laboratory; scientists, engineers, or marketing executives cannot distill
equivalent lessons from simply building a prototype or interviewing potential customers and
vendors. Economic experiments involve more than just technical invention; they also lead to
changes in business operations and organizational procedures that translate technology into
economic value.
What role did economic experiments play in the development of commercial Internet
access? Section II of the essay considers this question and I conclude that economic
experiments played an important role. That answer motivates the topic of Section III, which
investigates: Do the private returns from participating in these experiments align with
industry-wide returns? I argue that industry-wide returns exceed private returns, with several
important exceptions. That conclusion motivates the topic of Section IV, which investigates:
Does an emphasis on economic experiments provide insight about the specific types of
policies that would encourage innovation over time in communications markets? Does this
analysis hold lessons for Internet access policy, such as found in the net neutrality debate?

2

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

I.1. Outline of themes

Highlighting the historical role of economic experiments leads to a shift in
perspective on the creation of value in the commercial Internet. I argue that economic
experiments encompass a range of market-based learning. They encompass many important
activities related to the creation of value, such as when surprising sales reveal the previously
unknown value of primitive technologies, when new designs make managers aware of
broader uses for technologies invented for narrow applications, or when firms learn how to
improve a business process with customer-suggested refinements.
This contrasts with most historical studies of the commercial Internet. By and large,
most discussions of the rise of the Internet have focused on the evolution of technological
experimentation, i.e., the genesis of inventions from their unlikely origins. If experiments
during commercialization receive attention, it is in the context of analyzing the exploitation
of a small set of core technological standards (e.g., TCP/IP, HTML, etc). Highlighting
economic experiments, in contrast, emphasizes how the environment allowed for a range of
alternative commercialization strategies – in terms of pricing structures, marketing strategies,
and the like – when market participants had choices among several options. This provided
great leeway for a diversity of commercial outcomes.
Highlighting economic experiments leads to a refocusing of policy analysis. To date,
there has been considerable analysis of regulatory actions pertaining to broadband, as well as
analysis of the legal environment around participation in open source communities and
standardization efforts.1 However, while some research has examined the policies for
markets where exploratory behavior is prevalent, these are not articulated as issues about the
creation of value, or about nurturing economic experiments to support such creation.2
In contrast, because this framework focuses attention on the incentives of vendors, it
concludes that the industry wide value – i.e., benefit less cost – from economic experiments
exceeds private value due to the presence of positive information externalities. There are two
major exceptions to such a generality. The first exception arises when there is no link
1

There is considerable writing in these veins. See e.g., Lessig (1999), Sidak (2003), Crandall (2005),
Neuchterlein and Weiser (2005). More will be discussed in the text.
2
See e.g., Blumenthal and Clark (2001), Alleman and Rappaport (2005), Clark et al (2005), Clark et al
(2006), Goldfarb, Kirsch and Pfarrer (2005), Bauer (2006), or Greenstein (2007). More will be discussed in
the text.

3

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

between costs and benefit, as when one firm incurs the costs of an economic experiment
while another gains the benefit. The other exception arises in settings where the negative
externalities are present and large. Both circumstances can lead private and industry-wide
cost and benefit to be out of alignment.
That insight will highlight several challenging problems faced by regulators in
communications markets. An example of the challenges this presents arises in the net
neutrality debate. This debate has historical antecedents in policy decisions within
telecommunications markets, where regulated firms – principally local telephone companies
– acted as complements (in supply) to the innovative services of others with whom they also
competed (for end users). More recently, policy has moved towards permitting discretion to
broadband carriers, both telephone companies and other carriers, such as cable companies.
Net neutrality advocates worry that carriers possess too much discretion.
I reinterpret the debate through the lens of economic experiments, and show how this
debate could focus on value creation instead of (or in addition to) focusing on the distribution
of existing value, as it typically does. Policy could seek to raise incentives for value creation,
either by raising incentives at carriers to undertake exploration, and/or by reducing the
negative externalities broadband carriers might impose on other economic experiments.
This refocusing leads to a proposal for incorporating economic experiments into the
debate about net neutrality, discussed at length in the text. The proposal leads to a set of
conclusions not typically found in the net neutrality debate. The proposal gives considerable
discretion to broadband carriers if they act only as carriers, such as discretion for retail and
wholesale price discrimination (within some binding limits applying to the latter). When
carriers have economic interests in content markets, however, the proposal leads to a three
part test that limits carrier discretion within specific bounds, with the intent of nurturing
incentives for investing in economic experiments from both carriers and content providers.

I.2. Comparisons

This model of economic experiments overlaps with another model for analyzing
learning behavior: “user-oriented” innovation in communications markets.3 As in that
3

This is a growing literature, starting with Von Hippel (1988). It also is labelled “lead user” studies.

4

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

approach, the economic experiments framework explains how innovation becomes embodied
in commercial form, and highlights the links between the experience of market participants
and the conceptualization of an idea. Related, this framework also resembles the examination
of learning in user-communities, such as analysis of wireless Internet applications.4 As in that
approach, this essay also highlights the factors nurturing experiential-based learning about
new value in newly deployed technologies.
In contrast to both literatures, this framework places less importance on user
communities, instead focusing on how lessons spread – typically between vendors. To be
clear, the framework also stresses the importance of user communities that aid the sharing of
lessons, such as lead-user committees. However, the broader emphasis leads to other
implications for firms and policy makers.
Also significant for policy, the emphasis from the lens of economic experiments
differs with the emphasis found in the common “ladder model” (which Gomory labeled and
critiqued in 1997). The typical ladder model begins with events in a laboratory and moves
through stages into commercialization.5 The model of economic experiments does not begin
with events in a laboratory and is not a sequential model. Instead, the model of economic
experiments emphasizes activities outside of a laboratory, such as innovations arising after
experience in the market. It also focuses on the spreading of lessons. As a result, it develops
insights the ladder model does not, such as how to think about regulatory issues for industries
undergoing learning. In brief, there are situations in which both models provide useful
insight,6 but policymakers should not rely exclusively on the ladder model, because it
overlooks some innovative conduct that improves the economic performance of society.
Many observers have identified the need for a dynamic regulatory policy more attune
with the innovation behavior found in modern communications. The key contribution of this
essay is in the orientation. The model of economic experiments can yield quite different
insights about the merits and drawbacks of specific proposals for communications policy. I
review those differences with the extant (and extensive) literature later in the essay.

4

See e.g., Sandvig (2004 and 2007).
See Gomory (1997) for a discussion about why exposing this model to scrutiny would help eliminate the
mental monopoly it holds on the actions of many managers.
6
For example, the original investment by DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Agency) in the
fundamental science of packet switching led to events that broadly fits the stages in the ladder model.
5

5

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

II.ECONOMIC EXPERIMENTS IN INTERNET ACCESS MARKETS
Economic experiments are heterogeneous in practice. To organize the discussion, I
begin with two broad types of experiments. The first type, directed experiments, occurs when
firms deliberately invest in their own operations with existing customers in ways that allow
them to learn something that benefits their businesses. The second type, undirected
experiments, occurs when firms monitor the conduct of others, seeking to learn lessons from
the experience of others and through the interplay of their activities with one another.
The practical distinction between directed and undirected economic experiments is
not clear-cut in all circumstances, but general tendencies distinguish one from another.
Directed experiments tend to be incremental in technical scope and ambition (with important
exceptions described below). Motivated by the private desire to learn something, these
economic experiments aim to learn lessons useful to the organization conducting the
experiment. Undirected experiments also yield useful learning, but do not arise in such a
deliberate fashion. Rather, learning arises from the actions of many firms, yielding lessons
whose specific features are not anticipated. In such circumstances, firms invest in learning
lessons from unanticipated events.
In either case market participants engage in economic experiments because they have
a limited ability to imagine future (even near-term) economic activity in all its complexity
and detail. Many choices among the details about operations to serve buyers cannot be
learned except through trial and error. Even market participants with extraordinary
imaginations still find it impossible to forecast, for example, how demand will change when
prices decline drastically for complementary goods or how the majority of customers will
react to different menus of products. Even if early versions of a technology have partially
diffused to leading adopters, the rest of the population of adopters, who will be using the
technology when prices drop and capabilities expand, may have different characteristics and
needs from the first users. Planning activities can help, but they can never completely
overcome these limitations.
An additional factor also shapes industry-wide learning: any one firm faces difficulty
forecasting the actions of all of its near competitors or business partners. For example,
managers may not be able to resolve open questions about the actions of their business
6

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

partners until they observe events in a market. What services are offered at what set of
prices? What features are emphasized? To what specific user segments are other firms
appealing? These decisions reveal considerable information about what managers at rivals
and partners are thinking. In addition, the success or failure of certain activities (over time)
reveals considerable information about which risks paid off and which did not. In brief, firms
learn from observing one another’s actions, i.e., more learning takes place only after
observing actions than after reading about plans.
What is the value of economic experiments? I will focus on the value associated with
the creation of knowledge from experiential learning, and the initial spreading of that
learning. The private value gained from investing in an economic experiment is associated
with the benefits the lessons yield. For example, lessons may increase revenue, reduce costs,
or enhance the survivability of firms. Only some of these gains will be measurable.
The industry-wide value from such experiments can diverge from private value as
lessons spread. One firm’s economic experiment may yield information that benefits another
firm that did not conduct that experiment. Beyond that generality, the spreading of lessons
exhibits enormous heterogeneity. Technical lessons tend to spread quickly, while complex
business lessons not. In later sections I will describe why.

II.1. Directed economic experiments

This section uses the historical example of Internet access markets to flesh out the
analytical framework and establish its relevance. This example illustrates the predominant
features of a directed economic experiment: (1) Many firms try similar experiments, but not
every firm tries the same experiment; (2) Not all experiments succeed, but valuable lessons
are learned from both success and failure; (3) In retrospect, it may be possible to rationalize
the purpose behind an experiment that turned out to be successful, but such certainty does not
characterize the outlook at the time of the experiments; (4) The value of experiments changes
over time, and firms alter their experiments in response to market conditions.
At the outset of the commercial Internet access market value was uncertain due to a
surprising sequence of events. The release of the Mosaic browser began in the fall of 1993.

7

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Netscape released its beta browser in the fall of 1994, gained publicity in the winter of 1995,
and followed with its initial public offering (IPO) in August. Then Microsoft unveiled
Internet Explorer in December 1995. Around the same time, a number of other entrants also
began exploring new businesses, including Yahoo!, EBay, Amazon, Vermeer, and others.
Many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) wrestled with fundamental decisions about
how to build a business around the browser. This innovation raised expectations about future
demand for access to the Internet, but did not generate certainty about how suppliers could
best serve that demand. These events fueled expectations among industry insiders, futurists,
and venture investors that substantial demand for the Internet among households and
businesses would emerge quickly. That generated initiatives by firms to build ahead of the
anticipated demand.
By 1996 ISPs offered service in every major U.S. city, and many large firms had
begun building national networks. The growth was astounding to mainstream infrastructure
firms in computing and communications.7 By the fall of 1996, there were over twelve
thousand local phone numbers in the United States to call for commercial Internet access,
and more than sixty-five thousand by the fall of 1998.8 That build-out involved both scores of
large national firms and thousands of small local firms.
The build-out of ISPs did not happen without considerable experimentation to resolve
many open questions. A crucial question at the outset concerned the design of the opening
page—or, as it was subsequently labeled, portal—that users would see when they first
clicked on their browser.9 What should an ISP do? Should it design its own portal
(potentially at great expense), default to another’s (such as Excite or Yahoo!), or leave the
decision to users altogether?
There were many contrasting strategies for addressing the question. Different ISPs
made distinct choices and learned different lessons about the trade-offs between these
choices. No single choice dominated, and as firms learned more, perceptions about the costs
and benefits of each changed over time. Some ISPs maintained minimal home pages, which
many marketed as a virtuous attempt to give users freedom to choose for themselves among
7

Greenstein (2007) discusses why existing infrastructure firms were “surprised” by these developments.
See Downes and Greenstein (2002) for a description of the dial up market, or Downes and Greenstein
(2007) for an analysis for why some areas had more entry than others.
9
For a review of technologies behind the browser and portal, and an analysis of the factors that shaped
their evolution, see Haigh (2007).
8

8

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Yahoo!, Excite, Lycos, and a myriad of other young portals then springing up. Of these, a
portion succeeded with—or in some views, in spite of— this choice.
It is always possible to rationalize (after the fact) why a firm made the choices it
made. For example, even though many new ISPs openly derided America On-Line (AOL)
for its strategy, the company chose to continue activity it already performed in the era of
bulletin boards, perceiving that its prior investments in community building would continue
to have value as its users transitioned to using the Internet more frequently. Its portal
decisions continued to nurture those communities. AOL supplemented those actions with
other practices that some of its largest rivals, such as CompuServe, did not pursue, such as
using login names and email addresses using natural language labels instead of combinations
of letters and numbers.
While AOL’s choice may seem savvy in retrospect, many Internet enthusiasts then
regarded it as risky. Indeed, AOL was the only firm among the existing large “on-line service
providers” to succeed with its strategic choices in the medium term. For example, AOL was
the only firm to attract the mass-market user with investment in a walled garden (i.e., an
approach that protected content, or, in the eyes of technically sophisticated vendors, “spoon
fed” content to users), which both controlled a large fraction of the user experience while
sacrificing sophisticated users to other suppliers.
Not all of these types of experiments turned out well. As noted, CompuServe,
Prodigy, and Genie all failed at an approach with similarities to AOL’s, whereas Microsoft
Network (MSN) attempted a similar strategy and, with the help of its marketing advantages
and budgetary tolerance for operating losses, did not exit. Nevertheless, MSN was no better
than a distant second to AOL in market share throughout the 1990s.
As further example, in the mid- to late-1990s some cable companies believed they did
not understand Internet users requirements, so they ceded these decisions initially to others,
such as, for example, @home. Eventually, @home merged with Excite to gain access to the
perceived advantage of owning a portal, a decision that was regretted by several cable firms
later. When the cooperation between cable firms and @home/Excite ended, it produced a
large amount of recrimination, and the transition was not smooth for users.10

10

See e.g., Wagner (2002).

9

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Although this experiment was not financially successful, the surviving firms—cable
companies, in this case—learned valuable lessons about how to structure their ISP services.
First, certain useful “investments” were recreated, such as geographic caching of content,
and, second, certain “mistakes” were avoided, such as not depending on advertising for
revenue.11
Exploration focused on other fundamental determinants of value, as well, such as the
price paid for services. For example, throughout 1995 to 1998, many firms experimented
with offering different contracting plans to households. Specifically, the earliest entrants into
commercial ISP services borrowed the practices of bulletin boards, such as pricing per hour
or per service. By 1995 there was a general movement among new entrants to offer unlimited
monthly service for a fixed price, which was thought to accommodate browsing behavior and
to be more acceptable to those using faster modems, such as 28K modems.12
After AT&T WorldNet announced its intention to enter the household market with a
$20-per-month contract, this contractual form became the focal standard, eventually leading
to the end of marginal pricing of services. AOL’s conversion in early 1996 was the last,
most publicized, and most difficult of these conversions among the largest ISPs at the time.13
It would be an error to think that AOL’s well-publicized troubles were the end of
experiments with prices. Experiments continued for years, but only the major successes
received wide publicity. There were many attempts to give users choices among monthly
hourly limitations in exchange for discounts.14 There were also many attempts to learn how
much firms could alter the definition of “unlimited” without generating a large user
backlash.15

11

See e.g., Rosston (2007) for an analysis of the changing views of cable firms about the source of value
from controlling or not controlling a portal and ISP.
12
For more on the evolution of pricing in this time period, see Stranger and Greenstein (2007).
13
See Swisher’s (1998) account of this crisis. AOL’s user base reacted to the introduction of unlimited
pricing by increasing frequency of use and length of time per session. That behavior produced capacity
issues, experienced by uses as busy signals.
14
For example, many firms offered discounts of 50% in exchange for limitations of 60 hours per month
(combined with penalties for exceeding this limit). This type of offered received a cool reception from most
users even though over 90% of household users had use underneath such a limit. See the discussion in
Stranger and Greenstein (2007).
15
For example, some firms imposed automated session termination after a fixed period when the account
experienced no use. Other ISPs tried to put fine print into their contracts that imposed high penalties for use
that exceeded extremely high use, such as 150 hours per month.

10

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Most of these experiments with prices did not generate a significant reaction among a
large set of users. In 1999, one such experiment did: a set of entrepreneurial firms
experimented with formats that offered free dial-up access services in exchange for requiring
users to view advertising. Netzero eventually was the most successful entrant of this form,
though, arguably, that success arose because Netzero departed from its initial strategy and
eventually charged for access.16 In other words, the most fundamental determinant of value
in the retail household market—the contracting terms and pricing norms for access—
continued to evolve throughout the entire first decade of the commercial Internet.

II.2. Undirected experiments

While directed experiments in Internet access markets might have partially motivated
the actions of any single firm, it would be an error to regard every lesson learned as resulting
entirely from only one firm’s actions. Rather, the interplay of firms, their actions, and their
economic experiments yielded a form of serendipity in learning—learning that resulted from
the unanticipated combination of lessons learned from several actions or sources.
Though such learning does not come through a deliberate economic experiment, it
does not necessarily arise without cost. A firm who seeks to learn it may need to invest in an
array of learning activities, such as tracking the experience at other firms, monitoring other
experiments, and engaging key personnel in information-gathering activities in industry-wide
conferences or organizations.
This section uses the historical example of wireless Internet access markets to flesh
out the analytical framework and establish its relevance. This example illustrates the
predominant features of an undirected economic experiment: (1) Many firms benefit from the
same market-based experience, but not all firms get the same value from the same undirected
experiment; (2) Valuable lessons arise from combinations of events; (3) It may be possible in
retrospect to rationalize the direction pursued by a collection of experiments, but such
direction does not characterize the outlook at the time; (4) From a private firm’s viewpoint,

16

This strategy turned out to be effective for entry, but not for a sustainable business. Eventually, after
growing a service for several million users, then merging with another firm, Juno, Netzero adopted a
different pricing contract, one with a minimal monthly charge.

11

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

the value of an undirected experiment involves some serendipity.
Futurists had predicted the rise of mobile computing even before the rise of the
commercial Internet. After the boom in Internet access investment began in 1995, those
predictions were made with additional urgency. Several related efforts arose, including
several to design short-range data communications standards, such as HomeRF and
Bluetooth.17 In addition, because of the tremendous number of investments in technology
made by cellular equipment providers and carriers to carry data over their infrastructure, a
substantial number of futurists foresaw wireless data services emerging out of the cellular
phone industry as part of a number of initiatives in 3G (third generation) technologies. This
large effort involved virtually every equipment firm and carrier in the cellular phone
business, as well as many others.18
Most of those predictions turned out to be correct in a broad sense—that is, there was
substantial demand for wireless data communication technologies. Yet, in the specific sense,
HomeRF did not generate the enthusiastic sales that those who designed it predicted—even
though the designers considered it technically superior to the alternatives.19 In addition, after
a slow start, Bluetooth eventually found its way into a variety of products, particularly
attachments to cell phones and many other consumer devices, but largely not computing
devices. The 3G products and services also did not grow as hyped, initially gaining little
traction with U.S. consumers. It is only recently that 3G products have started to make a dent
in the United States.
More surprising, a wireless fidelity technology – now popularly known as Wi-Fi –
became dominant. Wi-Fi did not arise from a single firm’s innovative experiment. Rather,
Wi-Fi began as something different that evolved through economic experiments at many
firms. The evolution arose from the interplay of strategic behavior, coordinated action among
designers, deliberate investment strategies, learning externalities across firms, and a measure
of simple and plain good fortune.

17

Both were founded in 1998. The former was organized by firms such as Motorola and Seimens, and at
its peak involved over a hundred companies before it disbanded; while the latter was established by
Ericsson, Sony-Ericsson, IBM (International Business Machines), Intel, Toshiba, and Nokia, and currently
still exists, involving thousands of firms.
18
For a review of many of these developments, see e.g., Aronson, Cowhey and Richards (2007).
19
For speculation about why HomeRF failed, see, e.g., http://www.cazitech.com/HomeRF_Archives.htm.

12

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

What eventually became Wi-Fi originated from discussions about a technical standard
designed at the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) Subcommittee 11 for
Committee 802. The IEEE sponsors many committees to design standards. Committee 802
was formed in the early 1980s, before the commercial Internet was ever proposed. It was
well known among computing and electronics engineers because it had helped design and
diffuse the Ethernet standard.20 By the mid-1990s it had grown larger, establishing
committees for many areas, ostensibly to extend the range of uses for Ethernet.
Subcommittee 802.11 was established in 1990. Like all subcommittees of this broad
family of committees, it concerned itself with a specific topic, in this case, designs for
interoperability standards to enable wireless data traffic using Ethernet protocol over short
ranges. As with all such committees, any standards emerging from these discussions were not
legally binding on industry participants, but the committee was formed with the hope that
such a standard could act as focal point, helping different firms make products, such as
routers and receivers, that were interoperable. As with most such committees, it tried to
involve members who brought appropriate technical expertise and who represented the views
of most of the major suppliers and users of the type of equipment in which this standard
would be embedded.
There were many potential business applications for this standard – one of the earliest
prototypes had been in wireless terminals21 and another had been in a large-scale wireless
local area network for a university campus22 – and focusing on any of them was not a bad
idea. After all, it is often a smart strategy to focus development on valuable use or on users
with a history of tolerance for the technical challenges affiliated with being an early adopter.
At first, the group was comprised of enthusiastic designers focused on the needs of big users
of local area network technologies (e.g., FedEx, United Parcel Service, Wal-Mart, Sears, and
Boeing)—companies that they believed would have valuable uses for short-range wireless
Ethernet (e.g., in large warehouses with complex logistical operations). More to the point, the
20

The story of the growth of a local area network market around the activities in committee 802 is well told
in Von Burg (2001).
21
Vic Hayes, one of the earliest developers of wireless technologies and standards, and chair of the IEEE
802.11 committee during the 1990s, first developed wireless technologies for NCR (at sub-division of
AT&T then, today a division of Agere Systems). In that capacity he first developed wireless terminals for
stockbrokers. See Krariff (2003).
22
See the description of Hills (2005), who began developing the equivalent of a Wi-Fi network for the
Carnegie Mellon campus in Pittsburgh, starting in 1993.

13

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

original charter and motivation for this subcommittee was not focused on what eventually
became a large market in the home and in public spaces (e.g., coffee shops).
Federal spectrum policy cooperated with these technical initiatives – indeed, nothing
would have succeeded in its absence. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
holds authority to license or bar companies from using spectrum. In late April of 1996, after
several groups had begun discussing designs, the FCC initiated a “Notice for Proposed Rule
Making” to make available unlicensed spectrum for what became known as Unlicensed
National Information Infrastructure (U-NII) devices. After deliberating over that summer, the
commission made spectrum available. It was understood that the commission anticipated
“short range, high-speed wireless digital communications” and devices that supported “the
creation of new wireless local area networks ("LANs") and … facilitate wireless access to the
National Information Infrastructure ("NII").” Beyond that, however, little else was specified
about the design or application. The order that emerged on January 9, 1997, stated “we are
adopting the minimum technical rules necessary to prevent interference to other services and
to ensure that the spectrum is used efficiently.” 23
Subsequent events fit a category of unanticipated learning that Rosenberg (1995)
labels (and I paraphrase here) “an invention motivated by a specific application that
unexpectedly finds broader use.” Specifically, the Subcommittee 802.11 first proposed a
standard in 1997 that received many beta uses, but also failed to resolve many
interoperability issues (among many). Learning from this experience, the committee rewrote
the standard. What came to be known as 802.11a was ratified in early 2000. Just prior to that
in late 1999, the committee published Standard 802.11b, which altered some features
(changing the frequency of spectrum it used, among other things). The latter caught on
quickly and eventually widely, partly because it was licensed for usage in Europe and Asia as
well as North America, while for some time 802.11a was only licensed in North America.24
Because many vendors had experimented with earlier variations of this standard, the
publication of 802.11b generated a vendor response from those who were already making
equipment—and others soon thereafter. As it turned out, it also generated a response from
23

All quotes are from the review of FCC policies on http://www.cybertelecom.org/broadband/wifi.htm, a
non-profit site which links to the orginal FCC material and summarizes it. Subsequent clarifications and
rules emerged several times thereafter, partly to promote equipment export to other parts of the world by
aligning spectrum in the US with similar policies elsewhere.
24
Lui (2001) or Krarif (2003).

14

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Internet enthusiasts, who at the time began using this equipment in a variety of settings,
campuses, buildings, public parks, and coffee shops. Unsurprisingly, vendors tried to meet
this demand as well.
Around the same time as the publication of 802.11b, firms that had helped pioneer the
standard—including 3Com, Aironet (now a division of Cisco), Harris Semiconductor (now
Intersil), Lucent (now Agere), Nokia, and Symbol Technologies—formed the Wireless
Ethernet Compatibility Alliance (WECA). WECA branded the new technology Wi-Fi, which
was a marketing ploy for the mass market, since WECA’s members believed that “802.11b”
was a much less appealing label. The aim was clear: nurture what enthusiasts were doing and
broaden it into sales to a broader base of users.
WECA also arranged to perform testing for conformance to the standard, such as
certifying interoperability of antennae and receivers made by different firms. This is valuable
when the set of vendors becomes large and heterogeneous, as it helps maintain maximum
service for users with little effort on their part. In brief, while the IEEE committee designed
the standard, a different body performed conformance testing. The difficulties experienced
with incompatible equipment in 1997 had taught participants not to ignore this activity.
Events then took on a momentum all of their own. Technical successes became
widely publicized. Numerous businesses began directed experiments supporting what
became known as hot spots, which was another innovative idea. A hot-spot in a public space
could be free, installed by a home-owner, or maintained by a building association for all
building residences, or supported by the café or restaurant or library trying to support its local
user base. Or, it could be subscription-based, with users signing contracts with providers. The
latter became common at Starbucks, for example, which subcontracted with T-mobile to
provide the service throughout its cafés.
A hot spot was a use far outside the original motivation for the standard. Yet, since
nothing precluded this unanticipated use from growing, grow it did. It grew in business
buildings, in homes, in public parks, and in a wide variety of settings, eventually causing the
firms behind HomeRF to give up. The growing use of Wi-Fi raised numerous unexpected
technical issues about interference, privacy, and rights to signals. Nevertheless, they did not

15

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

slow Wi-Fi’s growing popularity.25 Web sites sprouted up to give users, especially travelers,
directions to the nearest hot spot. As demand grew, suppliers gladly met it. As in a classic
network bandwagon, the growing number of users attracted more suppliers and vice-versa.
Unlike the prior examples, no single firm initiated an economic experiment that
altered the state of knowledge about how to best operate equipment using IEEE Standard
802.11b. However, like the prior examples, many firms responded to user demand,
demonstrations of new applications, tangible market experience, vendor reactions to new
market situations, and other events that they could not forecast but which yielded useful
insights about the most efficient business actions to generate value.

II.3. Interplay between directed and undirected experiments

Virtually all firms perform directed experiments; and sometimes these experiments
lead to a product or service that generates an undirected response from other firms as they
watch, monitor, and compete with each other. Some firms learn from another firm’s directed
experiment and consequently reap the benefits of the lessons learned without having to
undertake the cost of performing the experiment. Although some firms might try (and
ultimately fail) to keep their directed experiments private, most recognize that they are part
of a broader interplay of firms. Thus, the original directed experiment leads to one or many
undirected experiments. Similarly, the process of building directed experiments on top of
undirected ones requires a firm to watch and learn, and ultimately devise a directed
experiment that takes advantage of that learning.
Later events in the development of Wi-Fi illustrate how directed learning can build on
an undirected economic experiment. Specifically, reacting to the undirected experiment that
generated Wi-Fi, Intel performed a directed experiment that led to the creation of Centrino, a
large program that would install wireless capability in its notebook computers. It was

25

For example, in high-density settings it was possible for there to be interference among the channels, or
interference with other users of the unlicensed spectrum reserved by the FCC (Federal Communications
Commission), such as cordless telephones. The diffusion of so many devices also raised questions about
norms for paying for access in apartment buildings, from neighbors, and others. See Sandvig (2004).

16

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

officially launched in March 2003, though industry insiders knew about the plans much
earlier.
This section uses the historical example of the Centrino program to flesh out the
analytical framework. This example illustrates the predominant features of interplay between
directed and undirected economic experiments: (1) Many firms try experiments and build on
each others’ experiments; (2) Lessons learned from both success and failure spread at the
same time, seeding more experiments; (3) Economic experiments can and do arise in the face
of inter-firm conflict; (4) The results from the interplay between economic experiments
makes it particularly difficult to forecast value.
This Centrino program is easy to misunderstand. Embedding a Wi-Fi connection in
all notebooks that used Intel microprocessors did not involve redesigning only the Intel
microprocessor, which is the component for which Intel is best known. It involved
redesigning the motherboard for desktop PCs and notebooks by adding new parts.26 This
came with one obvious benefit, namely, it eliminated the need for an external card for the
notebook, which was usually supplied by a firm other than Intel and installed by users or
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) in an expansion slot. Intel hoped for additional
benefits for users, such as more reliability, fewer set-up difficulties, longer-lived batteries
(due to less need for heat reduction), thinner notebook designs (due to smaller cooling units)
and less frequent incompatibility in new settings.
Intel had crept into the motherboard business slowly over the prior decade as it
initiated a variety of improvements to the designs of computers using its microprocessors.
Years earlier, the firm had designed prototypes of these motherboards and by the time it
announced the Centrino program, it was making some motherboards, branding them, and
encouraging many of its business partners to make similar designs. The wireless capabilities
of a notebook had not been the focus on these earlier programs, so the announcement of the
Centrino program represented a shift in strategic aims and direction.27
Intel hoped that its endorsement would increase demand for wireless capabilities
within notebooks by, among other things, reducing weight and size while offering users
26

Specifically, it involves designing an appropriate chipset and wireless network adaptor, as well as the
Intel Microprocessor.
27
For history and analysis of Intel’s investments in different projects, including, but not necessarily
Centrino, and why its management chose to invest heavily in some complementary technologies and not
others, see, e.g., Gawer and Cusumano (2002), and Gawer and Henderson (2007).

17

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

simplicity and technical assurances in a standardized function. The firm also anticipated that
its branding would help sell notebooks using Intel chips and motherboard designs instead of
using microchips from Advanced Micro Devices (AMD). Furthermore, antenna and router
equipment makers anticipated that a standardized format for wireless notebooks might help
raise demand for their goods.
Intel’s motherboard designs could increase the efficiencies of computers, but that
benefit was not welcomed by every OEM who assembled PCs or other industry players.
Firms such as Texas Instruments and Intersil had lobbied earlier for different designs for the
802.11g upgrade, investing heavily in the efforts at committee 802.11. Neither of them had
intended to help Intel’s business, and neither of them wanted to see Intel increase its
influence over the designs that were deployed to most users.
Moreover, as Intel’s design became employed more frequently, it eliminated some
differences between OEMs and other component providers. Many of these firms, including
motherboard suppliers and card makers, in addition to the OEMs, resented losing both
control over their designs and did not want to lose the ability to strategically differentiate
their own designs. Other OEMs liked the Intel design, since it allowed the firms to
concentrate on other facets of their business.
Only Dell was able to put up any substantial resistance, however, insisting on selling
its own branded Wi-Fi products right next to Intel’s, thereby supporting some of the card
makers. Despite Dell’s resistance, the cooperation from antenna makers and (importantly)
users helped Intel reach its goals. By embedding the standards in its products, Intel made WiFi, or rather Centrino, easy to use, which proved popular with many users.
Intel ran into several crises at first, such as insufficient parts for the preferred design
and a trademark dispute over the use of its preferred symbol for the program. However, as
desired, management learned many things from the experience and met strategic milestones,
and subsequently, refined a large company-wide and industry-wide strategy. They initiated
several related follow-on projects, such as contributing to writing upgrades in IEEE
Committee 802.11 (to design 802.11n) and writing an upgrade to a whole new wireless
standard for longer ranges (to design 802.16, a.k.a. Wi-Max, and related, 802.20).
The Centrino example illustrates the array of deliberate firm activities taken during a
short period that built on top of learning from an earlier undirected economic experiment.

18

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

The activities in IEEE Committee 802.11 ended up affecting the activities of many other
firms, such as equipment manufacturers, laptop makers, chip makers, and coffee shops,
which then shaped new activities at the committee as well.
This example also illustrates that economic experiments can – and do – happen in
spite of overt conflict between firms. Those firms may be either direct competitors or
partners in value chain with diverging interests. Conflict transparently arises, as it did here,
when all can forecast that the success of one firm’s experiment adversely affects the business
fortunes of another.

III. CREATING VALUE

Firms expend costly resources on economic experiments, for instance, in assets and
personnel to either conduct directed economic experiments or to learn from market events.
In general, the private costs and benefits from economic experiments diverge from the
industry-wide costs and benefits, with industry benefits being higher than private benefits.
There are exceptions to that generality, however, and I consider them after analyzing the
determinants of the private costs and benefits.

III.1. Private costs and benefits from conducting experiments

By helping market participants learn about the nature of demand in quickly evolving
environments, companies can more effectively position their offerings and pricing structures.
Such lessons increase value by: (1) generating more revenue through improvement of an
existing service, (2) enhancing profits from lowering operation costs or avoiding higher
investment expenses, or (3) enhancing pricing power through targeting services to customers
better than rivals do. In an especially competitive setting, such lessons can (4) contribute to
raising the probability of survival by teaching a firm to avoid outcomes where rivals can outmaneuver them.

19

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

In general, many of these benefits cannot be measured. If they can be measured –
even partially – the private value of many lessons can be measured in terms of the additional
revenue it contributes to a firm’s business and/or the additional cost savings it generates.
Revenue might increase through one of several mechanisms. For instance, firms may
learn to alter pricing practices, and those changes will alter total revenues. The history of ISP
access pricing illustrates several examples. For example, the acceptable pricing norm among
most users for hourly limitations changed over time, as ISPs learned about the reaction of
different customer segments to distinct menus of choices. A similar statement could be made
for the norms concerning whether it was appropriate to apply a separate charge for phone
support or not to users who taxed the ISPs resources heavily.
Some changes can increase sales volume of sales or prices. That was seen during the
upgrade from 28K to 56K. Some firms gained a premium in their pricing. Some aspired to
gain new customers or reduce turnover among their existing customers. Over time the market
participants learned that the pricing premium was temporary, and the upgrade became part of
a technological race among all firms.
Pricing experiments often coincide with experiments regarding the range of services
offered. During the mid to late 1990s, for example, virtually all ISPs experimented with
changes to the standard bundle offered, such as default e-mail memory, instant messaging
support, and hosting services in which the ISP maintained Web pages for clients. Also, in
response to user requests, some local ISPs arranged for the availability of phone numbers in
other locales for traveling clients. A wide range of regional ISPs experimented with
performing services complementary to access, such as hosting services, networking services,
and Web design consultations.28 Some of these additional services offered immediate
opportunities for ISPs to explore ways to raise revenue, while others simply enhanced
customer retention rates, which indirectly shaped the elasticity of demand for access services.
Operational costs can be lowered as well. Firms might learn how to tailor investment,
e.g., how to allocate capacity of new modem banks to satisfy the targeted customer base.
Firms also may learn about appropriate procedures for doing business with one another –
e.g., developing procedures between two peering firms when they experience issues handing
data to one another.
28

See e.g., Greenstein (2000).

20

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Learning leading to cost reduction may be difficult to distinguish from learning that
leads to enhanced revenue. For instance, as dial-up ISPs learned from one another about the
efficient deployment of 56K modems, those who deployed it found they could charge a
modest price premium for faster service (approximately five dollars), but that that premium
disappeared in less than a year, after the modems became more common.29 The ambiguities
between costs and revenues also could arise with decisions about the scope of the firm. When
ISPs chose to maintain minimal home pages, for example, it could be viewed as a cost-saving
to the ISP. Yet, a modest investment in helping users customize those pages to their needs
(e.g., giving help with “My-Yahoo”) could be an investment that leads to greater customer
retention. Better customer retention eventually manifests as greater sales values and higher
firm prices, but it may be difficult to attribute a specific change in price or volume to only
that investment.
In general, the accumulation of experiments may support knowledge that plays a role
in later economic experiments. In that latter sense, an economic experiment may be part of a
broader positive cycle of experimentation.
Importantly, the lessons learned from an experiment may or may not have any
comparative value – i.e., in altering the value of a firm’s service in comparison to rivals. It
will have such value, generally speaking, if a firm uniquely learns a lesson and no other rival
does. It will not when all firms have it and, therefore, it does not support differentiation. The
example of the upgrade to 56 modems illustrates this notion. When it was rare, firms with
faster service charged a premium. That premium disappeared, however, as the upgrade
became common.

III.2. Industry-wide benefits

Two additional factors shape the benefits and costs from economic experiments at the
industry-wide level but do not shape costs and benefits at the private level. Generally
speaking, all of these are hard to measure. This section highlights two themes: (1) Consumers
reap some benefits from an experiment – in the form of lower prices and new services -- and
these benefits do not necessarily play any role in the benefits experienced by the firm who
29

For documentation of this, see Stranger and Greenstein (2007).

21

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

conducts a directed economic experiment. (2) One firm’s experiment shapes the actions of
another, an effect that can take many forms, and these do not directly show up in a firm’s
accounting. These are particularly hard to measure because one firm may benefit while
another incurs a substantial fraction of the cost.
Generally speaking, consumer benefits from economic experiments are difficult to
measure except when it leads directly to a decline in price for an existing service. In
practice, however, that is rare. Consumers may also benefit from higher quality goods,
better supply of services that previously did not exist, or thicker supply of products
tailored to niche demands, among many benefits for which no price may be recorded.
An especially difficult-to-measure cost and benefit is the learning that takes place
at all market participants as one participant learns from another. When a new service or
improvement is reasonably permanent, the firm who commercializes it may see returns to
the investment in the form of increases in final revenue or other strategic advantages. If a
new product or service is quickly imitated by all firms, it quickly becomes a standard
feature of doing business in a downstream market. The benefits from the new technology
are quickly passed onto consumers in the form of lower prices and/or better products. In
this case, the benefits to a firm do not appear as an increase in revenues but may not
appear as lower prices; but they exist nonetheless, in the form of losses the business
avoided, or better quality services, which match the quality found elsewhere.
By traditional economic reasoning, at least two externalities shape the difference
between private and industry-wide learning. There is an information externality between
firms, as when one firm’s directed experiment teaches another firm a lesson, or a set of
actions interact in an undirected experiment and teach every industry participant a lesson.
There is also an information externality over time, as when the lessons of prior experiments
generate lessons on which further experiments are built. In practice, these two externalities
are difficult to distinguish from one another.
The positive information externalities between firms take one of two forms. In one
case, what worked for one firm becomes known and imitated by others – e.g., success from
an experiment at an ISP in one rural location in 1996 implied it might be profitable in
another. Alternatively, what did not work for one firm becomes known and, therefore,
avoided – e.g., the difficulties with the first design for 802.11 become known from

22

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

experiences in 1997, leading equipment firms to delay building plans until a more suitable
design emerged and with institutional support for enforcing interoperability.
Negative information externalities take a common form. That is, a successful
experiment for one firm becomes known and implies a loss for someone else – e.g., Intel’s
Centrino success in 2003 implied a loss at wireless card makers. Similarly, Netzero’s
experience as an advertising-supported “free” ISP implied a loss at some incumbent ISPs,
such as Earthlink or Juno. These examples imply that the industry-wide benefits from an
experiment combine the positive return to this lessons at one firm (Intel/Netzero) with the
negative return at another (a card maker/Earthlink), as well as the incremental benefit that
goes to consumers (in the form of greater capabilities, new services, and/or lower prices).
Inter-temporal externalities also lead to divergence between private costs and benefits
and industry-wide costs and benefits. One party (in a directed economic experiment) or
several parties (in an undirected economic experiment) assume the cost of generating lessons
while many others gain the benefits later. That is, those who pay for lessons in an early
market are not necessarily those who use them most profitably in a later market, but no
contract between them governs the early investment.
An important feature of inter-temporal externalities is the asymmetries to the costs
and benefits of generating lessons about commercial failure. Lessons about how to avoid
commercial failure can be as valuable as those who employ them, but the firm whose failure
illustrates the lesson for others rarely, if ever, does so for that purpose, and almost never
under contract with the others who (later) gain the benefit of the lessons learned from the
failure. In an extreme case, a firm may learn a lesson, teach others from its failure, but go
bankrupt before it is able to use that lesson. Even though the lesson was expensive to the
stockholders of the firm that initiated the experiment, it was inexpensive to the survivors.
The history of Internet access is littered with examples of failures from which all
other firms learned. For example, it is now accepted wisdom that users did not desire only a
browser and phone numbers presented as if it were packaged software– as first marketed by
Spry networks in “Internet in a Box.” Rather, users quickly migrated to ISPs who offer a
different type of service with a different set of market features, combining local services with
software tailored to their immediate demands (and tailored to some needs users did not know
they had). It is also accepted wisdom that mass market users do not desire login names with

23

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

acronyms that are difficult to recall or do not relate to natural language names, as widely
commercialized by CompuServe, for example. Most users also valued avoiding technically
laborious set-up costs involving weeks of waiting, as embedded in early broadband services,
such as ISDN.30 The list goes on and on.
These details of industry-wide learning – both positive and negative externalities –
are not just the flotsam and residue of inexorable technical evolution, but, rather, these
lessons became the foundation for later operations. It is well known, for example, that AOL
learned a tremendous amount from the successes and failings of CompuServe and AT&T
Worldnet and many others, and later implemented those lessons to some success, though they
never paid the stockholders at CompuServe or Worldnet or any other ISP for new
information – indeed, that was especially true when they bought what remained of
CompuServe in 1999.
More generally, many of these externalities underpin the emergence of an undirected
economic experiment. When lessons spread between firms, then it is possible for every
participant to build on the lessons of others. The industry wide value from economic
experiments exceeds private value due to the prevalence of spreading lessons, i.e., the
prevalence of positive information externalities between firms and over time.
There are exceptions to such a generality, and these are historically common enough
to merit consideration in practice. The most interesting exception arises when there is the
potential for a misalignment between costs and benefit, as when one firm incurs the costs of
an economic experiment while another gains the benefit. That is especially potentially
problematic when the negative externalities are present and large, that is, when one firm’s
private gain simultaneously reduces benefits for many, imposing a large burden on others.

III.3. Spreading lessons

Do different types of lessons exhibit different patterns of spreading after an
experiment? Answering this question provides an important step towards understanding
when private and industry-wide costs and benefits tend to diverge the most and least. This

30

For example, in their estimates of demand for broadband, Savage and Waldman (2005) find that most
users are willing to pay a considerable fee to avoid set-up hassles and achieve a reliable service.

24

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

section will use the historical experience of ISPs and Wi-Fi firms to highlight three themes:
(1) There are four different types of lessons; (2) They differ in their tendencies to spread; (3)
Most lessons that are incremental in scope, but a few are transformative.
There are four distinct types of lessons. The first are market lessons. These pertain to
norms and patterns of market-based actions, such as how to write a contract that users find
acceptable, and how to price services, and so on. Second, technical lessons pertain to the
design of a piece of equipment—for example, knowing how to configure Wi-Fi so that it
works in the type of space/location at all times that fits the supplier’s needs. Third, heuristic
lessons combine both technical knowledge with either market or operational knowledge
about how employees behave in firms and how customers react to firm behavior—for
example, knowing how to deploy Wi-Fi for a maximal set of users. Fourth, complex lessons
are marketing and operational lessons that involve many functions inside an organization—
for example, knowing how to integrate the use of Wi-Fi into a wide variety of other
offerings.
Private incentives to generate economic experiments will be less than the industry
benefits in situations where lessons spread quickly and others benefit, as occurs with
technical lessons, market lessons, and some heuristic lessons. Several examples will
illustrate these points.
In 1995 the technical and market lessons were often rather trivial for a former
bulletin-board firm to learn. The technical steps between an ISP and bulletin-board firm were
relatively incremental—many firms just added a connection to the newly privatized Internet
backbone.31 Generally, these technical skills were common among those who operated
bulletin boards. The related market steps were also incremental. Most bulletin board firms
already had procedures in place to, for example, implement billing, publicize their services to
local users, or address user service calls. Though the market actions changed, these were
relatively easy to execute within existing organizational procedures.
Technical lessons tend to spread easily because they tend to become codified

31

Most of these vendors already knew how to operate the basic building blocks for a point of presence (or
POP) and support a basic service. The details of such a POP involved operating modem banks, servers, and
managing traffic control.

25

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

quickly.32 It is almost tautological that such codification leads to easier transmission of the
knowledge. For example, lessons about the design for a modem bank, a server, or other
modem equipment became codified almost immediately, and for sound economic reasons.
Most equipment suppliers in competitive markets would not consider selling equipment if
information about it were not codified because most buyers demand it as a condition of
purchase. Related, vendors of equipment also would have developed a set of marketing
parameters for their buyers, guiding them towards best-practice deployment.
Others lessons pertain to heuristic knowledge about how to operate that equipment
efficiently. For example, lessons about how to manage a Wi-Fi router at peak usage levels
might not be known initially after a new piece of equipment became available for use, but
such lessons would be learned through trial and error. As it turned out, those lessons spread
to different coffee shops through a variety of mechanisms – i.e., franchises communicated
with one another, bulletin boards emerged to support different types of users-groups, and the
Wi-Fi association invested in support activities as well.
Several factors affect the speed at which heuristic lessons spread. On the one hand,
some heuristic lessons spread slowly because, as sources of potential competitive advantage,
they are guarded by the firms that first discover them. For example, firms guard their
strategies for how to deploy equipment efficiently and they may also guard information that
indicates details about their future designs. On the other hand, some firms, such as
equipment providers, have strong incentives to spread lessons, since their spread contributes
to further sales. Such tension was inherent in the diffusion of Wi-Fi, for example. While
numerous channels opened to provide information to support deployment of frontier
applications, some equipment manufacturers guarded the coding that was relevant to the next
generation of designs, called “mesh-networks.”33
User and vendor organizations also shape spreading of lessons. Most dial-up ISPs
used similar software tools for monitoring users, particularly after these showed up in the

32

In this context, “codified” refers to an idea put in a structured format that another technically trained
individual can understand without having the author present – e.g., words, mathematical formulas, plans,
pictures or professional drawings. See, e.g., the discussion in Nelson (2007).
33
Sandvig, Young and Meinrath (2004) document the tension between equipment firms and mesh-network
user groups. The firms guarded their code, delaying experimentation at user groups, because the firms were
also anticipating that they would deploy such designs in the near future.

26

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

discussion boards at an Open Source project, such as Apache, the most popular web server.34
The community effectively coordinated many innovative efforts for dial-up ISPs in the mid
to late 1990s, by sharing multiple upgrades and fixes to the source code among ISPs. This is
far from the only example. Designs embedded in standards in many organizations also
contributed to sharing of lessons. Organizations, such as the IETF and W3C, for instance,
also facilitated the movement of lessons.35
The variance in idiosyncratic factors also can slow the codification of such heuristic
lessons. First, one community of users may differ from another. For example, peak ISP usage
occurs around the same time of day in different locations, but the similarities end there.
Surfing behavior varies according to gender, family status, age, education, and income of the
members of the household, the sum of which varies across cities, and even from one vendor
to another within the same city. Such variety interferes with finding commonalities in, for
example, marketing strategies (for a new feature) across locations or vendors.
In addition, a heuristic operating rule established to resolve other operational issues
might interfere with the functionality of a new lesson. For example, most ISPs wanted a way
to limit overuse of capacity, especially when users failed to log off after ceasing or delaying
use. Some ISPs instituted rules for automating log offs after short periods of nonuse, while
others did not because users resented it (and, as a result, would leave for other vendors).
Some vendors instituted special clauses into their contracts that eliminated “unlimited use,”
authorizing them to charge penalties for exceeding especially high monthly usage (e.g., over
100 hours a month). Modem capacity usage differed depending on these rules. Any heuristic
lesson about how to operate new equipment at capacity would have to take into account such
rules, but such variety interfered with uniform rules for all operators.
Not all lessons can be reduced to simple heuristics—some are complex lessons. These
might emerge, for example, from lengthy investigations by firms seeking to lower cost or
generate extra revenue. They often are interdependent, where one operational goal reinforces
the other, or associated with unique firm features, such as scale. In either case, complex
34

As the Apache founders make clear on their own web page, in February 1995 they sought to improve and
coordinate further improvements to the NCSA server software, which had lost its key personnel. The
NCSA tried to revive the software in April, but then quickly cooperated with the Apache effort. See
http://httpd.apache.org/ABOUT_APACHE.html. Accessed March, 2007.
35
See Simcoe (2006) for a general analysis of many of the actions at the IETF, and a view about why
resolution became more difficult over time.

27

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

lessons cannot be easily summarized by a simple heuristic rule-of-thumb or by an answer to a
single question. Almost by definition, these lessons resist immediate codification and are the
slowest to move from firm to firm.
As with heuristic lessons, ISPs hesitate to share complex business lessons. For
example, they would not lightly discuss with other firms which lines of business best
complemented their access business. Firms also hesitate to share information about what sort
of costly activities build customer retention most effectively—for example, did users have
greater willingness to pay incrementally for phone service or more free storage for e-mail,
and which of these would users appreciate as a standard part of their contract?
ISPs also were hesitant to share their assessments of the costs, user habits, and further
prospects for new services. For example, AOL did not openly share the lessons it had learned
about the value of the instant messaging service it operated before making a bid in June of
1998 to buy Mirabilis, operator of ICQ, which at that point was the largest free standing
unaffiliated instant messaging service in the Internet. AOL kept its views secret for obvious
reasons. Had it discussed them openly, it would have affected the bargaining prior to the
merger, possibly not in AOL’s favor.
As with heuristic lessons, the same factors interfered with codification and the
spreading of complex lessons, namely, idiosyncrasies arising from differences across
communities and between other operating rules. That does not means complex business
lessons never spread. Rather, they spread with more effort and at greater cost. In general,
they spread more slowly and to fewer firms at any point in time.
These examples support a modified version of the commonly stated canard that “all
ideas are public goods.” Rather, some ideas are public goods, and, due to the conditions
shaping the spread of lessons, some remain privately held for a short period. Even while
technical information and market lessons move quickly between locations and firms, the
ability of a firm to prevent direct rivals from imitating its business actions immediately slows
others. Some complex lessons do not tend to spread to others, at least for a short time.
These examples show that lessons differ in the extent of the benefit others receive
from their creation. Most lessons involve incremental changes, so in most practical
circumstances the effect of spreading lessons becomes apparent only after accumulation of
many. Yet, that is not always so. Because some ideas spread quickly to others, a non-

28

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

incremental lesson – either a market, technical or heuristic lesson – can have high value to
many industry participants, especially when that idea would not have arisen otherwise.36 Call
such an idea an “iconoclastic” one. It is non-incremental in scope and differs dramatically
from common practice at the time of introduction. If it succeeds it can be transformative for
the industry, especially if it spreads widely. Almost by definition, it is rare to observe many
firms with successful implementation of iconoclastic economic experiments in practice.
This type of economic experiment is important, rare, and valuable. When lessons
spread from such experiments, their effect can be dramatic, yielding large benefits to many
firms and end-users. For example, bulletin board providers played the role of iconoclast
commercializer in the rise of the Internet, diffusing browser-based service into a market
where many other large incumbents had considered such a service to not be valuable. The
lessons learned by bulletin board firms covered more than just technical advance (and they
certainly developed those in abundance). The first generation of ISPs also developed
economic experiments that resulted in numerous market and heuristic lessons. Since so few
incumbent firms recognized the importance of the browser prior to its commercialization, I
conclude that these innovations otherwise would not have arisen as quickly and put into
practice in the economy had the experimentation by these ISPs not taken place.37
In general, I conclude that, though there is a range of possibilities, for the most part
the industry wide cost and benefit from economic experiments exceeds the private cost and
benefit. That conclusion motivates an approach to policy, one that focuses on creating value
by encouraging economic experiments. The approach seeks to remove barriers to conducting
economic experiments, with the general presumption that more economic experiments
benefits society, most often incrementally and occasionally by a substantial amount.

IV. REINTERPRETING NET NEUTRALITY
Does an emphasis on economic experiments provide insight about the specific types
36

The studies of lead users also highlight a related observation. That is, a lead user with an unusual
enthusiasm or desire to push in a new direction may become the catalyst for exploring new designs and
non-incremental business possibilities, which later grow into wide uses. See Von Hippel (1988) about lead
users, and Sandvig (2004, 2007) about wireless technology lead users in particular.
37
For more on this theme, see e.g., Greenstein (2007).

29

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

of policies that would encourage innovation over time in communications markets? As an
illustration, I consider issues found in a contemporary debate in communications policy that
goes under the heading of “net neutrality.” In practice, this debate has become quite broad.38
Instead of examining every aspect of it, I concentrate on how policy shapes the rate and
direction of economic experiments. Such a framing narrows the scope of the investigation but
focuses it in a useful fashion. Rather than focusing on the distribution of value between
market participants, as this debate often does, I focus on the links between policy, economic
experiments, and value creation. This focus exposes strengths and weaknesses in the most
common arguments, as well as raises important open questions. In general, this approach
motivates policies aimed at identifying negative externalities and tries to use policy to limit
their occurrence.39

IV.1. Origins of the net neutrality debate

Many facets of the net neutrality debate find antecedents in recent history in Internet
markets. In the late 1990s, cable firms began deploying Internet access over cable lines and
telephone companies began deploying digital subscriber lines (DSL), principally as
asymmetric DSL, with different bandwidths for downloading and uploading content. Users
began to adopt these options in large numbers after 2000. The fraction of Internet households
with broadband grew from less than five percent in the summer of 2000 to approximately
thirty percent of households in late 2006.40
To net neutrality advocates, the growth in the importance of broadband carriers raises
issues about whether policies should allow broadband carriers to have the discretion to
conduct economic experiments without restraint. These concerns need to be understood in
context. The last major legislative initiative for communications was the 1996 Telecom Act.
Numerous provisions regarding telephone regulation and competition took primary urgency
38

There are many opinions about which recent changes most informs the present debate. See e.g., Lessig
(1999), Weiser (2003), Alleman and Rappoport (2006), Atkinson and Weiser (2006), Wu and Yoo (2006),
Owen (2007) or Speta (2007). This is far from an exhaustive list.
39
Another approach, which I will not discuss, might argue for changes in intellectual property (or related
mechanisms) to align the private incentives for conducting directed economic experiments with the
industry-wide returns. There are numerous challenges with implementing such a proposal in general and/or
in this specific context. For discussion of one such proposal, see Abromowicz and Duffy (2007).
40
The first number comes from NTIA (2004), while the latter comes from Pew (2006).

30

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

during the writing and passage of the Act. The Act focused on introducing competition into
telephony and designing a structure to replace the waning influence of Judge Harold Greene,
who had presided over many regulatory rulings for the telephone industry for many years
after the AT&T divestiture. The growth of the Internet was not ignored, but it was not central
to the legislation.
Prior to the Act, an “information service” was exempt from common carrier
regulation and obligations. In the past such exemptions had supported robust economic
experimentation in private equipment markets (e.g., telephone handsets or routers) and
related services (e.g., bulletin boards). To make a very long story short, these exemptions
also nurtured competition in the Internet access market, though a fair reading of history
suggests this last outcome was an unintended but happy accident, not a deliberate regulatory
goal.41
The Act borrowed many elements from these prior regulatory practices. After its
passage these policies were challenged, but questions about Internet policy were rarely
considered in isolation from other policy issues about voice telephony (which is not a
surprise because the latter involve much larger economic activity in terms of revenue). In that
sense, litigation concerning the implementation of the 1996 Telecom Act over the next
decade considered many open questions that touched on core features of regulation for
Internet access markets, but typically those discussions became wrapped up in fights over,
for example, access charges, rights to unbundled elements of a local telephone company’s
network, and the rights of local telephone monopolies to enter each other’s territory.42
These developments allowed an open question to fester in the late 1990s: what
regulatory obligations and defaults govern broadband carriers, if any, other than general legal
obligations that apply to all firms, such as contracting law?43 This question coincided with
41

Though that outcome arose out of specific regulatory cases and markets, these rules were not imposed
with a vision of the Internet. See e.g., Cannon (2001), Noll (2002) or Owen (2007). For further analysis of
how these contributed to innovative behavior of Internet access market participants, see Greenstein (2007).
42
This statement necessarily simplifies a complex history. For example, for ISPs and Internet access the
first large change of federal policy at the FCC concerned the practice of “reciprical compensation” for
CLECs, many of whom offered services to ISPs. This ruling was issued in early 1999. For various views of
this and subsequent rulings, see e.g., Owen (2002), Sidek (2003), Goldstein (2005), Neuchterlein and
Weiser (2005), Frieden (2006), Greenstein (2007), or Speta (2007).
43
There also was uncertainty about the legal obligations of ISPs and hosting companies for their content.
Much of this was clarified by litigation involving the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, and, particularly,
the Communications Decency Act, a section inserted as a part of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 that

31

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

another issue in broadband regulation. Cable firms were already exempt from common
carrier obligations throughout the 1990s, while telephone companies were not exempt. As
cable firms and telephone firms came into competition for provision of broadband to
households, it was apparent they faced different costs due to different regulatory
obligations.44
By the late 1990s, federal policy could have taken one of two directions (away from
the status quo). Either regulation could be imposed on cable firms so they became regulated
more like telephone firms or regulation could be removed from telephone firms so they
became regulated more like cable. In the first type of policies cable firms would be required
to interconnect their networks to others. In the second type of policies telephone firms would
be exempt from interconnection obligations for Internet traffic carried over broadband lines.
As it turned out, federal policy moved a step towards opening up cable networks a bit
(as a condition for the Time-Warner merger), but then moved in the opposite direction a short
time later, under its new chair, Michael Powell, who sought to initiate a broad range of
changes to the FCC’s approach to regulating convergence between voice, data and video. In
2002, the FCC ruled that Internet service over cable lines was an “information service.” This
ruling effectively allowed cable firms to keep their networks closed to ISPs beyond the
specific agreements made for the merger. Though challenged in court, this ruling survived a
Supreme Court review several years later (in a case labeled Brand-X for short).45 Several
years after the FCC adopted the Brand-X ruling, broadband services from telephone
companies became classified as information services as well. The signal decision came in
August, 2005, when the FCC reclassified DSL facilities from local telephone companies.
This is not to say that the FCC stood silent about the regulation of carrier conduct.
Rather, it initiated an approach that differed from the existing precedent. Michael Powell
issued some guiding principles about how Internet carriers should behave, calling these the

came under immediate court challenge after passage. Though the challenges to the latter Act originally
involved principles of free speech, the relevant cases ended up clarifying the role of intermediaries. See, in
particular, the summary in http://www.cybertelecom.org/cda/cda3.htm, or the timeline of events
http://www.cybertelecom.org/cda/cdaref.htm. Accessed April, 2007.
44
None of this was a mystery. Many observers in the 1990s forecast the need to end this asymmetry. For a
summary of this debate at the beginning of the millenium, see e.g., Hausman et al (2001) Noll (2002),
Owen (2002), or Neuchterlein and Weiser (2005).
45
See the summary in http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/04-277.ZS.html.

32

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

“four freedoms.”46 These underwent a change with the appointment of his successor
chairman, Kevin Martin, who issued a set of declarations on September 23rd, 2005. These
declare that users should be able to access the entire lawful Internet, along with a few other
principles.47
Net neutrality advocates were motivated by the perceived lack of restraints on
broadband carriers that emerged after Brand-X (and related decisions) and were particularly
unsatisfied with Martin’s principles. Unlike typical FCC rulings, these declarations of
principles were, and are, just that -- declarations. They have some force, but they do not have
the weight of regulatory rulings or precedent behind them.48 They also are vague on details.
In particular, the principles do not describe minimal acceptable quality, how it will be
enforced, or what process the FCC expects to use to adjudicate a dispute.
Despite such ambiguities, these principles have influenced key events. For example,
near the end of its filings, AT&T (formerly SBC) suggested conditions it would accept in
exchange for the FCC’s permission to merge with Bell South. It agreed to follow the set of
FCC principles for DSL providers for the next 24 months after its merger.49
Reinterpreted through the lens of economic experiments, this brief history of
broadband regulation shows a trend in the last half decade: regulatory rules have been
changed to raise the incentives for directed economic experiments by telephone firms and
cable firms when they act as Internet broadband carriers. Is this trend worrisome? Net
neutrality advocates believe it is, though usually this concern is articulated in language that
only partially overlaps with that used to analyze economic experiments. I next consider how

46

Specifically, these are: (1) Freedom to Access Content: Consumers should have access to their choice of
legal content; (2) Freedom to Use Applications: Consumers should be able to run applications of their
choice; (3) Freedom to Attach Personal Devices: Consumers should be permitted to attach any devices they
choose to the connection in their homes; (4) Freedom to Obtain Service Plan Information: Consumers
should receive meaningful information regarding their service plans. See Powell, Michael (2004).
47
Specifically, these are: (1) Consumers are entitled to access the lawful Internet content of their choice;
(2) Consumers are entitled to run applications and use services of their choice, subject to the needs of law
enforcement; (3) Consumers are entitled to connect their choice of legal devices that do not harm the
network; (4) Consumers are entitled to competition among network providers, application and service
providers, and content providers.
48
A useful summary comes from James Speta (2007), who says, “A policy statement is a statement of how
the agency intends to exercise its regulatory discretion. It is not binding on the agency, and any party
against whom an enforcement action may be brought can defend by arguing that is action (even if contrary
to the policy statement) did not violate the applicable statute and substantive regulation.”
49
Similar conditions emerged from negotiations for the Verizon/MCI and SBC/AT&T mergers. These are
due to expire in October 2007. The conditions for the AT&T and Bell South merger expire in mid 2009.

33

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

to reinterpret this debate through that lens.

IV.2. Reinterpreting the starting point for debate

The usual starting point for the debate about net neutrality begins with an analysis of
the state of demand behavior and supply conditions. These concerns get combined in the
following open question: does a cable or local telephone firm have enough market power to
retain or lose many customers when it fails to innovate, offer lower prices, or experiment
with new services?
The answer matters for understanding the process of value creation because, if users
can directly punish providers for higher prices or inadequate service, then broadband
providers will be restrained by the usual discipline of the market. That is, when these firms
take undesirable actions, grumbling customers will take their business elsewhere. If users
tend not to leave their providers after higher prices and inadequate service, then the
competitive incentives to innovative will tend to be weak. In other words, from an economics
perspective there is little to debate if competitive supply characterizes carrier markets.
As it turns out, the majority of customers – households and small businesses – do not
reside in locations served by many providers. Moreover, the number of these broadband
users should continue to grow in the next few years, because adoption of broadband has not
yet slowed – especially among households.
More specifically, despite a contraction in the provision of competitive telephony and
data carrier service after the competitive crash of 2000, as of this writing, most large
businesses in central urban locations in the United States can choose among many providers
of broadband services. If there is an issue with market power in the provision of broadband
service, it exists for everyone else – i.e., small and medium enterprises and households
outside of very dense city locations. For a variety of reasons related to the costs of building
broadband, most of these potential users have access to no more than two broadband
suppliers—a cable company and a local telephone company. In less dense settings, there is
only one supplier, if any.50 The next-best alternative, satellite, is much more expensive. Until
further wireless devices deploy (such as Wi-Max), most observers expect it to stay this way.
50

For a discussion of the reasons, see e.g., Greenstein (2005).

34

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

While large businesses generate a large amount of traffic and, also, account for a
larger proportion of revenue than their numbers, they are also very small in numbers. As of
the last count, there are just over 150 thousand establishments in the US with 100 or more
employees in the private non-farm sector of the US economy. In contrast, there were over
seven million business establishments of smaller size (87 percent of those are under twenty
employees), and 113 million households.51 There are no hard statistics about business use of
the Internet by all types of businesses, but most data indicates that businesses of all sizes
have high rates of adoption.52 More concretely, most recent statistics indicate that over 30
percent of households have a broadband connection at home.53 Most analysts expect many
households with dial-up connection will convert to broadband within the next several years.54
There is a related open question about the intensity of competitive behavior between
cable firms and DSL providers as they compete for new customers. Does this type of
competition for new revenue support strong incentives to innovate? There is disagreement
among debaters. This disagreement survives because the current empirical evidence for or
against any hypothesis is mixed. There is little information about consumer switching
behavior or the cross-price elasticities between different modes of broadband.55 On the one
hand, there has been a recent and well-documented build-out of facilities to serve new
adopters.56 On the other hand, evidence about pricing does not find anything dramatic: there
has been no significant drop in the official US consumer price index for the component of
Internet access devoted to broadband over the last eight years.57
51

See Statistical Abstract of the US, 2007, Table 738, Establishments, Employees, and Payroll, and Table
56, Households, Families and Subfamilies.
52
Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2003) present estimates for Internet use by establishments with 100
or more employees at the end of 2000. They find rates of adoption close to 90% for simple applications,
such as browsing and email, with some variation across industries between 80% and 99%. They discuss
likely adoption rates for smaller businesses, noting, for example, surveys of households who “access the
Internet at work” show levels between 60 and 80%, depending on the survey year. See NTIA (2004).
53
Broadband adoption in the US, Pew Charitable Trust (2006) or NTIA (2004).
54
See, e.g., Pew Charitable Trusts (2006).
55
The literature supports a range of inferences. For example, see Rappoport et al (2002) or Hausman et al
(2001) for evidence that dial-up prices does not act as much of a constraint on broadband prices. Using a
different approach, Savage and Waldman (2005) find a high willingess to pay for broadband among a
certain set of users, but do not estimate elasticities for the marginal user.
56
Both the FCC surveys and the Pew Charitable Trust surveys find a large growth in Internet lines for
households in which virtually all of that growth occurred after 2000. See, e.g., Federal Communications
Commission (2007), Table 3, and Pew Charitable Trusts (2006).
57
This index focuses on households, not business expense, so it is only partially informative. Between the
end of 1997, when the index first begins, and 2006, when the most recent annual data is available, the price

35

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

There is an additional and distinct concern that often gets confounded with the above
points – whether a firm with market power in its retail Internet markets can shape innovative
behavior in other parts of the Internet. On questions about innovation the emphasis on
economic experiments yields new insights. The next section addresses that topic.

IV.3. Future Scenarios for economic experiments

A focus on economic experiments identifies three overlapping concerns in the
discussion about net neutrality. In general, few of these concerns apply to settings where
carriers only inhabit carrier markets. Instead, most apply to settings where the scope of
carrier interests extends beyond just data. Here these are labeled as concerns about the
inequity scenario, the mixed incentive scenario, and the less-innovative content scenario.
The inequity scenario: Every futurist forecasts improvement in broadband
technologies. Futurists foresee multiple tiers of service in retail markets: a low-price, lowquality option; and at least one high-price, high-quality option. Users are expected to
segment themselves among the options. Bandwidth hogs will pay more for the resources they
use.
On the surface this forecast would not seem to contain any features that stir
controversy. Many markets work this way, so why not broadband? The debate becomes
provocative with a couple additional pieces of speculation. First, many futurists forecast that
access firms will imitate the marketing behavior of cable television firms. For example, the
premium tier of Internet service might include proprietary Internet video on demand, other
IPTV (Internet Protocol Television) of various forms, and instant messaging with proprietary
webcams, all arranged and supplied by the access firm for high-tier users.
Net neutrality advocates argue that a carrier with market power has incentives to
encourage purchases of the highest tier, where the profit margins are more lucrative. In this
scenario, broadband firms will neglect the other tiers in comparison. That is, they will put
together a bland basic bundle and invest all marketing and organizational resources in the
more profitable high-priced bundles. Moreover, there is a concern that over time the firms
index dropped 7.8 percent. The only dramatic change occured in the late fall of 2006 and early 2007.
However, this fall in the price index had nothing to do a drop in broadband prices in late 2006. It occurred
because AOL, a dial-up firm with a large market share, dropped its subscription price by 100%.

36

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

will shift most of their budgets to economic experiments for the higher tier, improving it with
each new lesson, and not performing the same activities for the basic tier.
Net neutrality advocates argue that that several years of investment at the upper tier
will lead to an advanced Internet that remains available to only a small part of society. On the
one hand, this is plausible on the surface. Mass-market users might not first experience new
applications arising from new economic experiments. Fewer economic experiments will
yield fewer lessons aimed at the mass market, resulting in a cycle of experimentation that
reinforces the inequality.
On the other hand, many historical examples demonstrate that economic experiments
aimed at one segment of users often spread to other segments. In other words, it is not
obvious why lessons learned in the upper tier will remain exclusively there.
The concern about inequity motivates various policy proposals. For instance, the
extant literature has debated the merits of proposals to prevent price discrimination at the
retail level. Reinterpreted through the lens of economic experiments, such a proposal will
introduce distortions to investment, such as economic experiments to develop other
instruments for achieving similar ends – i.e., directed experiments aimed at developing
services for achieving price discrimination in spite of it not being allowed. For example, it
would induce broadband firms to invent proprietary software applications that generate high
margins and that sort between high and low bandwidth users. Generally speaking, such
investments are wasteful because they would be motivated by a desire to undo the effect of a
regulation.
In summary, the concerns of the inequity scenario receive little support in the
economic experiments framework. Lessons learned in one segment likely would move to
another and imposing retail price regulation would induce distortions.
Mixed incentive scanerio: This scenario begins from the premise that most broadband
carriers have their own voice service. That motivates an open question: why would a
broadband firm undertake an economic experiment that deliberately helps the market
interests of another provider of voice over IP (VoIP) that competes with the access firm’s
own services? Wouldn’t a broadband firm simply watch what another firm does, then imitate
it by offering its own service, kicking the competitor off its own lines? These questions arise
because broadband carriers are a complement to someone else’s production of service that

37

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

substitutes for the carrier’s own service. That situation creates poor incentives for the carrier
to support the other firm.
Net neutrality advocates see their suspicions confirmed in a recent regulatory case
over the must-carry obligations of firms to VoIP providers (called Madison River).58 If net
neutrality advocates are to be believed, many such conflicts are just around the corner. Many
are forecast after the expiration of the conditions imposed for telephone mergers.
Since the economics of this scenario are easily understood, this is the one case that
most lends itself to traditional regulatory approaches, such as restrictions on incumbent
behavior or limits to incumbent lines of business. Opponents say that the traditional
approaches are too restrictive on incumbent action and move too slowly to permit carriers to
conduct viable economic experiments. They say that Madison River is just such a case where
the four principles worked well. The FCC did intervene to stop the blocking of VoIP.
In the economic experiments framework, these concerns receive attention for one
primary reason: a broadband firm can adopt actions that reduce the imposition of negative
externalities (on itself) by limiting economic experiments that others can generate. Had one
firm been allowed to do this, then others would have followed. The foregone industry-wide
gains from these economic experiments could be large if a broadband firm adopts policies
that have wide impact on many other firms. That concern justifies policy intervention if a
suitable intervention exists.
Net neutrality advocates have argued that one way to regulate such mixed incentives
is to specify acceptable network management practices. Acceptable practices include, for
example, blocking viruses, authenticating customers, or managing traffic to give high quality
service to the greatest number of users by restricting the use of the network by bandwidth
hogs. Unacceptable practices include, for example, blocking competitor traffic or prohibiting
or restricting attachments from competitors if these provide a competitive advantage to the
carrier’s commercial interest.
There is an open question whether this list of acceptable management practices
should include requiring broadband carriers to release information to other content providers
if content firms claim to need it to mount an effective application that competes with those

58

See the review of this case in Atkinson and Weiser (2006) or Speta (2007). This case principally
concerned the rights of a broadband firm to block voice over IP.

38

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

sponsored by the carrier. I return to this question in the next section.
Net neutrality opponents argue that lists of acceptable actions are easier to make in
general than enforce in their specifics, and many practices have ambiguous implications for
learning behavior.59 In addition, there is an argument that enforcing any set of rules will
impose a laborious regulatory and legal process on all parties, reducing the extent of
experimentation by everyone.60
In summary, the lens of economic experiments does not settle many of these debates
in their specifics. Rather, this lens highlights one issue: there are settings where broadband
carriers can take actions which impose negative externalities on many others. Seen in that
light, this lens highlights a key open question: how could such negative externalities be
addressed while also permitting/encouraging carriers to conduct economic experiments? I
will say more about this question after addressing the third worrisome future scenario.
Less innovative content cycle: This scenario concerns the incentive of broadband
firm to charge different rates to different content providers. It overlaps with concerns about a
broadband carrier’s incentive to create new applications or new business alliances. Net
neutrality advocates worry about a firm with market power making such deals without
restraint.
Net neutrality advocates often begin discussing this issue by quoting Ed Whitacre,
CEO of AT&T (formerly SBC), who declared in an unchecked moment “Now what [many
content providers] would like to do is use my pipes for free, but I ain’t going to let them do
that because we have spent this capital and we have to have a return on it. So there’s going to
have to be some mechanisms for these people who use these pipes to pay for the portion
they’re using. Why should they be allowed to use my pipes?”61
The extant literature has debated whether the basic economics of this statement apply
in a wide range of situations or might be flawed in some circumstances. As it turns out, this
debate has implications for an analysis of economic experiments.
Standard price theory suggests that if a firm can price discriminate at the retail level,
it may not necessarily gain from charging content providers different wholesale rates. The
reasoning is quite established: if there is only a finite amount of value available, there is no
59

A useful summary of some of these issues can be found in Bauer (2006).
For various articulations of this argument, see, e.g., Noll (2002), Wu and Yoo (2006), Owen (2007).
61
Quoted in O’Connell (2005).
60

39

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

way to double dip – i.e., a firm cannot increase the amount of value available in the value
chain. So goes this argument, firms will try to extract value by any means possible, and
attempts to prevent it just lead to distortions. For example, a carrier might not be able to
segment its population perfectly using only retail segmentation strategies, in which case
wholesale pricing can be a useful instrument for supplemental value extraction.62 This line of
reasoning concludes that there is no reason to worry about whether a provider takes its value
in the retail end or wholesale/connection charge; it is the same value in either place.
Farrell and Weiser (2003) challenge this line of reasoning, providing an extensive list
of plausible reasons why a carrier might want to price discriminate both at the retail level and
at the wholesale level. Of most relevant to the less innovative-content scenario, they provide
reasons why wholesale price discrimination can play a strategic role to further a carrier’s
interest. It can be used to reduce the competitiveness of supply, raising a rival’s cost by, for
example, raising (directly) the costs of reaching end users for whom both the content
provider and carrier compete. Such action is especially damaging to society when new
entrants can commercialize service in ways that make it superior to the incumbents’, an
outcome incumbents might seek to delay.
Reinterpreted through the lens of economic experiments, the net-neutrality debate
thus takes issue with the premise behind the double-dipping logic. That is, economic
experiments can lead to the possibility that total value (to be split among carriers and content
providers) is not fixed. It can be higher or lower if carriers take action. Particularly
worrisome are situations where carriers take actions that are privately beneficial – either to
protect existing markets or related commercial investments and relationships – and have the
consequence of reducing the incentives of other firms to conduct economics experiments that
could create value.
This concern borrows themes from the prior analysis of mixed incentives. After
signing deals with content providers, a carrier has an incentive to protect its own commercial
interests and directed experiments, pricing in a way to disadvantage other potential providers
of new Internet applications. In other words, a carrier takes the position as a complement in
production to someone else’s service that potentially substitutes for a service they or a

62

Or, in the event that regulation prevents retail price discrimination, charging different wholesale prices to
different content providers could make up for some of the shortfall.

40

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

business partner provide. Carriers also can choose to enter service markets where they can
use their discretion to disadvantage a potential competitor.
Numerous hypothetical scenarios in the net neutrality debate spin variations of this
concern. Once an access firm has an economic relationship with an adventuresome video
site, what is to stop it from sharing revenue if it steers traffic to the partner? What is to stop
the access firm from excluding from its enhanced tier any competitor to the preferred partner
site, even a young YouTube? Net neutrality advocates worry that business will become more
difficult for young experimental sites that do not (or cannot) prearrange contracts with
broadband firms. They worry that the bargaining costs of making deals with carriers after
demonstrated success will interfere with the incentive to innovate in the first place.
Seen through the lens of economic experiments, there are two concerns. First, a
carrier can use pre-innovation contracting to generate market conditions that limit entry of
innovative content providers. Second, carriers can use post-innovation bargaining to
strategically aid their competitive position. There are a variety of reasons why both of these
are a general concern, because the carriers may intend to imitate content providers, may
intend to compete through provision of their own service, or may intend to compete with
alliance with another content provider. And there are a variety of ways for a carrier to take
such action.
This lens raises an important qualifying point. These hypothetical scenarios are not
complete arguments unless they compare one counterfactual outcome against another
appropriate counterfactual. In other words, while a broadband carrier might discourage some
content firms, a complete analysis must recognize that carriers might use their discretion to
encourage others with whom it can coordinate an economic experiment. That is, a broadband
carrier has an incentive to use private contracting to generate economic experiments that
benefit its business. Even if the worry about carrier contracting behavior is correctly placed,
it has to be compared against the additional contracting carriers will conduct to support
directed economic experiments. The comparison between industry-wide experiments under
these two hypothetical situations will involve both positive and negative.
Advocates call for regulations requiring broadband carriers give services to others at
the same cost as they give their own divisions. This includes a ban on exclusive deals by
carriers with content providers. Advocates also call for transparent policies from carriers

41

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

about how they treat the traffic of other parties. As seen in other aspects of the debate,
opponents to such provisions see such regulations doing more harm than good, and they
anticipate that regulations will reduce a carrier’s incentives to conduct direct economic
experiments, with a concomitant reduction in benefits to their users and to others learning the
lessons that spread.
Interpreted through the lens of economic experiments, the open question for this
scenario is similar to that for the mixed incentives scenario: What policies will address
concerns about a carrier’s incentive to shape the learning behavior of others, and,
simultaneously what policies will permit/encourage a carrier to continue to conduct
economic experiments?

IV.4. A proposal for a three-part test

Policy can play a role nurturing economic experiments. Communications policy did
in historical circumstances. However, it played this role as a happy accident in the past, as
was seen with the Internet access market. The lens of economic experiments focuses
attention on a key difference: it focuses on policy orienting towards that goal and explicitly
committing to it.
Reinterpreted through this lens, what is the principal challenge faced by a deliberate
policy? No market participant knows the best option for creating and delivering economic
value, so it is in society’s interest to have both broadband carriers and others conduct directed
economic experiments. However, there is a difference between a situation where carriers are
just carriers, and when they involve themselves in many complementary markets. While
broadband carriers do have incentives to support economic experiments when these raise the
value for their carrier services, they do not have strong incentives to support economic
experiments from firms who conduct experiments that have a potential to compete with their
own (carrier) interests.
If this type of reasoning guides policy, what would it look like in practice? This is not
a trivial detail in practice. Decision making could fall in the domain of several different

42

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

agencies, and that alters the practical details behind policy formation and implementation.63
To keep the explanation focused on the trade-offs between competing principles for
encouraging economic experiments, I will frame the answer as if the regulatory system the
FCC has adopted in the last several years continues to operate (in a somewhat idealized
form). Generally speaking, this is a system that grants discretion to broadband carriers, but
within oversight of a federal agency that places broad limits on that discretion by announcing
principles in advance, deferring interpretations until specific circumstances give rise to
problems.
For purposes of this analysis I will treat the FCC’s declaration of principles as a step
towards meeting such a commitment. For purposes of this reinterpretation, the fourth of
Kevin Martin’s principles is most pertinent. It states: “Consumers are entitled to competition
among network providers, application and service providers, and content providers.”
The statement accommodates environments where carriers have incentives to support
economic experiments from others, in which case there is no need for policy intervention. It
does not provide much guidance, however, about regulatory policies for a setting where
broadband carriers and others bargain while each attempts economic experiments aimed at
commercializing innovations.
If increasing economic experiments is a policy goal, then the open question becomes:
what types of actions from broadband carriers impose negative externalities on the value
creation of others, and can regulators identify these actions in a systematic manner as part of
a strategy to prevent them? Since circumstances change one year to the next, it is impossible
to try to develop a specific answer. Any specific proposal also risks becoming rigid and
inappropriate as technologies change. Rather, policy must adapt an approach that helps all
parties predict its application under different circumstances.
What might that look like? Any proposal would aim to make regulator and carrier
behavior predictable for a targeted set of circumstances. That is, policy would aim to address
a core concern of the net neutrality debate: that the threat of some carrier action that could be
taken after a demonstration of a commercial experiment will, in practice, discourage another
63

This question arises precisely because the FCC has declared broadband carriers to be information
services and not be common carriers, and the Brand-X decision gives the FCC authority to reverse itself.
Under the present declarations it is not obvious what legal authority the FCC has to regulate conduct
(though, to date, that has not stopped the FCC from intervening in a few select cases). This awkward state
of legal authority has not gone unnoticed. For a discussion, see, e.g., Speta (2007).

43

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

firm from ever making the investment in the first place. Simultaneously, the policy would
seek to not discourage a carrier from undertaking an economic experiment.
I borrow insights from prior thinking about the role for competition policy in
innovative industries where firms offer complementary services.64 Such policies trade off the
interests of the two parties – in this case, a carrier and a content provider, where one has
market power – in this case, a carrier. These policies presume the preponderance of carrier
behavior requires no intervention, i.e., many actions would be allowed under this test. This is
deliberate, as the test seeks not to limit a carrier’s economic experiments except in a narrow
range of circumstances.
The policy takes the form of a test which delineates a set of alarming circumstances
from all others. Following prior work, I propose a three part test. These questions are:
•

Does the incumbent carrier possess market power and use it when bargaining
with others?

•

Are the scrutinized tactics closely affiliated with non-innovative behavior?

•

Is there a rationale under which a reduction of user choice is in the user's
interest?

What would this test permit? By way of illustration, consider that a broadband carrier
can use almost any contractual requirement when it supplies services to business users in a
dense urban market. Since business customers in dense urban markets have access to many
providers and can move between them in the presence of poor practices, policy would not be
concerned with contractual actions of carriers in this market.
It also permits considerable discretion if a carrier is just a carrier, even if the carrier
has market power, as found in most residential markets. It would permit almost any
contractual feature if that contractual feature has an apparent benefit for user choice, such as
increasing the menu of options available to users (e.g., supporting multiple tiers of
bandwidth), as well as a wide range of pricing actions in residential markets, such as retail
price discrimination between low and high bandwidth services. It also permits a range of
wholesale/connection charges in the same set of circumstances, with several important (and
potentially binding) limitations to discretion described below.
64

This proposal borrows from Greenstein (2002). For general discussion of these issues, see, e.g., Arora,
Fosfuri, and Gambardella (2001), or Gans and Stern (2003).

44

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

What would this test not permit? As illustration, consider applying it to the actions
scrutinized in Madison River. First, the carrier had market power with its customer base.
Second, the scrutinized tactic, blocking of VoIP, served no innovative purpose. Third, the
blocking of an additional choice reduced user choice without any associated savings in cost
or lowering of prices or increase in the quality of existing service from the carrier.65 This
three-part test would lead to a prohibition on blocking of VoIP, the result in that case.
The three questions also divide along familiar lines for identifying acceptable
managerial practices. It would permit any carrier, even one with market power, to block
viruses, authenticate customers, or manage traffic, as these actions support user interests in a
functioning network. However, it would lead to scrutiny of a carrier with market power who
blocks competitor traffic, or prohibits or restricts attachments from competitors, since such
practices rarely benefit users seeking to try innovative new services.
Perhaps a more interesting illustration arises when carriers seek to offer more services
than just carrying data. How would these three tests treat a carrier who proposes to make an
exclusive deal – e.g., to distribute a firm’s content over their lines, and ban traffic from
competitors whose content competes with it? In this case, the proposed test leads to a ban on
an exclusive deal when it serves no innovative purpose (which it usually does not) and
reduces user choice (which it usually does). In some respects, this result follows the familiar
reasoning in antitrust economics, which views with suspicion exclusive deals when an
upstream firm possesses market power and downstream firms do not. However, the reasoning
related to economic experiments differs slightly. There is a potentially large loss to the extent
of industry wide economic experiments from reducing entry of innovative content,
particularly when the value of a new entrant is unknown. There is an especially large
potential loss to industry-wide economic experiments from reducing the potential for an
innovative entrant with a transformative experiment. The loss to society from allowing
carriers to have exclusive deals seems too great.
One extension of a ban on exclusive deals is a proposal for “must carry” provisions.
Such a provision would prohibit a carrier with market power from blocking traffic over one
65

Notice that if the VoIP from another firm interfered with the ability of Madison River to manage its own
service, then this principle does not give a clear-cut answer about how to trade-off those costs. In that
sense, it leans toward giving broadband firms discretion, subject ot the natural concern that carriers cannot
invest excuses to exclude others.

45

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

tier while a making it available on another tier. The reasoning in favor of must-carry is
similar to that for banning exclusive deals: a must-carry provision supports value creation by
content providers by reducing most anticipated post-entry bargaining problems. The test also
highlights (practically-minded) exceptions to this reasoning, as might arise, for example, if
congestion on a low-bandwidth line is severe and, as in some cable Internet architectures,
increasing use by one user may shape the experience of many. In such a case, targeted
reduction of choice to relieve congestion issues could serve an innovative purpose. A
different type of exception arises when a peer-to-peer application threatens the security of all
network users. Once again, a ban on such an application could serve an innovative purpose.
In practice, this proposal only partially addresses two large open questions in the net
neutrality debate, i.e., about carrier requirements for sharing of information, and about price
discrimination of wholesale access. The proposed three-part test leads to an unambiguous
answer in only extreme cases. An illustration can show why. For example, had Madison
River refused to provide relevant technical information to the VoIP provider or charged an
extremely high price to the VoIP provider, its actions would have been virtually equivalent to
blocking the rival. This test would lead to the conclusion that extreme use of these practices
should be banned.
On the other hand, the proposal does permit information secrecy when it serves a
useful innovative purpose, such as assessments of the potential value of new applications for
an existing customer base. It also would allow for wholesale price differences between
applications that use high bandwidth when the broadband carrier has no economic business
interest in the relevant application market, such as when a frontier peer-to-peer application
heavily uses available capacity for one user’s benefit and the carrier has no economic interest
in any peer-to-peer applications.66
The difference between one extreme example, where a practice is forbidden, and one
not-so-extreme example, where a practice supports economic experiments, highlights a
drawback with this proposal: these three questions do not give a sharp answer for every
relevant situation. While it would be a surprise for any single proposal to give a sharp answer
to all open questions, this ambiguities leaves open opportunities for a market participant to
66

Once again, note the relevance of the qualification: if a carrier makes a deal with Yahoo (e.g., to make
Yahoo its default portal) the carrier would have an economic interest in the relevant application market for
Google and, as a result, would not be permitted to charge more to Google for use of its lines.

46

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

push a boundary, inviting costly regulatory and legal wrangling about the definition of that
boundary. The appropriate question to ask is whether that cost comes with a benefit that, on
net, exceeds the cost/benefit of the present situation, as carriers with market power try to
commercialize services, shape economic experiments nation-wide, and simultaneously work
out the meaning of the four vague principles governing the Internet.
The lens of economic experiments leads to a general policy approach that is not
common within the extant net neutrality debate. It leads to a forward-looking set of
guidelines to encourage value creation. As illustrated above, it would favor some “must-carry
provisions” and ban “exclusive deals” when market power is present and a carrier has
commercial interests in an application market. This is consistent with suggestions coming
from net neutrality advocates. On the other hand, it leads to favoring discretion over pricing
at the retail level and at the interconnection/wholesale level, limited primarily by the type of
principles found commonly in the antitrust analysis of contracting practices. That is
consistent with common suggestions among net neutrality opponents.
In summary, the lens of economic experiments sheds new insight on the net neutrality
debate. It focuses attention on preserving the incentives of both broadband carriers and others
to conduct directed economic experiments. It draws a distinction between settings where
carriers choose to be just carriers and when they choose to do more. In the latter, it focuses
attention on the role policy can play when broadband carriers do not have strong incentives
to support economic experiments from firms who conduct experiments that have a potential
to compete with carrier commercial interests.

V. CONCLUSION
Focusing on the role of economic experiments leads to a shift in perspective on the
creation of value. Both directed and undirected economic experiments played a valuable role
in the development of commercial Internet access. Generally speaking, many firms
participated in economic experiments, and, though the participation took a variety of forms,
many firms gained substantial private benefit from the lessons learned. Market, technical,
heuristic lessons spread quickly between firms, while complex business lessons spread more

47

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

slowly. As a result, the industry-wide benefits from economic experiments were substantial,
and though many of these gains were measurable, many were not.
There is an irony embedded below the surface of this analysis. Firms conduct
economic experiments to resolve uncertainty about the underlying determinants of market
value. Yet, as it typically turns out, no firm’s experience can be viewed in isolation of others,
and by taking actions, each firm teaches others lessons, which, in turn, lead to more
experiments. While all this interplay is inextricably linked to the creation of value for the
industry, the interplay between firms increases the possibility for the emergence of an
undirected economic experiment, itself creating another barrier to making any near-term
forecast about the creation of value at a specific firm. In other words, each firm may take
action to reduce uncertainty, but together the actions may lead to more uncertainty, not less.
This environment raises many challenges for communication policy. Due to innate
measurement challenges and the heterogeneity in experiences across firms, there is no way to
say in any given instance whether costs from economic experiments exceed their benefits at a
private or industry wide level. In general, policy might presume that the industry wide from
economic experiments exceeds private value due to the presence of positive information
externalities between firms and over time. A major exception arises in settings where the
negative externalities are present and large, a situation that a targeted policy would seek to
address.
Those insights lead to a reinterpretation of the net neutrality debate. The central
policy concern is that post-innovation bargaining by carriers can be used to strategically aid
its competitive position. The carriers may intend to imitate content providers, may intend to
compete through provision of their own service, or may intend to compete with alliance with
another content provider. In all cases, carriers with market power have incentives to raise a
rival’s cost. Hence, carrier action can reduce incentives for investment by content providers
to support an economic experiment. The lens of economic experiments focuses attention on
preserving incentives to conduct economic experiments by both broadband carriers and
others. It focuses attention on the role policy can play through targeted intervention against a
few carrier practices.

48

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

REFERENCES
Abramowicz, Michael, and John F. Duffy (2007), “Intellectual Property for Market
Innovation,” Mimeo, Center for Intellectual Property Law and Information Technology,
DePaul University College of Law, 7th Annual CIPLIT Symposium, accessed at
http://www.law.depaul.edu/institutes_centers/ciplit/niro_symposium/abstracts.asp.
Alleman, James, and Paul Rappoport (2005), “Regulatory Failure: Time for a New
Policy Paradigm,” Communications and Strategies, No 60, 4th Q, pp 105 – 121.
Aronson, Johnothan, Peter Cowhey, and J. Richards (2007), “The Peculiar Evolution
of 3G Wireless Networks: Institutional Logic, Politics, and Property Rights,” in (eds)
William Drake and Enst Wilson, Governing Global Electronic Networks, International
Perspectives on Policy and Power, MIT Press.
Atkinson, Robert D., and Philip J. Weiser (2006), “A Third Way on Network
Neutrality,” Working paper, the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation.
Arora, Ashish, Andrea Fosfuri, and Alfonso Gambardella (2001), Markets for
Technology: The Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy, MIT Press, 2001.
Bauer, Johannes (2006), “Dynamic Effects of Network Neutrality,” paper presented
at Telecommunications Policy Research Conference, September. Accessed at
http://web.si.umich.edu/tprc/papers/2006/633/Bauer-Net-Neutrality-TPRC-2006-fin.pdf.
Blumenthal, Marjory S., and David D. Clark (2001), “Rethinking the Design of the
Internet: The End-to-End Arguments vs. The Brave New World.” In (eds.) Benjamin
Compaine and Shane Greenstein, Communications Policy in Transition: The Internet and
Beyond. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. Pp. 91-139.
Cannon, Robert (2001), “Where Internet Service Providers and Telephone Companies
Compete: A Guide to the Computer Inquiries, Enhanced Service Providers, and Information
Service Providers,” In Communications Policy in Transition: The Internet and Beyond, eds.
Benjamin Compaine and Shane Greenstein. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, Dave, Bill Lehr, Steve Bauer, Peyman Faratin, Rahul Sami, John Wroclawski
(2006), “Overlay Networks and the Future of the Internet,” Communications and Strategies,
63, 3rd quarter, pp 1 – 21.
David Clark, John Wroclawski, Karen, R. Sollins, Robert Braden (2005), “Tussle in
Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow’s Internet,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 13
(3), June, pp. 462 – 475.
Crandall, Robert (2005), Ten Years after the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
Brookings; Washington D.C.

49

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Downes, Tom, and Shane Greenstein (2002), “Universal Access and Local
Commercial Internet Markets,” Research Policy, 31, pp 1035-1052.
Downes, Tom, and Shane Greenstein (2007), “Understanding Why Universal Service
Obligations May Be Unnecessary: The Private Development of Local Internet Access
Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics.
Farrell, Joe and Phil Weiser (2003), "Modularity, Vertical Integration, and Open
Access Policies: Towards a Convergence of Antitrust and Regulation in the Internet Age" .
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology, Vol. 17, No. 1, Fall,
Federal Communications Commission (2007), High Speed Services for Internet
Access, Status as of June 2006, Industry Analysis and Technology Division, Wireline
Competition Bureau, January, http://www.fcc.gov/wcb/iatd/comp.html.
Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein (2003), “Which Industries use
the Internet?” in (ed) Michael Baye, Organizing the New Industrial Economy, Elsevier.
Pages 47-72.
Frieden, Rob (2006), "Network Neutrality or Bias? - Handicapping the Odds for a
Tiered and Branded Internet" (September 2006). Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=893649
Gans, Joshua, and Scott Stern (2003), “The Product Market and the Market for Idea:
Commercialization Strategies for Technology Entrepreneurs,” Research Policy, Volume
32(2), pp 333-50.
Gawer, Annabbelle, and Michael Cusumano (2002), Platform Leadership: How Intel,
Microsoft and Cisco Drive Industry Innovation, Harvard Business School Press; Boston, Ma.
Gawer, Annabelle, and Rebecca Henderson (2007), “Platform Owner Entry and
Innovation in Complementary Markets: Evidence from Intel,” Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, Volume 16 (1).
Goldfarb, Brent D., David Kirsch, and Michael D. Pfarrer (2005), "Searching for
Ghosts: Business Survival, Unmeasured Entrepreneurial Activity and Private Equity
Investment in the Dot-Com Era" Robert H. Smith School Research Paper No. RHS 06-027
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=825687
Goldstein, Fred (2005), The Great Telecom Meltdown, Artech House; Boston.
Gomory, Ralph (1997), "The Technology-Product Relationship: Early and Late
Stages," in (eds.) Tushman and Anderson, Managing Strategic Innovation and Change.
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Greenstein, Shane (2000), "Building and Developing the Virtual World: The

50

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Commercial Internet Access Market." Journal of Industrial Economics, December. 48
(4):391–411.
Greenstein, Shane (2002), “Market Structure and Innovation: A Brief Synopsis of
Recent Thinking,” Report for the Federal Trade Commission, Feburary, 20. Accessed at
http://www.ftc.gov/opp/intellect/shanemitchell.pdf
Greenstein, Shane (2005), “The Economic Geography of Internet Infrastructure in the
United States,” in (eds) Martin Cave, Sumit Majumdar, and Ingo Vogelsang, Handbook of
Telecommunication Economics, Volume II. Elsevier.
Greenstein, Shane (2007), “The Evolution of Market Structure for Internet Access in
the United States.” in (eds) William Aspray and Paul Ceruzzi, The Internet and American
Business, MIT Press.
Haigh, Thomas (2007), "Building the Web's Missing Links: Portals and Search
Engines" in The Internet and American Business, in (eds) William Aspray and Paul Ceruzzi,
The Internet and American Business, MIT Press.
Hausman, Jerry A., Sidak, J. Gregory and Singer, Hal J. (2001), "Cable Modems and
Dsl: Broadband Internet Access for Residential Customers" American Economic Association
Papers & Proceedings, Vol. 91, No. 2, pp. 302-307.
Hills, Alex (2005), “Smart Wi-Fi” Scientific American, October.
Kharif, Olga (2003), “Paving the Airwaves for Wi-Fi,” Business Week, April 1, 2003.
Lessig, Lawrence (1999), Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace, Basic Books, New
York.
Liu, Bob (2001), “Is New Standard for 802.11 Out of Luck?” Internetnews, 11/04/01.
http://www.internetnews.com/wireless/article.php/10692_923821, accessed April, 2007.
Nelson, Richard (2007), “On the Evolution of Human Know-how,” mimeo, Columbia
University.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (2004), “A Nation
Online: Entering the Broadband Age.” http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.
Noll, Roger (2002), “Resolving Policy Chaos in High Speed Internet Access,” Siepr
Discussion Paper 01-13. Stanford University. SSRN-id311900.
Nuechterlein, J E. and Weiser, P. J. (2005), Digital Crossroads: American
Telecommunications Policy in the Internet age, Cambridge: MIT Press.
O’Connell, Patricia (2005), “At SBC, It’s All About Scale and Scope,” Business
Week Online (November 7, 2005). www.businessweek.com.
51

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

Owen, Bruce (2002), “Broadband Mysteries,” in (eds.) Robert W. Crandall and James
H. Alleman, Broadband: Should we Regulate High-Speed Internet Access? AEI-Brookings
Center for Regulatory Studies, Washington D.C. Pp. 9-38.
Owen, Bruce (2007), “The Net Neutrality Debate: Twenty Five Years after United
States v. AT&T and 120 years after the Act to Regulate Commerce.” John M. Olin Program in
Law and Economics, Working paper 336, Stanford Law School, SSRN 963623.
Pew Charitable Trusts (2006), Home Broadband Adoption 2006,
http://www.pewinternet.org/PPF/r/184/report_display.asp. Accessed April, 2007.
Powell, Michael (2004), “Preserving Internet Freedom: Guiding Principles for the
Industry,” accessed at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC243556A1.doc.
Rappoport, Paul, Donald Kridel, Lester Taylor, James Alleman (2002),
“Residential Demand for Access to the Internet,” in (ed) Gary Madden, The International
Handbook of Telecommunications Economics: Volume II, Edward Elgar Publishers,
Cheltenham.
Rosenberg, Nathan (1994), “Economic Experiments,” in Inside the Black Box,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Rosenberg, Nathan (1995), “Uncertainty and Technology Change,” in (eds.), Landau,
Taylor and Wright, The Mosaic of Economic Growth, Stanford University Press, Stanford,
CA. 1996. Pp. 334-356.
Rosston, Greg (2007), "The Evolution of High-Speed Internet Access 1995-2001"
mimeo, SIEPR, Stanford University.
Sandvig, Christian (2004), “An Initial Assessment of Cooperative Action in Wi-Fi
Networking,” Telecommunications Policy, 28 (7/8), pp 579-602.
Sandvig, Christian (2007), “Wireless Play and Unexpected Innovation,” Working
paper, University of Illinois. Accessed at http://www.spcomm.uiuc.edu/csandvig/research/
Sandvig, Christian, David Young, and Sascha Meinrath (2004), “Hidden Interfaces in
Ownerless Networks,” Paper presented to the 32nd Annual Telecommunications Policy
Research Conference (TPRC) on Communication, Information and Internet Policy,
Arlington, Virginia, USA. Accessed at http://www.spcomm.uiuc.edu/csandvig/research/
Savage, Scott, and Don Waldman (2005), “Broadband Internet access, awareness, and
use: Analysis of United States household data,” Telecommunications Policy.
Sidek, Greg (2003), “The Failure of Good Intentions: The WorldCom Fraud and the
Collapse of American Telecommunications After Deregulation,” Yale Journal of Regulation,

52

Economic Experiments

Shane Greenstein

V20, pp 207-267,
Simcoe, Tim (2006), “Standard Setting Committees,” working paper,
http://www.rotman.utoronto.ca/timothy.simcoe/papers/Simcoe_SSOCommittes.pdf
Speta, James (2007), Telecommunications in 2006: A year of Lost Opportunities,”
Paper presented at Searle Center Annual Review of Regulation, Northwestern University
Law School.
Stranger, Greg, and Shane Greenstein (2007), “Pricing in the Shadow of Firm
Turnover: ISPs in the 1990s.” International Journal of Industrial Organization.
Swisher, Karen (1998), aol.com: How Steve Case Beat Bill Gates, Nailed the
Netheads, and Made Millions in the War for the Web, Random House; New York.
Stern, Scott (2005), “Economic Experiments: The Role of Entrepreneurship in
Economic Prosperity,” in Understanding Entrepreneurship: A Research and Policy Report.
http://research.kauffman.org/cwp/ShowProperty/web/CacheRepository/Documents/
Research__Policy_Singles.pdf, Kaufman Foundation.
Von Burg, Urs (2001), The Triumph of Ethernet: Technological Communities and the
Battle for the LAN Standard, Stanford University Press.
Von Hippel, Eric (1988), The Sources of Innovation, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Wagner, Jim, (2002), “Cable execs learning lessons the hard way,”
http://www.internetnews.com/xSP/article.php/8_962301, January 28.
Weiser, Philip J. (2003), “Toward a Next Generation Regulatory Strategy,” Loyala
University Chicago Law Journal, 35 (1), Fall. Pp. 41-85.
Wu, Tim and Yoo, Christopher S., "Keeping the Internet Neutral? Tim Wu and
Christopher Yoo Debate" (December 28, 2006). Vanderbilt Public Law Research Paper No.
06-27 Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=953989

53

