                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ALTRUISM AND THE CHILD-CYCLE OF ALUMNI GIVING

                                            Jonathan Meer
                                           Harvey S. Rosen

                                         Working Paper 13152
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13152


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




We are grateful to B. Douglas Bernheim, William Bowen, Ronald Ehrenberg, Jean Grossman, Bo
Honore, Donna Lawrence, Brian McDonald, Ashley Miller, John Morgan, Sriniketh Nagavarapu, Andres
Santos, Julie Shadle and Burton Weisbrod for useful suggestions. Brent Newhouse and Zhihao Zhang
provided excellent research assistance. This research was supported in part by Princeton's Center for
Economic Policy Studies and in part by the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jonathan Meer and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Altruism and the Child-Cycle of Alumni Giving
Jonathan Meer and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 13152
June 2007
JEL No. H49,I22

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper uses a unique data set to assess whether donors' contributions to a nonprofit institution
are affected by the perception that the institution might confer a reciprocal benefit. We study alumni
contributions to an anonymous research university. Inter alia, the data include information on the ages
of the alumni's children, whether they applied for admission to the university, and if so, whether they
were accepted. The premise of our analysis is simple: If alumni believe that donations will increase
the likelihood of admission for their children and if this belief helps motivate their giving, then the
pattern of giving should vary systematically with the ages of their children, whether the children ultimately
apply to university, and the outcome of the admissions process. We refer to this pattern as the child-cycle
of alumni giving. If the child-cycle is operative, one would observe that, ceteris paribus, the presence
of children increases the propensity to give, that giving drops off after the admissions decision is made,
and that the decline is greater when the child is rejected by the university. Further, under the joint hypothesis
that alumni can reasonably predict the likelihood that their children will someday apply to the university
and that reciprocity in the form of a higher probability of admission is expected, we expect that alumni
with children in their early teens who eventually apply will give more than alumni whose teenagers
do not. The evidence is strongly consistent with the child-cycle pattern. Thus, while altruism drives
some giving, the hope for a reciprocal benefit plays a role as well. Using our results, we compute rough
estimates of the proportion of giving due to selfish motives.

Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jmeer@stanford.edu

Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
HSR@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

       In an essay on the economics of altruism, Samuelson [1993, p. 143] writes

               Mesmerized by Homo economicus, who acts solely on egoism,
               economists shy away from altruism almost comically. Caught
               in a shameful act of heroism, they aver: “Shucks, it was only
               enlightened self interest.” Sometimes it is. At other times it
               may be only rationalization… “If I rescue somebody’s son,
               someone will rescue mine.”

Samuelson concludes that such arguments render economists guilty of “face saving tau-

tologies.” Bergstrom and Stark [1993, p. 149] similarly criticize economists’ stance to-

ward altruistic behavior: “Why are economists convinced that Homo economicus is self-

ish? No doubt we find considerable support for this hypothesis in the behavior of our

colleagues.”

       However, the notion that mainstream economics categorically rejects the exis-

tence of altruism is essentially false. As noted below, a substantial theoretical literature

explicitly allows for the possibility that human behavior is unselfish and draws out the

implications of altruism in a variety of contexts. Contrary to Samuelson, it would be

more accurate to characterize economists’ view of the importance of altruism as agnostic

rather than skeptical. They are willing to contemplate the possibility that altruism is an

important motivator of behavior, but at the same time do not rule out selfishness. Clot-

felter’s [1985] important volume on charitable giving is typical in this regard. In an in-

troductory section, he provides a list of possible motivations for charity. Some involve

narrow self-interest, such as the expectation that donors and their families will receive

services in return, or favorable publicity for their businesses. But the list gives equal

footing to altruism, associated with social norms or a sense of duty or commitment.
                                                                                                                     2


Clotfelter takes no position on the relative importance of the various motivations, mere-

ly observing that they could all be operative.1

         Of course, saying that both selfishness and altruism can be present does not tell

us that both motivations actually guide behavior. This is an empirical question, but

empirical work using observational data is rare in this area. Perhaps the primary reason

is the difficulty of measuring the benefits that donors expect to receive. Without quanti-

fiable indicators of the potential selfish benefits, one cannot estimate how responsive

giving is to their existence.

         This paper uses a unique data set that allows us to assess whether donors’ con-

tributions to a nonprofit institution are affected by the expectation of a reciprocal bene-

fit. We study alumni contributions to an anonymous selective research university, hen-

ceforth referred to as Anon U. The proprietary data provided by Anon U contain de-

tailed information about donations made by alumni as well as a variety of their eco-

nomic and demographic characteristics. The data also include information on the ages of

the children of the alumni, whether they applied for admission to Anon U, and if so,

whether they were accepted. The premise of our analysis is simple: If alumni believe

that donations increase the likelihood of their children being accepted to Anon U and if

this belief helps motivate their giving, then the pattern of giving should vary systemati-

cally with the age of their children, whether the children ultimately apply to Anon U,

and the outcome of the admissions process. Specifically, if reciprocity influences the be-

havior of donors, one would expect that, ceteris paribus, the presence of children in-
creases the propensity to give, that giving drops off after the admissions decision is ren-

dered, and that the decline is greater when the child is rejected. We refer to this pattern

as the child-cycle of alumni giving.


1
  In the same way, Dugan et al. [1999, p.2] ascribe a number of motivations to university donors. The list includes
“avoidance of social stigma, tax incentives, recognition for generosity, a response to past or deterrence to future so-
licitation, and quid pro quo for services rendered indirectly such as access to elite social circles or business con-
tacts.” However, at the top of their list is “pure altruism.”
                                                                                                                   3


         An interesting feature of this phenomenon is that the institution makes no prom-

ise of reciprocity whatsoever. True, children of Anon U alumni have a higher rate of ac-

ceptance than other students,2 but this does not prove that having a parent who made

donations in the past increases a child’s likelihood of admission. Nevertheless, the view

that reciprocity exists is widespread. As one account of the college admissions process

stated, “Traditionally, universities have relied on gifts from alumni, who are rewarded

with ‘legacy’ preferences for their children.” [Golden, 2006, p. A10]. Perceptions of re-

ciprocity may be reinforced by university administrators who link the acceptance of

alumni children to financial support of their institutions. In a recent interview with the

Wall Street Journal, the president of Princeton University was asked, “Why does Prin-

ceton give admissions preference to alumni children…?” Her response was, “We are

deeply dependent on the generosity of our alumni each and every year… They are ex-

tremely important to the financial well-being of this university.” (Hechinger [2006, p.

B1]). We know of no statistical evidence on whether alumni donations at any university

affect admissions probabilities for their children, and if so, how much. For our purposes,

the key insight is that generating the child-cycle of alumni giving requires only the per-

ception of reciprocity.
         Determining whether a child life-cycle exists is important because of the oppor-

tunity it provides to shed light on the general issue of altruism. Gaining a better under-

standing of the motivations for alumni giving is also of independent interest because of

its importance to the financing of higher education. In 2004-05, alumni contributed $7.1

billion to higher education, about 28 percent of all voluntary support.3



2
  According to public information, children of alumni at Anon U are accepted at roughly three times the rate as other
applicants. However, Bowen et al. [2005] document the importance of correcting for differences in the characteris-
tics of applicant pools when assessing the importance of legacy preferences.
3
  Other sources of voluntary support include other individuals, corporations, foundations, and religious and other
organizations. See Chronicle of Higher Education [2006].
                                                                                             4


       In Section 2 we briefly review some pertinent previous research in this area, with

particular emphasis on theoretical work that helps motivate a child-cycle framework.

Section 3 describes the data and econometric framework. The results are presented in

Section 4. The evidence is strongly consistent with the child-cycle pattern. Alumni par-

ents of teenage children who eventually apply to Anon U make larger donations than

alumni whose children do not eventually apply. Once an alumnus’s child is accepted, his

donations fall off substantially. If the child is rejected, giving falls off dramatically. Sec-

tion 5 discusses the sensitivity of the results to alternative specifications of the model.

Section 6 concludes with a summary and suggestions for additional research.



2. Previous Literature

       The role of altruism in human behavior has long been of interest to economists.

As Kolm [2000b, p. 7] notes, “all great economists have considered the effects of positive

social sentiments,” including Smith, Mill, Walras, Pareto, and Bentham. In more recent

times, notions of altruism have been brought to bear in theoretical analyses of charitable

giving (Becker [1974]), rescues (Landes and Posner [1978]), commercial policy (Rotem-

berg [2000]) and remittances of migrants to their home countries (Docquier and Rapo-

port [2000]), among other important social phenomena. Additional examples can be

found in Kolm [2000a].

       Altruistic behavior within families has received particularly extensive attention

because of its implications for several important policy questions. In particular, the effi-

cacy of fiscal policy hinges on the extent to which intergenerational bequests are moti-

vated by altruism. Becker [1974] considers a theoretical model in which parents are al-

truistic and shows that, under certain assumptions — an important one being that par-

ents’ utility depends only on family income — they have no incentives to be strategic

with respect to their children. In contrast, Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers [1985] de-
                                                                                                            5


velop a theory in which bequests are motivated not only by altruistic concern for chil-

dren, but also with the hope for reciprocity in the form of care or attention.

        Theories relating to intra-family altruism have been tested in a rich econometric

literature. This literature has developed because there are observable variables related

to the selfish gains that might be obtained from seemingly altruistic behavior. For ex-

ample, one can look at the amount of contact between elderly parents and children and

how it is related to the parents’ bequeathable wealth. The results are mixed. Bernheim,

Shleifer and Summers [1985], Altonji et al. [1992] and Cigno and Rosati [2000] find evi-

dence that gifts from parents to children have a strategic component, while McGarry

and Schoeni [1995], Raut and Tran [2000] and Ioannides and Kan [2000] find that altru-

istic motives predominate.

        Turning to the important case of charitable donations — which amounted to

about $250 billion in 20044 — researchers have more or less taken for granted that self-

ish motives play a role. According to Clotfelter [1985, p. 38], “Individuals may volunteer

for organizations in order for their families or themselves to consume services.” Weis-

brod [1978, p. 34] is more pointed: “The extent to which narrow self-interest lies behind

the donations of money and time to non-profit organizations is little understood, but

there can be no doubt that donors often do benefit through the making of business con-

tacts and the receipt of favorable publicity for good deeds.” Similarly, it has been sug-

gested that selfish motives may underlie donations to universities: “Donors demand at-

tention and prestige supplied by college fund raisers”5 [Yoo and Harrison,1989, p. 367].

        Are such assertions valid? Schokkaert and Van Ootegem [2000] provide extensive

survey evidence of reasons for giving. Also, a number of laboratory experiments have

4
  Giving USA Foundation [2005].
5
  This suggests that efforts by college development offices could be an important determinant of alumni
giving. Certainly this is why colleges have such offices in the first place. While there is some evidence of a
correlation between development costs and donations across institutions (Harrison, et al. [1995]), it is dif-
ficult to ascribe a causal relationship because the variables are likely jointly determined.
                                                                                                     6


investigated the extent to which contributions to public goods are marked by altruism.

(See, for example, Andreoni [1993] and List [2006].6 ) However, in marked contrast to

the literature on giving within the family, we have been able to find no statistical work

on motivations for charitable giving based on observational data. The same holds for

the voluminous literature on the determinants of alumni giving to their universities.7

Econometric studies of alumni giving have examined a wide array of variables: attitudi-

nal measures of satisfaction with the undergraduate experience, income, marital status,

number of children, occupation, the state of the stock market, marginal tax rates, gen-

der, ethnicity, academic performance as an undergraduate, extracurricular activities in-

cluding varsity athletics, membership in fraternities or other social clubs, whether the

individual received financial aid, performance of athletic teams, and so on.8 However, we

have found no systematic attempts at all to assess whether self-interest might have a

role in explaining giving behavior.

       The likely reason for the dearth of such research is the absence of measurable in-

dicators of the benefits that donors expect to receive in return for their donations. Our

study is premised on the notion that alumni believe that donations enhance the prob-

ability that their children will be admitted to their alma mater. Therefore, the presence

of children, their ages, and their admissions status are measurable indicators of the po-

tential for reciprocal benefits generated by donations. In this view, alumni believe that

donations buy them entrance into a lottery whose prize is admissions for their children.

       Framing the issue this way suggests a connection between alumni giving and

Morgan’s [2000] theory of lotteries as a mechanism for financing public goods. Morgan

observes that lotteries are often held by private charities. He shows that, under a broad

set of conditions, lotteries raise the level of provision of a public good relative to stan-


6
  For an ethnographic approach to studying motivations for charitable giving, see Odendahl [1990].
7
  Taylor and Martin [1995] provide an extensive survey of variables that have been analyzed in previous
studies.
8
  See, for example, Clotfelter [2003], Monks [2003], Shulman and Bowen [2001, Chapter 10], Taylor and
Martin [1995], and Wunnava and Lauze [2001].
                                                                                                        7


dard voluntary contribution schemes—a lottery increases giving, ceteris paribus. An-

other of Morgan’s important findings is that as the lottery becomes more “discriminat-

ing” (that is, the prize is more likely to go to whomever donates the most money), the

overall giving level increases.9

        Our child-cycle framework fits well within Morgan’s model. Here, the public good

is the donation to the university, which benefits its students, faculty, and society at

large. The power of our test comes from the fact that only alumni with children can

play the lottery, and among those who have children, the value depends on their ages.

In particular, the value is relatively high for the parents of teenagers who plan to apply

to their parents’ alma mater. On the other hand, once a child is past the college admis-

sions age, playing the lottery has no value at all.

        As we stressed above, whether the probability of one’s child being admitted de-

pends on prior or expected future donations is unknown.10 However, as long as alumni

perceive that their contributions improve their children’s chances of being admitted and

that greater contributions by others lessen the odds, Morgan’s mechanism is operative.11



3. Data and Econometric Model
        3.1 Data

        Our primary data source is the administrative archives of Anon U’s Development

Office, which contain information on all alumni donations from 1983 to 2006. The data

are proprietary and sensitive, and individuals’ names were stripped from the records be-

fore being made available to us. Our unit of observation is a yearly giving opportunity.

9
   This particular result is demonstrated in an unpublished 1995 working paper with the same title as the
published version.
10
   In particular, our data do not allow us to explore this hypothesis for Anon U as we have no information
on the attributes of rejected students. (See below.)
11
    However, the mapping from Morgan’s model into the alumni donation problem is not perfect. The
model assumes that the impact on the amount that is donated upon the probability of winning is common
knowledge, which is clearly not true in our context.
                                                                                         8


For example, if an individual has been an alumna for 5 years, she accounts for 5 giving

opportunities in our analysis, starting in the first fiscal year after graduation. Multiple

gifts in the same year are summed together. The Development Office data also include

information on academic major, extracurricular activities when the alumnus was an un-

dergraduate, post graduate education, occupation, residence, whether he or she is mar-

ried to another graduate of Anon U, as well as information on the age and admissions

status of the alumnus’s children. Anon U’s Registrar supplemented these data with in-

formation on SAT scores, academic honors, ethnicity, type of high school, summary

evaluations made by the Admissions Office during the application process, and grade

point average. The Registrar’s data are available only for the classes of 1972 and on-

wards, so we restrict most of our analysis to this group of individuals.

           We begin with 547,836 observations, representing 35,556 alumni. We delete

27,992 observations because of missing data on the child’s age, essential information for

our analysis. 1,100 observations were deleted because the child withdrew his or her ap-

plication before a decision was rendered, and another 32,041 because of missing data for

other variables. Altogether, our analysis sample has 487,913 observations on a total of

32,488 alumni.

           We focus on three dimensions of alumni giving. First is the probability that an

alumnus made any gift at all in a given year.12 Universities care about the proportion of
their alumni who make donations. Anon U, for example, makes considerable efforts to

contact as many alumni as possible, and urge them to give something, even if it is just a

few dollars. Second, we analyze the amount donated in any given year. Third, as is typ-

ically the case, a few relatively large gifts account for a disproportionate amount of

Anon U’s donations. For example, in 2006, the top one percent of gifts accounted for

69.2 percent of total giving. We estimate the probability that the alumnus is a “class


12
     Pledges without an associated gift are not counted.
                                                                                                            9


leader” in a given year, where a class leader is defined as an individual who donated an

amount greater than or equal to the 90th percentile of gifts in his or her class.

        The mean and standard deviation of each of these variables are shown at the top

of Table 1.13 The unconditional mean gift (in 2006 dollars) is $466. The relatively large

standard deviation, $49,512, reflects the presence of enormous outliers. To reduce the

likelihood that outliers drive our results, we take the log of the amount given. 14 In addi-

tion, we also estimate our models (except for class leader) without the top 1 percent of

the observations, and find that the results are essentially unchanged. With respect to

the probability of giving, Table 1 shows that about 55.6 percent of the giving opportuni-

ties result in a donation to the university.

        Most of the explanatory variables in the table are dichotomous. For each set of

dichotomous variables, the “omitted category” is the variable that is excluded from the

regressions. About 65.1 percent of our observations are associated with male alumni.
Historically, Anon U was an all-male institution, and did not confer degrees upon wom-

en until the 1970s. Whites comprise 81.9 percent of our observations. 57.9 percent of the

observations are associated with secondary education at a public school; almost 39 per-

cent with participation in undergraduate varsity athletics15; and 45.3 percent with indi-

viduals who receive honors when they graduate. About 40 percent receive a post bacca-

laureate degree.

        Unfortunately, the data include no direct information on income, an important

determinant of giving (Shulman and Bowen [2001, p. 404]). We address this issue in two

ways. First, for a large subset of our alumni, we have information that is closely related


13
    As noted above, these are summary statistics of our observations, which are not the same as summary
statistics for the alumni themselves. In effect, the data in the table weight alumni characteristics by the
number of years each alumnus was in the sample. Therefore, changes in the demographic structure of
Anon U may not be fully evident.
14
   A logarithmic transformation presents problems for observations that take a value of zero. As noted be-
low, we set 320 gifts that are greater than zero but less than or equal to $1.00 equal to $1.01. Therefore,
observations for which there is no giving are associated with $1, whose logarithm is zero.
15
    Varsity athletes are defined as those who participated in a varsity-level sport, not necessarily receiving
a varsity letter. Club sports are defined as those that do not confer a varsity letter.
                                                                                                           10


to permanent income, occupation and field.16 Table 2 shows the occupations and fields

for the 344,342 observations, representing 20,039 alumni, for which we have this infor-

mation.17 The fields of education, finance, health care and law are highly represented.

We re-estimate our basic models with this subsample including the occupation and field

data in order to see whether our substantive results are sensitive to their inclusion. As

shown below, they are not. Second, if we are willing to think of an alumnus’s permanent

income as an unchanging attribute (at least during our sample period), then we can

model it as a fixed effect. We show below that our substantive results are unchanged

with fixed effects estimation.

        3.2 Characterizing the Child-Cycle.

        We characterize the child-cycle by a vector of dichotomous variables indicating

whether the alumnus has a child, and if so, his or her age and admissions status. We

discuss the treatment of families with several children below. Recall that in our frame-

work, alumni with children believe that a gift to Anon U may some day generate a re-

ciprocal benefit, and therefore the presence of a child should increase the probability of

making a gift. Perhaps, though, having a child is correlated with unobserved variables

that also drive giving decisions. For example, individuals who become parents might

care about young people in general, and hence be particularly willing to support higher
education. But if so, there would be no reason to expect giving to decline just when the

child exceeds the age at which college admissions decisions are made. In contrast, the

child-cycle framework implies that once the child is beyond that age, giving will drop

off, because the admissions lottery is over. To examine how giving varies with the age of

the child, we include a series of dichotomous variables, CHILDi, which take a value of


16
   In this context, it is important to note that a number of the variables in our basic specification are also
correlated with income, including gender, ethnicity, college major and grade point average, advanced de-
grees, years since graduation, and location. Moreover, Cunningham and Cochi-Ficano (2002) point out
that SAT scores are closely related to family socioeconomic status as well.
17
   Due to lack of reliable data regarding the start- and stop-dates of occupation and field, these variables
indicate whether the alumnus was ever involved in that field or occupation, rather than whether they are
involved during the particular year of observation.
                                                                                      11


one if the alumnus has a child of age i and zero otherwise. The range of i is from zero

(less than one year old) to 26 years and older.

       Even if giving increases as admissions time approaches (at approximately 18

years old) and falls thereafter, hopes for reciprocity need not be at work. Perhaps, for

example, a child of college age reawakens fond memories of an alumnus’s undergraduate

days, or inspires thoughts of experiences that the alumnus and his child might share

during future parents’ weekends. This could lead to an increase in an alumnus’s propen-

sity to give. To investigate this possibility, we take advantage of information on

whether the child ultimately applies for admission. Suppose that by the time the child is

a teenager, an alumnus can reasonably estimate the probability that his or her child will

ultimately apply. Such an estimate could be based on the child’s expressed preferences

for type of college, academic performance, and so on. If so, the perceived payoff to the

admissions lottery should be higher for alumni whose children ultimately apply than

those who do not and so should their donations. We therefore include a set of interac-
tion terms, CHILDiAppl, which multiply CHILDi by a dichotomous variable that equals

one if a child of age i eventually applied to Anon U and zero otherwise. We assume that

parents can form reasonably accurate expectations about whether their children will ap-

ply only when the children are into their teens, so that CHILDiAppl is defined only for
values of i from 14 through 17. Under the joint hypothesis that alumni can predict with

some accuracy whether their children will apply and that expected reciprocity is a moti-

vation for giving, these interaction terms should have positive coefficients.

       Similarly, we define a series of dichotomous variables, CHILDiNoAppl, which

equal one if the child ultimately did not apply and zero otherwise, with i running from

14 to 17. If expected reciprocity is present, the coefficients on these variables will be

smaller than those associated with the CHILDiAppl variables, but still positive. They

remain positive because presumably some parents in this group believe that their chil-
                                                                                                       12


dren will apply, so their giving should be higher than that of members of the omitted

category, who have no children at all. A third series of dichotomous variables, CHILDi-

Young, equal of one if the child was not old enough to have applied by the end of our

sample in 2006, with i running from 14 to 16.

        Turning now to the outcome of the admissions decision, we expect it to have no

impact on giving if altruism is the only motivation. On the other hand, to the extent

that giving is motivated by expected reciprocity, we expect parents of admitted children

to reduce giving, as there is no longer an expected gain.18 This effect will be attenuated

if these alumni perceive that Anon U has “held up its side of the bargain,” and recipro-

cate by continuing to give. Below, we examine some other reasons why admittance of

one’s child might not lead to a dramatic decrease in giving. Turning now to the parents

of rejected children, not only is the prospect of an expected gain gone, but the alumnus

may perceive that the university has not reciprocated properly, and therefore retaliates

by reducing donations even further.

        To examine these conjectures about the impact of the admissions decision, we

create a set of dichotomous variables, CHILDiAcc, which equal one if the child applied

to Anon U and was accepted and zero otherwise; and CHILDiRej, which equal one if the

child applied to Anon U and was rejected and zero otherwise.19 For these variables, i
runs from 18 through 26 and over.

        A complication arises when families have multiple children: which one should be

used for characterizing the child-cycle? In our basic results reported below, all the child-

cycle variables are defined in terms of the first child. This makes sense because the giv-

ing decision surrounding the first child is unaffected by any prior personal experience of

18
   Reduced giving after admissions might be driven by income effects associated with tuition payments. If
tuition is the important factor, then we would also expect to see decreases in giving among alumni whose
children did not apply to Anon U but instead attended other institutions. As shown below, these alumni
do not exhibit anything like the substantial decreases in giving that we see for the alumni of accepted
children.
19
   The data allow us to distinguish between those who are accepted but do not attend and those who do
attend. However, nearly all of Anon U’s alumni children who are accepted to Anon U choose to attend;
therefore, sample sizes are too small to accurately measure any differences in the two populations.
                                                                                        13


reciprocity. However, some of the giving that occurs during the first child’s cycle might

be affected by the presence of younger children. For example, alumni might continue to

make large donations after their first child is accepted out of concern about the admis-

sions prospects of younger children. Given the large number of child cycle variables, it is

infeasible to include in one model the cycles for multiple children and their interactions.

Therefore, we simply estimate the child-cycle based on the last child in the family. As

shown below, the substantive results are essentially the same as those based on the first

child.

         It would be cumbersome and uninformative to report summary statistics for each

of the large number of variables that characterize the child-cycle. To provide some basic

information, we note that in 2006, the last year of our sample, 23.5 percent of the alum-

ni had at least one child; of those who had a child, the mean age was 13.6 years. Condi-

tional on reaching age 17, 1,501 alumni children, representing 52.9 percent of that sub-

sample, had applied to Anon U, and 37.2 percent were accepted.


         3.4 Econometric Model

         We model the decision to make a gift to Anon U with a probit model:

         Prob(G jt) = Φ[α + CYCLE jtβ1 + X jtγ + YEARtβ2 + LOC jtβ3 + CLASS jβ4] ,

where Prob(Gjt) is the probability that alumnus j makes a gift in year t, Φ[•] is the cu-

mulative normal distribution function, CYCLE jt is the vector of variables characterizing

the child-cycle as discussed above, Xjt is a vector of the alumnus’s personal characteris-

tics, YEARt is a set of time effects, LOCjt is a set of location effects (state or foreign

country of residence) and CLASSj is a set of class effects (equal to one if the alumnus

graduated in a given year and zero otherwise). The time effects account for the impacts
                                                                                                    14


of the state of the business cycle, the stock market, and so on.20 The class effects control

for common influences on alumni in the same class, such as the political milieu when

they were undergraduates, the presence of certain professors or administrators, and so

on.

       As noted above, we have more than one observation per alumnus. Because the

errors for the observations on a given alumnus are likely to be correlated, the standard

errors are adjusted for clustering within individuals. Our analysis of class leaders also

uses a probit model; here the outcome variable is the probability that in a given year,

the alumnus made a gift that was greater than or equal to the gift made by the top 10

percent of his or her classmates.

       When we turn to the actual amount of the gift, we face two issues that arise in

all studies of donative behavior. First, a substantial number of the observations are ze-

ro; second, there are a few very large outliers. For example, the three largest gifts in our

sample are $3.1, $6.0, and $31.1 million. To address the first issue, we use the Tobit es-

timator, which explicitly takes censoring into account. The second problem suggests

that we transform the data to reduce the influence of outliers. We take logarithms. Be-

cause the logarithm of zero is not defined, we set the 320 positive gifts that were less

than or equal to one dollar equal to one dollar and one cent. In effect, then, we have

censoring at the point where the logarithm of the gift is equal to zero, and can then ap-

ply Tobit straightforwardly. There is, of course, some arbitrariness to this procedure. To

assess its robustness, we also estimate the model in levels, first with the entire sample

and then eliminating the top one percent of the observations in order to reduce the im-

pact of outliers The substantive results with respect to the child-cycle variables are not

affected.



20
  Bristol [1991] emphasizes the role of the stock market and Ehrenberg and Smith [2003] document the
importance of macroeconomic conditions. Time effects also take into account changes in the value of the
university’s endowment (Oster [2001]).
                                                                                          15


           We assume that the determinants of the amount of giving are the same as those

that affect the probability of giving. As with the probit estimates, we correct for corre-

lation among the error terms for any given individual by using a clustering procedure.



4. Results

           4.1. Probability of Making a Gift

           Our basic results are reported in Table 3. To begin, column (1) shows each vari-

able’s marginal effect on the probability that an alumnus made any gift in a given year

and the associated standard error.21 We discuss the child-cycle variables and then turn

to the other covariates.

           Consider first the CHILDi variables, each of which takes a value of one if the

alumnus had a child of age i during the year of the observation and zero otherwise.

When a child is born, the probability of making a donation increases by about 13 per-

centage points. The incremental effect of the child’s presence generally increases with

the child’s age, reaching about 17 percentage points by the time he or she is 13. These

coefficients are precisely estimated.

           When children reach the age of 14, we distinguish between those who eventually

apply to Anon U and those who do not. The figures under the heading Child Did Not
Apply show the coefficients on interactions of a dichotomous variable equal to one if the

child did not apply with the child’s age, that is, the CHILDiNoAppl variables. The vari-

ables under Child Did Apply show the corresponding coefficients when the child eventu-

ally did apply, CHILDiAppl in our earlier notation. Comparing the two sets of coeffi-

cients, we see that at every age from 14 to 17, the incremental probability of giving is

greater for alumni whose children ultimately applied. The differences at each age are

statistically significant from each other. This differential is consistent with the joint hy-


21
     The year, class, and location effects are not reported for brevity.
                                                                                                      16


pothesis that alumni can reasonably predict the likelihood that their children will apply

to Anon U and that reciprocity in the form of admission is expected.22

        The CHILDiAppl variables are defined only up to the age of 17. After that point,

we distinguish between successful and unsuccessful applications to Anon U.23 The coeffi-

cients under the Child Accepted heading indicate that, conditional on applying, the

probability of giving increases by about 34 percentage points for an alumnus whose 18

year old child is accepted. The incremental probability falls after acceptance (by age 20

it is down to 27 percentage points), but remains elevated into the child’s mid-20s. The

parents of unsuccessful applicants behave very differently. As the figures under Child

Rejected indicate, the incremental probability of making a gift falls off substantially at
age 18, and at ages 19 and beyond, it is essentially zero. At each age, the differences be-

tween probabilities for alumni whose children were accepted and those who were not are

statistically significant except for those whose children were 26 or older. Interestingly,

having a child rejected lowers the probability of giving to the level of alumni who have

no children. Indeed, for most ages one cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients

for individuals without children and parents of rejected children are the same.

        To provide a better sense of the implications of the child-cycle coefficients in col-

umn (1), we graph them in Figure 1. The horizontal axis measures the child’s age, and

the vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the probability of making a gift (rela-

tive to having no children). The graph starts when the child is born and shows that

having a child increases the probability of giving by about 13 percentage points. At age

14, the line divides, showing the difference between alumni whose children do and do

not ultimately apply to Anon U. The gap between the two groups is substantial, and it

widens as the children approach college age. At age 18, the graph splits again, this time
22
   Note also that this finding is inconsistent with the notion that the child-cycle pattern is due to the
fundraising office focusing on alumni with children approaching college age. To explain this finding, one
would have to argue that the fundraisers have perfect foresight with respect to the future behavior of
alumni children.
23
   Because our unit of observation is based on an entire year, there is some ambiguity in precisely when
the admissions decision becomes known. The year in which the child turns 18 is a sensible choice.
                                                                                           17


between applicants who were rejected and those who were accepted at Anon U. At ad-

missions time, the probability of making a gift falls substantially for alumni whose chil-

dren were rejected. It also declines for those whose children were accepted, albeit by a

smaller amount.

          One concern with our interpretation of these findings is that the likelihood of giv-

ing and the likelihood that a child applies to Anon U are both driven by some unob-

served third variable, perhaps the extent to which a parent feels an affinity to Anon U.

To investigate this possibility, we estimated a model in which CHILDiAppl and CHILD-

i   NoAppl are included for ages 0 through 17. If our results are driven by affinity for Anon

U, then we would expect the differences between these variables at young ages to be as

important as when the children are teenagers. However, this is not the case. When the

dependent variable is the probability of making a gift, the joint hypothesis that the co-

efficients on CHILDiAppl and CHILDiNoAppl are equal for ages 0 through 13 cannot be

rejected (p = 0.1415). The same is true for amount given (p = 0.3083) and annual class

leader (p = 0.6902). These findings increase our confidence that the child-cycle results

are not being driven the alumnus’s unobservable affinity for Anon U. Further evidence

along these lines is presented in Section 5 below.

          The patterns in Figure 1 cannot readily be explained by public good provision or

by a “warm glow” from giving. In contrast, the results fit well in the child-cycle frame-

work.

          Other variables. The coefficients on the linear and quadratic terms for years since
graduation imply that the probability of making a gift falls for about the first 20 years

after graduation, and then turns upward. With respect to gender, men are 4.6 percent-

age points less likely to donate in a given year, ceteris paribus. Whites are more likely

to contribute than American Indians, African-Americans, Hispanics or Asians. The gap

is largest with African-Americans, who are 16 percentage points less likely to make a

gift than whites. These gender and ethnic/racial differentials are similar to those re-
                                                                                                       18


ported in previous studies (Monks [1993]).24 Alumni who attended boarding or private

schools are somewhat more likely to contribute than those who attended public schools.

There is no discernible impact of home or alternative schooling on the probability of

giving relative to public school attendees.

        As noted above, the admissions office produces summary evaluations of appli-

cants on the basis of both non-academic and academic criteria. An A is the highest

score and an E is the lowest score. Alumni who received the lowest non-academic rat-

ings at the time of admissions are 6.9 percentage points less likely to make donations.

On the other hand, students in the highest academic category are somewhat less likely

to make donations than those with lower ratings. SAT scores do not appear to have any

statistically significant impact on the probability of giving.

        We now turn from variables that are known before matriculation at Anon U to

those that reflect the alumnus’s undergraduate experiences. Involvement in a varsity

sport increases the probability of giving by about 5 percentage points, and membership

in one of Anon U’s fraternities or sororities increases it by 13 percentage points.25 These

results are consistent with previous findings that students who were actively engaged in

extracurricular activities as undergraduates are more likely to make donations as alumni

(Dugan et al. [1999]). With respect to academic performance, receiving honors has no

effect on the probability of giving. However, the probability of giving increases with

grade point average (GPA). Those in the bottom quartile of the GPA distribution were

5.7 percentage points less likely to make a gift, while those in the third quartile were 2.1

percentage points less likely. There is no significant difference in giving between the sec-

ond and top quartiles.


24
   Some of these differentials may be due to the fact that income and wealth differ across ethnic groups.
As noted below, when we re-estimate the model for a subsample of our data which includes some reason-
able measures of permanent income, the differentials do not disappear.
25
   Several organizations did not provide membership information for the class of 2001 and above. Interact-
ing indicators for those classes with the Greek indicator did not change the estimate of the main coeffi-
cient substantially.
                                                                                         19


       Consistent with earlier studies, giving patterns differ substantially by course of

study (Dugan, et al. [1999], Monks [2003]). Alumni who majored in engineering, eco-

nomics and public policy have relatively high probabilities of making a gift later in life;

majors in the small social sciences departments (such as sociology) and small humanities

departments (such as linguistics) tend to have relatively low probabilities. Students with

minors in finance are more likely to make subsequent gifts (by about 9 percentage

points), while those with minors in theater are less likely (by about 7 percentage

points).

       Turning to schooling after Anon U, alumni who continue their education are

more likely to make donations than those who do not, a finding consistent with previous

studies (Dugan et al., [1999], Monks [2003]). Finally, we note that, consistent with pre-

vious research (Grant and Lindauer [1986], Olsen et al. [1989]) the likelihood of giving

increases substantially during reunion years, with the probability increasing by 6.3 per-

centage points.

       Taken together, our results are very much in line with those from previous stud-

ies. While no school is “typical,” Anon U appears not to be idiosyncratic with respect to

the determinants of the donation decision. It is not unreasonable to expect, therefore,

that the child-cycle results would also generalize to other selective institutions.

       4.2 Amount of Giving

       Each entry in column (2) of Table 3 shows the unconditional marginal effect of

the corresponding variable on the amount given. Because the dependent variable is the

logarithm of giving, small coefficients are approximately percentage changes. However,

this approximation is not very good for large coefficients, so caution is required in their

interpretation. Qualitatively, just as in column 1, the coefficients are consistent with the

child-cycle framework. Having a child increases the expected logarithm of the amount of

giving by 0.76, or roughly 114 percent. Once the child enters the teens, parents whose

children eventually apply to Anon U give more than parents whose children do not. For
                                                                                                         20


example, at age 15, the logarithm of giving is 1.38 higher (about 223 percent) for par-

ents of future applicants than for individuals without children. The corresponding coeffi-

cient for alumni whose children do not eventually apply is 1.01 (about 175 percent). For

parents of successful applicants, giving remains elevated after admission; the incre-

mental effect on the logarithm of giving at age 18 is about 2.5 (about 1150 percent). For

parents of rejectees, one cannot reject the hypothesis that the incremental effect on the

amount of giving falls to about zero at age 19. As we saw for the probability of giving,

the parents of rejected applicants behave no differently than alumni without children.

The child-cycle coefficients are graphed in Figure 2.

        Figure 2 allows us to address that possibility that reduced giving after admissions

might be driven by income effects associated with tuition payments. If tuition were the

important factor, then we would also expect to see decreases in giving among alumni

whose children did not apply to Anon U but instead attended other institutions. As

Figure 2 demonstrates, these alumni do not exhibit anything like the substantial de-

creases in giving that we see for the alumni of accepted children.26

        Another issue pertaining to the child-cycle interpretation of Figure 2 is that the

overall giving over an alumnus’s life may not be affected much by having an eligible

child, just the timing of donations. To investigate this possibility, we estimate a cross

sectional regression in which the left-hand side variable was lifetime giving as of 2006,27

and the right hand side included the basic demographic variables in Table 3 (minus the

child-cycle variables) augmented with a series of dichotomous variables for number of

children, and continuous variables for the age of each child. We find that lifetime giving

is 109 percent higher for alumni with one child and an additional 58 percent higher with

a second child. Further, lifetime giving increases by 5.1 percent for each year of the first

26
   Another argument along the same lines is that when one’s child is accepted at another institution, new
opportunities for charitable giving open at that institution. Again, though, if this were the case, we would
expect the behavior of the parents of rejected children and the parents of children who never applied to
be about the same, in contrast to Figure 2.
27
   Specifically, this is computed as the sum of giving in constant dollars over all years that the alumnus
has been in the sample.
                                                                                          21


child’s age and 2.0 percent for each year of the second child’s age. In short, life-time

giving is affected by the presence and age of children; the child-cycle does not arise sim-

ply because alumni are shifting donations over time.

       The coefficients on the other variables in column (2) generally have the same

signs as those for the probability of giving in column (1). One possible concern is that

even after taking logs, the estimates in column (2) might be driven by outliers. We es-

timate the model after deleting the largest one percent of the gifts, and no substantive

differences emerge. To assess the sensitivity of our results to the logarithmic transforma-

tion, we also estimate the Tobit equation in levels (with censoring at zero), both with

and without the top one percent of gifts deleted. As shown in the Appendix figures, the

child cycle is robust with respect to this change in functional form.

       4.3 Probability of Being a Class Leader

       As is true at most universities, the majority of money donated to Anon U comes

from a few very generous donors. Column (3) of Table 3 examines the probability of be-

ing a class leader, defined as an individual whose gift was greater than or equal to the

90th percentile in his or her class. When interpreting these figures, recall that, by defini-

tion, the probability of a random person being a class leader is about 10 percent. There-

fore, if a given characteristic raises the probability by (say) 5 percentage points, this
represents a 50 percent increase relative to the mean.

       The coefficients indicate that, for this dimension of giving as well, the child-cycle

pattern is present and very similar to the patterns we have already seen. These coeffi-

cients are graphed in Figure 3. The other covariates are generally similar in sign to

those in the other two columns. An important exception is gender. While women are

more likely to make a gift in a given year (column (1)) and to make larger gifts on aver-

age (column (2)), ceteris paribus, column (3) tells us that the probability of making a

very large gift is 1.2 percentage points higher for males.
                                                                                                           22


        4.4 The Role of Directed Giving

        Giving by parents of accepted children remains high after the admissions decision

has been rendered, a result that is not necessarily wholly consistent with the child cycle

model. After all, the lottery has been decided; why continue to buy tickets? Perhaps the

alumnus is showing tangible evidence of warm feelings engendered by the acceptance of

his or her child.28 Without ruling out this explanation, we note that another force may

be operative: certain donations made by alumni with children on campus could be less

public goods than relatively targeted benefits for their progeny. An example is a dona-

tion earmarked for a child’s varsity team.

        To explore this possibility, we estimate the probability that an alumnus makes a

directed gift in a particular year as a function of the variables in Table 3.29 We find

that, conditional on making any gift, alumni with 17-year old children who are applying

to Anon U are 3.4 percentage points more likely to make a directed gift than alumni

who have no children, and the difference is statistically significant. After admission, this

figure increases substantially. Alumni with 18 year old accepted children are 6.1 per-

centage points more likely to make a directed gift, while those whose accepted children

are 19 years old are 12.8 percentage points more likely. The impact of having a child

accepted at Anon U on directed giving peaks at 16.5 percentage points when the child is
21. It remains statistically significant through age 25, but drops to an insignificant -0.22

percentage points for children aged 26 and older. In contrast, conditional on giving, the

parents of rejected children are not significantly more likely to make a directed gift

when their children are of college age.30

        In short, during the time an alumnus’s child is on campus, the probability of

making a gift aimed at specific purposes, conditional on making a gift at all, is elevated.

28
   Another possibility is that the alumnus is concerned about admissions prospects for younger children.
However, as shown below, the same tendency exists when we look at the child-cycle for the last child in
the family.
29
   A directed gift is defined as one not made to the general annual appeal.
30
   The full set of results is available upon request.
                                                                                           23


This phenomenon might be due to the fact that prior to the matriculation of their chil-

dren, parents know little about the activities of certain campus organizations, or even of

their existence. But if that is the case, it is hard to explain why the relative likelihood of

directed giving drops after the child graduates. We conjecture that at least part of the

explanation is that the specific purposes directly benefit the child. Therefore, elevated

giving after the admission of one’s child may be due in part to non-altruistic motiva-

tions.

         4.5 Basic Model: Summary

         Whether we look at the probability of making any gift, the size of the gift, or the

probability of making a large gift (relative to one’s classmates), the child-cycle pattern

comes through clearly. This is not to say that altruism is unimportant--people without

any children give substantial amounts of money, after all. For the top 1 percent of all

gifts, unconditional on class or year, 2,875 gifts came from alumni with children, while

2,003 came from alumni without any children. Among the top 1 percent of lifetime (cu-

mulative to 2006) givers, 212 had children and 110 did not. However, it is hard to ex-

plain the patterns found in Table 3 on the basis of altruism alone.

         If we are willing to make some strong assumptions, we can be more precise about

the relative roles played by altruistic and selfish motivations. Specifically, suppose that:

1) Giving by alumni without children is done without the expectation of receiving any

reciprocal benefit. Of course, other motivations, such as public recognition or donating

to research projects that could be useful to one’s business, may also be present. To the

extent that they are, our estimate of the proportion of giving due to altruism may be

considered an upper bound. 2) The additional giving by alumni with children who do

not ultimately apply to Anon U is unselfish as well—as conjectured above, it is gener-

ated for one reason or another by warm feelings toward Anon U that are associated
                                                                                                        24


with having children.31 3) The additional giving by alumni whose children do apply is

motivated by self-interest. Under these assumptions, we can use our estimates of the dif-

ference in giving associated with a child who did not apply relative to a child who did

apply to estimate the self-interested component of giving. A complication arises because

this differential depends on the child’s age. Seventeen years seems a sensible choice, be-

cause at this age, the application choice has generally been made so that alumni whose

children do not apply are not making any precautionary donations. At the same time,

these children have not yet been accepted, so parents do not have an incentive to make

directed donations as discussed in Section 4.4. For the same reason, neither can dona-

tions be influenced by warm feelings due to the acceptance of one’s child.

        Under these assumptions and using the coefficients on CHILD17Appl and

CHILD17NoAppl from column (2) of Table 3, we calculate that about 52 percent of giv-

ing by alumni whose children apply to Anon U is due to altruism and the remaining 48

percent is due to self-interest.32 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to

use observational data to decompose donative behavior into altruistic and self-interested

components, and it suggests that the two motivations are of about equal importance, at

least in this context.


5. Alternative Specifications

        In this section we present some alternative specifications of our model in order to

assess the robustness of the basic results.


31
   One concern is that giving by alumni whose children do not apply may be motivated by the desire to
enhance the prospects of younger children. However, as shown below, this portion of the child-cycle for
the last child in a family is very similar to the child-cycle for the first child.
32
   The calculation is done as follows: We assume, without loss of generality, that giving associated with
no children (the baseline) is 1. We then exponentiate the coefficient on CHILD17Appl, which gives us a
figure of 6.06, the amount donated by alumni whose 17 year old children applied to Anon U, relative to
the baseline. We next exponentiate the coefficient on CHILD17NoAppl to obtain the relative amount given
by those whose 17 year old children did not apply, which is 3.14. Under our assumptions, the proportion
due to altruism has two components: baseline altruism and the increment associated with having children.
The proportion of giving from baseline altruism is 1/6.06 (= 0.165), while the proportion due to warm
feelings associated with having children is (3.14-1)/6.06 (= 0.353), and the amount associated with selfish
reasons is (6.06-3.14)/6.06 (= 0.482).
                                                                                                          25


        5.1 Subsequent Children

        So far we have characterized the child cycle in terms of the first child in the fam-

ily. A possible drawback is that giving along the first child’s cycle could be affected by

concerns about younger children’s admissions prospects. Therefore, estimating the cycle

for the last child might allow a cleaner test of the model.33 We began by re-estimating

our basic model from Table 3 using information on the last child rather than the first,

which, in effect, ignores any possible impact of older siblings. All alumni with complete

data, including those who only have one child, are included in this sample. After delet-

ing observations with missing data on the child’s age (27,882 observations), this sample

contains 488,297 observations.

        Again, for brevity we present only the graphical representation of the child-cycle

for amounts given. (See Figure 5.) If anything, the child-cycle pattern is even stronger

than for the first child. Note that giving by those whose last child was rejected is lower

than those with no children at all, and significantly so at ages 22 and 23. This is a shar-

per relative decrease than we observed for first children. Within our framework, this

suggests that parents of rejected first children still give some amount with an eye to-

ward enhancing their younger children’s prospects. But with the last child, this motiva-

tion disappears.34

        A natural question is whether the character of the child-cycle is affected by a

previous child’s outcome. Does acceptance of a first child to Anon U reinforce the no-

tion that donations generate a reciprocal benefit? One way to answer this question

33
   For families with only one child, the first child is also considered to be the last. Future children may
not yet be born, but it is reasonable to expect that at least for the children’s age group that is our pri-
mary interest, 14 years and older, most families are unlikely to have another child. In addition, for some
families, previous children may be sufficiently old that alumni are concerned about the admissions pros-
pects for grandchildren.
34
   This raises the question of whether other family relationships might be associated with expectations of
reciprocal benefits to giving. For example, grandparents might make donations hoping to enhance the
likelihood of admissions for their grandchildren. Unfortunately, in our data set, we are only able to relia-
bly link grandparents and grandchildren when the members of the intermediate generation also attended
Anon U. This would leave us with a small and very unrepresentative sample of grandparent-grandchild
pairs.
                                                                                                            26


would be to interact the child-cycle variables for the second child with indicators for the

first child’s outcome. However, estimating such a model is infeasible, as it would involve

hundreds of right hand side variables, many of which are all or nearly all zeros. Instead,

we augmented the specification for the second child with three indicator variables relat-
ing to the status of the first child: whether the first child was rejected by Anon U,

whether the first child was accepted, and whether the first child did not apply to Anon

U at all. Note that these variables are not constant over time; their values change as the

first child grows older and his or her admissions status becomes known.35

        We find that the shape of the giving cycle associated with the second child is un-

affected by the inclusion of these variables. However, if the first child is known to have

been accepted, the entire child cycle shifts upwards. The probability of making a gift

increases by 11.6 percentage points, while the amount given increases by about 87 per-

cent. If the first child is rejected, the probability of making a gift falls by 6.1 percentage

points, while the amount given decreases by about 27 percent. (All of these figures are

statistically significant.) If the first child did not apply, there is no significant change in

the probability of making a gift or the amount given. These results have a straightfor-

ward interpretation within the child-cycle framework: Rejection of the first child indi-

cates to the alumnus that his or her expectations regarding reciprocity were to some ex-

tent incorrect, and giving behavior is adjusted accordingly. In the same way, acceptance

of the first child reinforces the perception that reciprocity is present.

        As an additional test, we estimate the cycle for third children.36 The shape of the
cycle associated with the third child is very similar to that of both the first and second

children. The oldest child’s rejection reduces the amount given by 14.5 percent (impre-

cisely estimated), while the second child’s rejection reduces the amount given by a sta-

35
   In particular, the variables for first child acceptance and rejection can take on a value of one only for
those years in which the first child is 18 or over, while the indicator for first child non-application can be
one only for those years in which the first child is 14 and over.
36
   In this specification, there are 493,854 observations representing 32,817 alumni with 1,687 third chil-
dren.
                                                                                                            27


tistically significant 39 percent. The first child’s and second child’s acceptances increase

the amount given by 134 percent and 118 percent, respectively, and both figures are

statistically significant. Again, information that reinforces or weakens the perception of

a reciprocal benefit affects giving.

        5.2 Occupation and Field

        As noted earlier, a drawback of our data set is lack of information on income or

wealth. However, for a subset of observations, we have detailed information on the

alumnus’s occupational field and position. We know whether the individual ever worked

in a number of fields, including consulting, finance, information technology, health care,

education, and so on. From the position data, we can classify the alumnus as an execu-

tive, government worker, academic, attorney, physician, white collar worker, or some

other occupation. We believe that this information, together with the variables in our
basic model, likely do a reasonable job of proxying for permanent income. Using the

field and position data reduces our sample size substantially, from 487,913 to 344,342

giving opportunities, which is why we did not include these variables in our basic model.

        When we augment the basic model with the field and position variables, the es-

timated child-cycle is essentially unchanged. For brevity, we do not include the coeffi-

cients here. Rather, we present a graphical summary of the child-cycle for the amount

given in Figure 4. The same tendencies that we saw in Figure 1 are clearly present.

Hence, the existence of a child-cycle is not sensitive to the inclusion of a rich set of vari-

ables relating to the alumnus’s permanent income.37



37
   Although the child-cycle coefficients do not substantially change, we note in passing that some of the
other coefficients do. For example, in our basic model, being an economics major increases the amount of
giving by about 85 percent (computed from column (2) of Table 3). However, once we take occupation
into account, this figure falls to 37 percent. In part, the coefficient in Table 3 reflects the fact that Anon
U’s economics majors are particularly likely to go into the field of finance which, by itself, increases the
amount of giving by about 75 percent, ceteris paribus. Interestingly, the coefficients on the race variables
do not change substantially; for instance, the independent effect of being black is -56.8 percent in the ba-
sic model and -59.4 percent when we augment the model with occupation and field. Other race variables
are similarly unaffected. Detailed estimates for these models are available upon request.
                                                                                       28


       5.3 Permanent Income and Fixed Effects Estimation

       Another approach to dealing with missing income data begins with the hypothe-

sis that giving depends on the alumnus’s permanent income. If so, then a sensible alter-

native is fixed effects estimation, which controls for any attributes of an alumnus that

do not change over time (or at least over the length of our sample period). Indeed, a

fixed effects model takes into account any time-invariant unobservable variables that

might drive both giving behavior and the admissions status of an alumnus’s child, and

hence confound the child-cycle interpretation of our findings. Such unobservables in-

clude affinity to Anon U, generosity, quality of undergraduate experience, and so on.

Estimating fixed effects in a probit model is not possible, and doing so with Tobit is

cumbersome. Therefore, we use ordinary least squares. Figures 6, 7, and 8 show the

child-cycles for the probability of giving, the amount given, and the probability of being

a class leader, respectively. If our results were in fact being driven by permanent income

or other time-invariant unobservables, then the child cycle would be less pronounced

than previously, or perhaps disappear altogether. However, if anything, the fixed effects

estimates are more consistent with the child-cycle framework. The probability that an

alumnus with an accepted 22 year old child makes a gift is 18.5 percentage points higher

than for an alumnus without children. But this differential trends downward to 8.5 per-

centage points by age 25. The incremental probability of an alumnus with a rejected

child making a gift drops to -.044 percentage points at age 19 and stays insignificantly

different from the probability for a childless alumnus. The results for amount given and

probability of being a class leader are similarly pronounced. We conclude that our re-

sults are not likely affected by time-invariant unobservable variables.
       5.4 Augmented Sample

       Our analysis sample is based on alumni who graduated between 1972 and 2005.

We have additional data on alumni who graduated before 1972. This sample, which in-

cludes alumni from classes as early as 1914, is far larger: 939,671 giving opportunities
                                                                                        29


between 1983 and 2006. It has many more alumni children who are at college age and

beyond, a group that is essential to estimating the child-cycle. The number of children

who applied since 1983 is 5,096 (41.9 percent of whom were accepted), compared to

1,501 in our basic sample. The tradeoff is a less rich set of explanatory variables, be-

cause we lack data on SAT scores, admissions rating, race, grade point average, secon-

dary school type, and honors for the pre-1972 classes. This section presents results based

on the augmented sample.

       Figures 9, 10, and 11 show the child-cycles for the probability of giving, the

amount given, and the probability of being a class leader, respectively. The results are

nearly identical to those from the basic sample. The only noticeable difference is in Fig-

ure 10, which shows that although the relative amount given by parents of rejected

children falls, it does not actually become statistically indistinguishable from childless

alumni. The key point, though, is that our main results continue to hold using a data

set with much more information on a critical group of alumni, those with children old

enough to have gone through the admissions process.


6. Conclusions

      Our starting point is an old question in economics: To what extent does philan-

thropy stem from altruism rather than the expectation of receiving some reciprocal

benefit? Research on this topic using observational data is rare because quantifying a

reciprocal benefit is difficult. To address the problem, we analyze a unique data set that

allows us to estimate how alumni contributions to a university relate to a perceived

benefit—an improvement in the likelihood that their children will be admitted.

      We find that the presence of children increases an alumnus’s giving, that giving

drops off after the admissions decision, and that the decline is far greater when the child

is rejected. In short, alumni giving varies systematically with the age and admissions

status of their children. This child-cycle of alumni giving is consistent with the hypothe-
                                                                                          30


sis that some donations are made in the hope of a reciprocal benefit. The result is robust

to choice of estimation method and alternative specifications of the model, and does not

appear to be due to unobservable variables such as underlying affinity to the university.

           Our results do not imply that self-interest is the only motivation behind donative

behavior. As we document in the text, many alumni with no apparent reason to expect

a reciprocal benefit, at least in terms of a higher admissions probability for their chil-

dren, are extraordinarily generous. In the context of the larger debate over the motiva-

tions for altruism, our analysis shows that both selflessness and giving with the hope of

reciprocity are present.

           We do not know whether these results generalize to other selective universities.

However, we are encouraged by the fact that other institutions seem quite similar to the

university we study with respect to other variables that affect giving. Hence, behavior

with respect to the child-cycle might be similar as well. That said, it would be useful to

investigate whether the child-cycle is present at other selective schools.38 Similarly, it

would be informative to study the trajectory of alumni giving at non-selective schools.

At such schools, the child-cycle is not operative, and hence we would expect to see a

path of alumni giving with respect to children’s age that is less steep, and that exhibits

less of a falloff after the child’s admissions decision.




38
     By definition, the child-cycle can be operative only at selective schools.
                                                                                      31


                                      References

      Altonji, Joseph. G., Fumio Hayashi and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Is the Extended
Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data,” American Economic Re-
view 82, no. 5, 1992, pp. 1177-98.

      Andreoni, James, “An Experimental Test of the Public-Goods Crowding-Out
Hypothesis, American Economic Review 83, no. 5, December, 1993, pp. 1317-1327.

       Becker, Gary S., A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy
82, pp. 1063-93.

       Bergstrom, Theodore C. and Oded Stark, “How Altruism Can Prevail in an Evo-
lutionary Environment, American Economic Review 83, no. 2, May 1993, pp. 149-155.

       Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers, “The Strate-
gic Bequest Motive, Journal of Political Economy 93, no. 6, December 1985, pp. 1045-
1076.

       Bowen, William G., Martin A. Kurzweil, Eugene M. Tobin, and Susanne C. Pich-
ler, Equity and Excellence in American Higher Education (Thomas Jefferson Founda-
tion Distinguished Lecture Series), University of Virginia Press, 2005.

      Bristol, Ralph, “How Much Will Alumni Give in the Future?” Planning for High-
er Education 20, Winter 1991-92, pp. 1-12.
       Chronicle of Higher Education, The 2006-7 Almanac, Volume 53, Issue 1, p. 30,
http://chronicle.com/weekly/almanac/2006/nation/0103003.htm

       Cigno, Alessandro and Furio C. Rosati, “Mutual Interest, Self-enforcing Consti-
tutions and Apparent Generosity,” in Gerard-Varet, L.-A., S.-C. Kolm and J. Mercier
Ythier (eds.), The Economics of Reciprocity, Giving and Altruism, Macmillan Press
Ltd.: London, 2000, pp. 226-247.

      Clotfelter, Charles, Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving, The University of
Chicago Press: Chicago, 1985.

      Clotfelter, Charles, “Alumni Giving to Elite Private Colleges and Universities ,”
Economics of Education Review 22, 2003, pp. 109-120.

       Cunningham, Brendan and Carlena Cochi-Ficano, “The Determinants of Dona-
tive Revenue Flows from Alumni of Higher Education: An Empirical Inquiry,” Journal
of Human Resources 37, no. 3, Summer 2002, pp. 540-569.

       Docquier, Frederic and Hillel Rapoport, “Strategic and Altruistic Remittances,”
in Gerard-Varet, L.-A., S.-C. Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier (eds.), The Economics of Re-
ciprocity, Giving and Altruism, Macmillan Press Ltd.: London, 2000, pp. 285-297.

      Dugan, Kelly, Charles H. Mullin and John J. Siegfried, “Undergraduate Financial
Aid and Subsequent Alumni Giving Behavior,” Working Paper, Vanderbilt University,
1999.
                                                                                       32


       Ehrenberg, Ronald and Christopher L. Smith, “The Sources and Uses of Annual
Giving at Private Research Universities,” Economics of Education Review 22, June
2003, pp. 223-341.

        Gerard-Varet, L.-A., S.-C. Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier, The Economics of Recip-
rocity, Giving and Altruism, Macmillan Press Ltd.: London, 2000.

        Giving USA Foundation, “Charitable Giving Rises 5 Percent to Nearly $250 Bil-
lion in 2004,” http://www.aafrc.org/gusa/GUSA05˙Press˙Release.pdf#search
=%22total%20charitable%20giving%22

      Golden, Daniel, “How Lowering the Bar Helps Colleges Prosper,” Wall Street
Journal, Saturday/Sunday, September 9-10, 2006, pp. A1, A10.

      Grant, James H. and David L. Lindauer, “The Economics of Charity—Life-Cycle
Patterns of Alumnae Contributions,” Eastern Economic Journal 2, April-June, 1986, pp.
129-141.

      Harrison, William B., Shannor K. Mitchell, and Steven P. Peterson, “Alumni
Donations and Colleges’ Development Expenditures: Does Spending Matter?” The
American Journal of Economics and Sociology 54, no. 4, October, 1995, pp. 397-412.

      Hechinger, John, “The Tiger Roars,” Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2006, p. B1.

       Ioannides, Yannis M. and Kamhon Kan, “The Nature of Two-directional Inter-
generational Transfers of Money and Time: An Empirical Analysis,” in Gerard-Varet,
L.-A., S.-C. Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier (eds.), The Economics of Reciprocity, Giving
and Altruism, Macmillan Press Ltd.: London, 2000, pp. 314-331.

      Kolm, Serge-Christophe, “The Theory of Reciprocity,” in Gerard-Varet, L.-A., S.-
C. Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier (eds.), The Economics of Reciprocity, Giving and Altru-
ism, Macmillan Press Ltd.: London, 2000, pp. 115-141.

      Landes, William M. and Richard A. Posner, “Salvors, Finders, Good Samaritans
and Other Rescuers: An Economic Study of Law and Altruism,” Working Paper No.
227, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 1978.

      List, John A., “On the Interpretation of Giving in Dictator Games,” Working Pa-
per, University of Chicago, November 2006.

       McGarry, Kathleen and Robert F. Schoeni, “Transfer Behavior: Measurement
and the Redistribution of Resources within the Family,” Working Paper No. 4607, Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research, January 1994.

       Monks, James, “Patterns of Giving to One’s Alma Mater among Young Gradu-
ates from Selective Institutions,” Economics of Education Review 22, 2003, pp. 121-130.

      Morgan, John, “Financing Public Goods by Means of Lotteries,” The Review of
Economic Studies 67, no 4, October 2000, pp. 761-784.
                                                                                     33


      Odendahl, T. J., Charity Begins at Home: Generosity and Self-Interest among
the Philanthropic Elite, Basic Books, 1990.

      Olsen, Katherine., Amy L. Smith and Phanindra V. Wunnava, “An Empirical
Study of the Life-Cycle Hypothesis with Respect to Alumni Donations, “ American
Economist 33, no 2, 1989, pp. 60-63.

      Oster, Sharon, “The Effect of University Endowment Growth on Giving: Is There
Evidence of Crowding Out?” Working Paper, Yale School of Management, February
2001.

        Raut, Lakshmi K. and Lien H. Tran, “Reciprocity with Two-sided Altruism in
Intergenerational Transfers: Evidence from Indonesian Family Life Survey Data, “ in
Gerard-Varet, L.-A., S.-C. Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier (eds.), The Economics of Recip-
rocity, Giving and Altruism, Macmillan Press Ltd.: London, 2000, pp. 298-313.

      Rotemberg, Julio J., “Commercial Policy with Altruistic Voters,” Working Paper
No. 7984, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2000.

       Samuelson, Paul A., “Altruism as a Problem Involving Group versus Individual
Selection in Economics and Biology,” American Economic Review 83, no. 2, May 1993,
pp. 143-148.

        Schokkaert, Erik and Luc Van Ootegem, “Preference Variation and Private Do-
nations,” in Gerard-Varet, L.-A., S.-C. Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier (eds.), The Econom-
ics of Reciprocity, Giving and Altruism, Macmillan Press Ltd.: London, 2000, pp. 78-95.
       Shulman, James L. and William G. Bowen, The Game of Life, Princeton Univer-
sity Press: Princeton, 2001.

       Taylor, Alton L. and Joseph C. Martin, “Characteristics of Alumni Donors and
Nondonors at a Research I, Public University,” Research in Higher Education 36, June,
1995, pp. 283-302.

        Weisbrod, Burton A., “The Forgotten Economic Sector: Private but Non-
Profit,” Challenge, September-October 1978, pp. 32-36.

       Willemain, Thomas R., Anil Goyal, Mark Van Deven, and Inderpreet S. Thukral,
“Alumni Giving: The Influences of Reunion, Class, and Year,” Research in Higher Edu-
cation 35, no. 5, October 1994, pp. 609-629.

       Wunnava, P.V. and M. A. Lauze, “Alumni Giving at a Small Liberal Arts Col-
lege: Evidence from Consistent and Occasional Donors,” Economics of Education Re-
view 20, 2001, pp. 533-543.

       Yoo, Y.H. and W. B. Harrison, “Altruism in the Market for Giving and Receiv-
ing: A Case of Higher Education,” Economics of Education Review 8, no. 4, 1989, pp.
367-379.
                                               Table 1*
                             Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

     Variable                                Description                             Mean      Standard
                                                                                               Deviation
    TotalYear                    Total giving for year in 2006 dollars               466.14     49512
  LogTotalYear                Log of total giving for year in 2006 dollars            2.425      2.425
     Didgive                        1 if any donation given in year                  0.5563     0.4968
                      1 if giving was at or above the 90th percentile in the alum-
Annual Classleader                                                                   0.1207     0.3258
                                      nus’s class for a given year
    Yearssince                    Number of years since graduation                    12.05      7.826
   Yearssince2                Number of years since graduation, squared               206.5      231.3
  Spouseisalum                      1 if the spouse is an alumnus                    0.1302     0.3365
      Male                             1 if the alumnus is male                      0.6507      .4768
 Race/Ethnicity
      White                  Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus is White             0.8195     0.3846
    Amerind                     1 if the alumnus is a Native American                0.00363    0.06012
      Black                            1 if the alumnus is Black                     0.06929    0.2539
    Hispanic                         1 if the alumnus is Hispanic                    0.03798    0.1911
      Asian                            1 if the alumnus is Asian                     0.06958    0.2544
Secondary School-
       ing
      Public          Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus attended public school      0.5792     0.4937
    Boarding                  1 if the alumnus attended boarding school              0.1395     0.3464
     Private                   1 if the alumnus attended private school              0.2622     0.4398
     Schloth               1 if the alumnus attended another type of school          0.01916    0.1371

    SATmath           SAT math score. Scores prior to 1996 are adjusted to re-        703.1      75.95
                              flect recentering of the scoring scale.

   SATverbal          SAT verbal score. Scores prior to 1996 are adjusted to re-      701.9      75.77
                               flect recentering of the scoring scale.
Admissions Office
“Non-Academic”
   Ranking
                     Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus received the highest non-
        A                   academic ranking from the admissions office              0.03220    0.1765

        B             1 if the alumnus received the second highest non-academic      0.4660     0.4988
                                   ranking from the admissions office

        C              1 if the alumnus received the third highest non-academic      0.4188     0.4934
                                   ranking from the admissions office
        D             1 if the alumnus received the fourth highest non-academic      0.07897    0.2697
                                  ranking from the admissions office

        E              1 if the alumnus received the fifth highest non-academic      0.00401   0.06319
                                   ranking from the admissions office
 Admissions Office
“Academic” Rank-
       ing           Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus received the highest aca-    0.1536    0.3605
                              demic ranking from the admissions office
        A

        B            1 if the alumnus received the second highest academic rank-     0.4242    0.4942
                                    ing from the admissions office

        C            1 if the alumnus received the third highest academic ranking    0.2708    0.4444
                                      from the admissions office

        D            1 if the alumnus received the fourth highest academic rank-     0.1435    0.3506
                                    ing from the admissions office

        E            1 if the alumnus received the fifth highest academic ranking    0.0079    0.08858
                                      from the admissions office
     Varsity                  1 if the alumnus played on a varsity team              0.3892    0.4876
    Clubsport                  1 if the alumnus played on a club team                0.1728    0.3780
      Honors          1 if the alumnus graduated magna, summa, or cum laude          0.4532    0.4978
      Greek           1 if the alumnus was a member of a fraternity or sorority      0.6949    0.4604
      Major           Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus majored in molecular
      Molbio                                   biology

   Small Social      1 if the alumnus majored in Anthropology, Urban Studies, or     0.02940   0.1689
    Sciences                                  Sociology.
     English                     1 if the alumnus majored in English                 0.1073    0.3095
    Economics                  1 if the alumnus majored in Economics                 0.07949   0.2705
   Public Policy              1 if the alumnus majored in Public Policy              0.05841   0.2345
 Political Science           1 if the alumnus majored in Political Science           0.08796   0.2832
    Psychology                 1 if the alumnus majored in Psychology                0.04890   0.2157
     History                     1 if the alumnus majored in History                 0.1182    0.3229

      MAE            1 if the alumnus majored in Mechanical/Aerospace Engineer-      0.03534   0.1846
                                                 ing

      EE/CS          1 if the alumnus majored in Electrical Engineering or Com-      0.05533   0.2286
                                           puter Science

   Arch & Civ        1 if the alumnus majored in Architecture or Civil Engineer-     0.07040   0.2558
                                                 ing
                     1 if the alumnus majored in Art, Art History, Classics, East
 Small Humanities    Asian Studies, Linguistics, Music, Near Eastern Studies, Phi-   0.1180    0.3226
                     losophy, Religion, or Languages and Literature departments

Small Engineering      1 if the alumnus majored in Engineering, Operations Re-       0.03132   0.1742
                      search and Financial Engineering, or Chemical Engineering
  Small Sciences      1 if the alumnus majored in Applied Mathematics, Astro-        0.1375    0.3444
                      physics, Biochemistry, Biology, Chemistry, Ecology and Evo-
                      lutionary Biology, Geology, Mathematics, Physics, or Statis-
                                                   tics
      Minor
                         Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus received no minor         0.7673    0.4226
    No Minor
 African/African-       1 if the alumnus received a minor in African or African-      0.02303   0.1500
 American Studies                          American Studies
 American Studies        1 if the alumnus received a minor in American Studies        0.02324   0.1507
       Latin                   1 if the alumnus received a minor in Latin             0.00186   0.04305
     Finance                  1 if the alumnus received a minor in Finance            0.00324   0.05683
     Theater                  1 if the alumnus received a minor in Theater            0.01293   0.1130
   Public Policy           1 if the alumnus received a minor in Public Policy         0.05027   0.2185
                      1 if the alumnus received a minor in Architecture, Basic En-
Other Engineering     gineering, Bioengineering, Electrical Engineering, Geological   0.01840   0.1344
                       Engineering, Management, Materials Sciences, or Robotics.
                      1 if the alumnus received a minor in Applied and Computa-
  Other Sciences      tional Mathematics, Biophysics, Cognitive Studies, Environ-     0.02731   0.1630
                       mental Studies, Science in Human Affairs, or Neuroscience.
 Other Humanities        1 if the alumnus received a minor in a humanities field      0.05261   0.2233
     Teaching                1 if the alumnus received a teaching certificate         0.01377   0.1165
     Reunion               1 if the year after graduation is some multiple of 5       0.1795    0.3838
Post Baccalaureate
    Education
                      Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus has no advanced degree       0.6053    0.4888
    NoPostAB
      PhD                  1 if the alumnus has a Ph.D. or equivalent degree          0.06742   0.2508
     Masters                         1 if the alumnus has a masters                   0.1381    0.3450
        JD                             1 if the alumnus has a JD                      0.1004    0.3006
     MDDDS                       1 if the alumnus has a medical degree                0.06173   0.2407
       MBA                           1 if the alumnus has an MBA                      0.08986   0.2860

*Based on 487,913 observations on gift-giving from 1983 to 2006. 32,488 alumni who graduated from 1972
to 2005 are represented.
                                              Table 2*
                       Position and Field Definitions and Summary Statistics

    Variable                               Description                             Mean      Standard
                                                                                             Deviation
     Field
                                                                                   0.06254    0.2421
     Arts                 1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Arts field
  Agriculture          1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Agriculture field       0.00187    0.04324
  Architecture        1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Architecture field       0.02516    0.1566
Pharmaceuticals      1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Pharmaceuticals field     0.02336    0.1511
Communications      1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Communications field       0.09619    0.2949
   Consulting          1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Consulting field        0.1009     0.3011
   Education            1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Education field        0.1222     0.3275
    Finance              1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Finance field         0.1947     0.3960
  Health Care
     (Busi-            1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Health Care field       0.1700     0.3756
 ness/Industry)
  Hospitality          1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Hospitality field       0.00457    0.06743
  Information              1 if the alumnus ever worked in the IT field            0.1150     0.3190
  Technology
      Law                  1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Law field           0.1883     0.3909
 Manufacturing       1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Manufacturing field       0.07509    0.2635
     Retail               1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Retail field         0.02251    0.1483
 Transportation      1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Transportation field      0.01014    0.1002
Federal Govern-      1 if the alumnus ever worked for the Federal Government       0.04406    0.2052
     ment
 State Govern-         1 if the alumnus ever worked for a State Government         0.02515    0.1566
     ment
Foreign Govern-      1 if the alumnus ever worked for a Foreign Government         0.00275    0.05234
     ment
Nongovernmental           1 if the alumnus ever worked in the NGO field            0.02832    0.1659
  Organization
    Religion             1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Religion field        0.01052    0.1020
     Other                 1 if the alumnus ever worked in another field           0.27108    0.4445
Multilateral Or-   1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Multilateral Organization   0.00191    0.04371
  ganization                                   field
    Military               1 if the alumnus ever worked for the Military           0.00747    0.08612
   Occupation
  Government                                                                       0.01007      0.09982
    Worker              1 if the alumnus ever worked as a government worker
  Miscellaneous      1 if the alumnus ever worked in some miscellaneous occupa-    0.08177       0.2740
    Worker                                      tion
Physician/Dentist       1 if the alumnus ever worked as a physician or dentist      0.1339       0.3405
  White Collar         1 if the alumnus ever worked in a white collar occupation    0.3079       0.4616
    Attorney                 1 if the alumnus ever worked as an attorney            0.2673       0.4426
    Executive                1 if the alumnus ever worked as an executive           0.4863       0.4998


*Based on 344,342 observations on gift-giving from 1983 to 2006 for individuals for whom data on field
and position are reported. 20,039 alumni who graduated from 1972 to 2005 are represented.
                                 Table 3*
                                Basic Model

    Variable          (1)                      (2)               (3)
                    Didgive                   Amount      Annual Classleader

      Child
     Age 0            0.1347                    0.7619         0.04197
                    (0.00674)                 (0.03785)       (0.00478)

     Age 1            0.1293                    0.7371         0.03318
                    (0.00603)                 (0.03376)       (0.00423)

     Age 2            0.1341                    0.7561         0.03438
                    (0.00605)                 (0.03465)       (0.00426)

     Age 3            0.1436                    0.8068         0.03349
                    (0.00607)                 (0.03562)       (0.00429)

     Age 4            0.1505                   0.8588          0.03050
                    (0.00611)                 (0.0368)        (0.00432)

     Age 5            0.1469                    0.8596         0.02806
                    (0.00624)                 (0.03804)       (0.00434)

     Age 6            0.1541                    0.8904         0.02652
                    (0.00638)                 (0.03942)       (0.00446)

     Age 7            0.1543                   0.8986          0.02134
                    (0.00658)                 0.04119)        (0.00451)

     Age 8            0.1620                    0.9511         0.02683
                    (0.00676)                 (0.04314)       (0.00477)

     Age 9            0.1629                    0.9730         0.02102
                    (0.00702)                 (0.04525)       (0.00479)

     Age 10           0.1652                    1.026          0.02480
                    (0.00730)                 (0.04792)       (0.00509)

     Age 11           0.1806                    1.116          0.03055
                    (0.00742)                 (0.04994)       (0.00536)

     Age 12           0.1812                    1.151           0.0400
                    (0.00773)                 (0.05252)       (0.00575)

     Age 13           0.1743                    1.099          0.03142
                    (0.00816)                 (0.05476)       (0.00583)

Child Did Not Ap-
       ply
     Age 14           0.1380                   0.9535          0.03986
                    (0.01452)                 (0.0941)        (0.01069)
    Age 15           0.1595      1.011      0.01863
                   (0.01421)   (0.09295)   (0.01002)

    Age 16           0.1552      1.0276     0.03923
                   (0.01437)   (0.09411)   (0.01064)

    Age 17           0.1705      1.143      0.02927
                   (0.01419)   (0.09483)   (0.01038)

    Age 18           0.1523      0.9994     0.02870
                   (0.01455)   (0.09535)   (0.01028)

    Age 19           0.1318     0.9088      0.03342
                   (0.01637)   (0.1055)    (0.01139)

    Age 20           0.1266     0.7961      0.01992
                   (0.01795)   (0.1122)    (0.01189)

    Age 21           0.1032     0.6701      0.01675
                   (0.01986)   (0.1217)    (0.01280)

    Age 22          0.08568     0.5497      0.00684
                   (0.02233)   (0.1335)    (0.01342)

    Age 23          0.09589     0.5745      0.00619
                   (0.02377)   (0.1417)    (0.01440)

    Age 24          0.08697     0.5954      0.01787
                   (0.02701)   (0.1631)    (0.01670)

    Age 25          0.08394     0.4776      -0.00849
                   (0.03124)   (0.1806)    (0.01755)

Age 26 and above     0.1208     0.7603      0.01774
                   (0.03436)   (0.2224)    (0.02436)

Child Did Apply
    Age 14           0.1813      1.172      0.03261
                   (0.01224)   (0.08215)   (0.00917)

    Age 15           0.2048      1.376      0.06187
                   (0.01187)   (0.08346)   (0.01017)

    Age 16           0.2071      1.462      0.07480
                   (0.01198)   (0.08601)   (0.01053)

    Age 17          0.2497       1.800       0.1099
                    (0.011)    (0.08671)   (0.01131)

 Child Accepted
    Age 18           0.3360     2.525        0.1889
                   (0.01362)   (0.1193)    (0.01999)
    Age 19           0.3071     2.382      0.1852
                   (0.01631)   (0.1346)   (0.0212)

    Age 20          0.2670      2.083       0.1610
                   (0.0202)    (0.1515)   (0.02230)

    Age 21           0.2674     2.078       0.1748
                   (0.02271)   (0.1665)   (0.02579)

    Age 22           0.2512     1.837       0.1497
                   (0.02597)   (0.1807)   (0.02820)

    Age 23           0.2491     1.736       0.1284
                   (0.02913)   (0.1982)   (0.03013)

    Age 24           0.1747     1.284      0.06793
                   (0.03589)   (0.2281)   (0.02969)

    Age 25           0.1459     1.122      0.08681
                   (0.04276)   (0.2517)   (0.03492)

Age 26 and above    0.07759     0.5236     -0.00234
                   (0.05461)   (0.3015)   (0.03083)

 Child Rejected
    Age 18           0.1352     0.9030     0.03016
                   (0.01639)   (0.1055)   (0.01164)

    Age 19          0.02262     0.2026     -0.01564
                   (0.01896)   (0.1070)   (0.01014)

    Age 20          0.02675     0.1698     -0.01788
                   (0.02073)   (0.1143)   (0.01093)

    Age 21          0.04713     0.2869     -0.02333
                   (0.02238)   (0.1251)   (0.01157)

    Age 22          0.02477     0.1222     -0.01926
                   (0.02595)   (0.1377)   (0.01354)

    Age 23          -0.01938    -0.1187    -0.03922
                   (0.03031)   (0.1519)   (0.01374)

    Age 24          -0.00816   -0.02148    -0.02581
                   (0.03412)   (0.1794)   (0.01711)

    Age 25          -0.04415    -0.2117    -0.05188
                   (0.03943)   (0.1999)   (0.01662)

Age 26 and above    -0.03201    -0.1109    -0.02369
                   (0.05015)   (0.2663)   (0.02394)
Child Too Young to
   Have Applied
     Age 14            0.2295       1.535      0.06728
                     (0.01374)    (0.09402)   (0.01190)

                       0.2304      1.566       0.06800
     Age 15          (0.01588)    (0.1094)    (0.01388)

                       0.2101      1.525       0.08390
     Age 16          (0.02147)    (0.1473)    (0.01861)

    Yearssince        -0.01455     -0.00904       -
                     (0.00085)    (0.00403)

   Yearssince2        0.00034     0.00044         -
                     (0.00002)    (0.0001)

   Spouseisalum        0.1401       0.5879     0.02086
                     (0.005968)   (0.03113)   (0.003734)

      Male            -0.04591     -0.1690     0.01163
                     (0.00482)    (0.02444)   (0.002584)

  Race/Ethnicity
     Amerind          -0.09796     -0.5464     -0.03699
                     (0.03579)    (0.1638)    (0.01640)

      Black           -0.1622      -0.8398     -0.06219
                     (0.00979)    (0.0433)    (0.00348)

     Hispanic         -0.1112      -0.5852     -0.04640
                     (0.01146)    (0.05246)   (0.00459)

      Asian           -0.07193     -0.3497     -0.02722
                     (0.00823)    (0.03857)   (0.00379)

Secondary School-
       ing
    Boarding          0.01963       0.1723     0.03182
                     (0.00656)    (0.03467)   (0.00398)

     Private          0.01021      0.09102     0.01545
                     (0.00501)    (0.02564)   (0.00282)

     Schloth          -0.02547     -0.1313     0.00065
                     (0.01764)    (0.09234)   (0.01057)

    SATmath           -0.00010     -0.00081    -0.00005
                     (0.00009)    (0.00042)   (0.00005)

    SATverbal        0.000002      0.00026     -0.00001
                     (0.00010)    (0.00044)   (0.00005)
Admissions Office
“Non-Academic”
   Ranking
       B             0.00123     -0.01145    -0.00569
                    (0.01326)   (0.07015)   (0.00690)

       C             0.00505    0.00651      -0.00383
                    (0.01365)   (0.0722)    (0.00713)

       D             -0.01293    -0.05963    -0.00846
                    (0.01563)   (0.08027)   (0.00785)

       E             -0.06919    -0.2641     -0.00849
                    (0.03214)   (0.1520)    (0.01642)

Admissions Office
“Academic” Rank-
       ing
       B             0.01503    0.09554      0.00569
                    (0.00724)   (0.0368)    (0.00397)

       C             0.02461      0.1944     0.02227
                    (0.00939)   (0.04927)   (0.00552)

       D             0.00710      0.1399     0.02383
                    (0.01231)   (0.06569)   (0.00749)

       E             -0.02640   0.06120      0.05336
                    (0.02365)   (0.1321)    (0.01678)

     Varsity         0.04912      0.2848     0.02996
                    (0.00494)   (0.02528)   (0.00276)

   Club sport        -0.00860    -0.05443    0.00053
                    (0.00598)   (0.03053)   (0.00330)

     Honors          -0.00105   0.01172      0.00559
                    (0.00628)   (0.0318)    (0.00344)

     Greek            0.1285      0.6643     0.04356
                    (0.00501)   (0.02486)   (0.00251)

  GPA – Second       0.00313     0.00221     -0.00036
    Quartile        (0.00662)   (0.03277)   (0.00357)

GPA – Third Quar-    -0.02053    -0.1066     -0.00255
      tile          (0.00812)   (0.04056)   (0.00438)

  GPA – Bottom       -0.05714    -0.3072     -0.01688
    Quartile        (0.00946)   (0.04644)   (0.00486)
     Major
  Small Social       -0.03655    -0.1644     0.00824
   Sciences         (0.01782)   (0.08596)   (0.01141)

     English         -0.02557    -0.08494    0.02144
                    (0.01426)   (0.06708)   (0.00937)

   Economics         0.08084      0.6131     0.11356
                    (0.01408)   (0.07868)   (0.01302)

  Public Policy      0.04885     0.3950      0.08576
                    (0.02069)   (0.1093)    (0.01713)

Political Science    0.02286      0.2191     0.06621
                    (0.01428)   (0.07239)   (0.01125)

   Psychology        -0.02501    -0.1181     0.00769
                    (0.01583)   (0.07523)   (0.01003)

     History         0.03214      0.2711     0.06825
                    (0.01388)   (0.07058)   (0.01093)

     MAE             0.06214      0.3558     0.04322
                    (0.01650)   (0.08775)   (0.01195)

     EE/CS           0.06090      0.4403     0.08403
                    (0.01520)   (0.08358)   (0.01297)

   Arch & Civ        0.06510      0.3974     0.05299
                    (0.01504)   (0.08039)   (0.01151)

Small Humanities     -0.03285    -0.1325     0.02406
                    (0.01411)   (0.06571)   (0.00932)

Small Engineering    0.09559      0.5887     0.08625
                    (0.01666)   (0.09486)   (0.01478)

 Small Sciences      -0.00471    0.01634     0.02486
                    (0.01377)   (0.06591)   (0.00916)

     Minor
African/African-     -0.03727    -0.2348     -0.02458
American Studies    (0.01555)   (0.08006)   (0.00798)

American Studies     0.09132      0.4297     0.02150
                    (0.01337)   (0.06904)   (0.00816)

     Latin           -0.00103   -0.02392     -0.00124
                    (0.04341)   (0.2076)    (0.01921)

    Finance          0.09217      0.3102     0.06009
                    (0.02246)   (0.08333)   (0.01415)

    Theater          -0.07022    -0.4213     -0.04300
                    (0.01876)   (0.08803)   (0.00722)
         Public Policy               -0.00890                 -0.03483                 0.00518
                                    (0.01896)                (0.08983)                (0.01042)

       Other Engineering             0.02029                   0.1389                  0.01410
                                    (0.01739)                (0.08696)                (0.00985)

         Other Sciences              0.00304                 -0.02102                  -0.01354
                                    (0.01282)                (0.0614)                 (0.00639)

       Other Humanities              -0.00678                 -0.05838                 -0.00997
                                    (0.00936)                (0.04539)                (0.00481)

            Teaching                 -0.00768                 -0.1215                  -0.02239
                                    (0.01930)                (0.09668)                (0.00980)

            Reunion                  0.06318                  0.5627                      -
                                    (0.00141)                (0.0077)
      Post Baccalaureate
          Education
             Ph.D.                   0.04909                   0.1581                  -0.02790
                                    (0.00955)                (0.04894)                (0.00468)

            Masters                  0.08972                   0.3830                  -0.00292
                                    (0.00670)                (0.03587)                (0.00380)

              J.D.                    0.1483                   0.8610                  0.05149
                                    (0.00721)                (0.04357)                (0.00516)

          M.D./D.D.S.                 0.1258                  0.6625                   0.00768
                                    (0.00901)                (0.0515)                 (0.00537)

             M.B.A.                   0.1873                   1.152                   0.09493
                                    (0.00703)                (0.04391)                (0.00553)

* Column (1) shows incremental effects on the probability of making a gift in a given year; column (2)
shows incremental effects on the logarithm of amount of gift in a given year, and column (3) shows in-
cremental effects on the probability that the individual gave a gift greater than or equal to the top 10
percent in a given year. Results in columns (1) and (3) are marginal effects generated by a probit model.
Column (2) reports marginal effects generated by a Tobit model. Columns (1) and (2) use the basic sam-
ple of 487,913 observations. Column (3) uses a slightly smaller sample, 487,873, because some observa-
tions are dropped due to collinearity. The figures in parentheses are standard errors. Figures in italics are
statistically significant at the 5% level. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering based on individuals.
In addition to the variables listed, the regressions in columns (1) and (2) include location effects, year
effects and class effects, which are suppressed for brevity. The regression in column (3) includes location
and class effects.
                                                                                    Figure 1: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Probability of Making a Gift


                                                         0.35


                                                                                              Child 1
Incremental effect on the probability of making a gift




                                                          0.3
                                                                                              Applied
                                                                                              Didn't Apply
                                                         0.25                                 Accepted
                                                                                              Rejected
                                                          0.2


                                                         0.15


                                                          0.1


                                                         0.05


                                                            0
                                                                 0                        5                          10                         15                          20                         25

                                                         -0.05
                                                                                                                                  Age
                                                         This figure graphs the child-cycle coefficients from column (1) of Table 3, using 487,913 observations. The vertical axis shows the incremental ef-
                                                         fect on the probability of making a gift in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions status.
                                                          Figure 2: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given


                                                 3


                                               2.5          Child 1
                                                            Applied
                                                            Didn't Apply
   Incremental effect on log of amount given




                                                 2
                                                            Accepted
                                                            Rejected
                                               1.5


                                                 1


                                               0.5


                                                 0
                                                      0     5                     10                     15                     20                    25

                                               -0.5


                                                -1
                                                                                             Age
This figure graphs the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3, using 487,913 observations. The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the
log of amount donated in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions status.
                                                                        Figure 3: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Probability of Being a Class Leader


                                                            0.25
   Incremental effect on the probability of making a gift




                                                             0.2
                                                                                Child 1
                                                                                Applied
                                                            0.15                Didn't Apply
                                                                                Accepted
                                                                                Rejected
                                                             0.1



                                                            0.05



                                                               0
                                                                    0            5                     10                     15                     20              25

                                                            -0.05



                                                             -0.1
                                                                                                                  Age

This figure graphs the child-cycle coefficients from column (3) of Table 3, using 487,873 observations. The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the
probability of being a class leader (making a donation at least as large as the upper 10 percent of gifts of all gifts) in a given year as a function of the first
child’s age and admissions status.
                                                         Figure 4: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given
                                                                         (Controlling for Position and Field)
                                                3


                                              2.5

                                                         Child 1
  Incremental effect on log of amount given




                                                2        Applied
                                                         Didn't Apply
                                                         Accepted
                                              1.5        Rejected


                                                1


                                              0.5


                                                0
                                                     0     5                    10                     15                      20                   25

                                              -0.5


                                               -1
                                                                                           Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3, using 344,342 observations, when the basic model is re-estimated
including information on alumni’s fields and positions. The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the log of amount donated in a given year as a
function of the first child’s age and admissions status.
                                                             Figure 5: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given
                                                                                         (Last Child)
                                                3


                                              2.5            Last Child
  Incremental effect on log of amount given




                                                             Applied
                                                             Didn't Apply
                                                2
                                                             Accepted
                                                             Rejected
                                              1.5


                                                1


                                              0.5


                                                0
                                                     0   5                    10                    15                    20                         25

                                              -0.5


                                               -1
                                                                                        Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3, using 482,760 observations, when the basic model is re-estimated
using the last child’s age and admissions status rather than the first child’s. The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the log of amount donated in
a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions status.
                                                                        Figure 6: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Probability of Making a Gift
                                                                                                     (Fixed Effects Estimates)
                                                            0.35


                                                             0.3                Child 1
   Incremental effect on the probability of making a gift




                                                                                Applied
                                                                                Didn't Apply
                                                            0.25                Accepted
                                                                                Rejected
                                                             0.2


                                                            0.15


                                                             0.1


                                                            0.05


                                                               0
                                                                    0       5                    10                    15                    20               25

                                                            -0.05
                                                                                                            Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (1) of Table 3 when the basic model is re-estimated with OLS and fixed effects.
The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the probability of making a gift in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions
status.
                                                         Figure 7: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given
                                                                              (Fixed Effects Estimates)
                                           3


                                         2.5
                                                    Child 1
                                                    Applied
                                           2
    Incremental effect on amount given




                                                    Didn't Apply
                                                    Accepted
                                         1.5        Rejected


                                           1


                                         0.5


                                           0
                                                0    5                   10                    15                        20                         25

                                         -0.5


                                          -1
                                                                                   Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3 when the basic model is re-estimated with OLS and fixed effects.
The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the logarithm of the amount of giving in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions
status.
                                                                        Figure 8: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Probability of Being a Class Leader
                                                                                                         (Fixed Effects Estimates)
                                                            0.25
   Incremental effect on the probability of making a gift




                                                             0.2
                                                                                Child 1
                                                                                Applied
                                                            0.15                Didn't Apply
                                                                                Accepted
                                                                                Rejected
                                                             0.1



                                                            0.05



                                                               0
                                                                    0          5                     10                    15                    20                  25

                                                            -0.05



                                                             -0.1
                                                                                                               Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (3) of Table 3 when the basic model is re-estimated with OLS and fixed effects.
The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the probability of being a class leader in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions
status.
                                                                       Figure 9: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Probability of Giving
                                                                                                  (Augmented Sample)
                                                           0.35


                                                            0.3             Child 1
  Incremental effect on the probability of making a gift




                                                                            Applied
                                                                            Didn't Apply
                                                           0.25             Accepted
                                                                            Rejected
                                                            0.2


                                                           0.15


                                                            0.1


                                                           0.05


                                                              0
                                                                   0         5                     10                      15                     20   25

                                                           -0.05
                                                                                                              Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (1) of Table 3, using 939,671 observations, when the basic model is estimated
with a sample that includes alumni who graduated before 1972. This sample has more observations, but is lacking information on a number of covariates.
The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the probability of making a gift in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions
status.
                                                             Figure 10: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given
                                                                                     (Augmented Sample)
                                                3


                                              2.5            Child 1
                                                             Applied
  Incremental effect on log of amount given




                                                             Didn't Apply
                                                2            Accepted
                                                             Rejected
                                              1.5


                                                1


                                              0.5


                                                0
                                                     0   5                     10                    15                    20                    25

                                              -0.5


                                               -1
                                                                                         Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3, using 939,671 observations, when the basic model is estimated
with a sample that includes alumni who graduated before 1972. This sample has more observations, but is lacking information on a number of covariates.
The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the log of amount donated in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions status.
                                                                       Figure 11: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Probability of Being a Class Leader
                                                                                                          (Augmented Sample)


                                                           0.25
  Incremental effect on the probability of making a gift




                                                            0.2
                                                                                  Child 1
                                                                                  Applied
                                                           0.15                   Didn't Apply
                                                                                  Accepted
                                                                                  Rejected
                                                            0.1



                                                           0.05



                                                              0
                                                                   0                 5                     10                     15                     20          25

                                                           -0.05



                                                            -0.1
                                                                                                                      Age
This figure graphs the analogs of the child-cycle coefficients from column (3) of Table 3, using 939,569 observations, when the basic model is estimated
with a sample that includes alumni who graduated before 1972. This sample has more observations, but is lacking information on a number of covariates.
The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the probability of being a class leader (making a donation greater than or equal to the 90th percentile in
one’s class for that year).
                                                             Appendix Figure A1: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given
                                                                                               (Levels)
                                                 25000


                                                                     Child 1
  Incremental effect on amount given (dollars)




                                                 20000               Applied
                                                                     Didn't Apply
                                                                     Accepted
                                                 15000               Rejected




                                                 10000



                                                  5000



                                                     0
                                                         0       5                    10                   15                   20               25


                                                 -5000
                                                                                                Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3, using 487,913 observations, when the basic model is estimated in
levels rather than logarithms. The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the number of dollars donated in a given year as a function of the first
child’s age and admissions status.
                                                            Appendix Figure A2: Incremental Effect of the Child-Cycle on the Amount Given
                                                                    (Levels, Top One Percent of Donations Removed from Sample)
                                                 300
  Incremental effect on amount given (dollars)




                                                 250               Child 1
                                                                   Applied
                                                                   Didn't Apply
                                                 200
                                                                   Accepted
                                                                   Rejected
                                                 150


                                                 100


                                                  50


                                                   0
                                                        0      5                    10                   15                    20                25

                                                  -50


                                                 -100
                                                                                              Age
This figure graphs the analogs to the child-cycle coefficients from column (2) of Table 3, using 483,034 observations, when the basic model is estimated in
levels rather than logarithms and the top 1 percent of gifts are deleted from the sample. The vertical axis shows the incremental effect on the number of
dollars donated in a given year as a function of the first child’s age and admissions status.
