NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION, MULTI-PRODUCT FIRMS AND ESTIMATING
THE IMPACT OF TRADE LIBERALIZATION ON PRODUCTIVITY
Jan De Loecker
Working Paper 13155
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13155

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title "Product Differentiation, Multi-Product
Firms and Structural Estimation of Productivity". I am especially grateful to Joep Konings, Marc Melitz
and Ariel Pakes for comments and suggestions. I would also like to thank Dan Ackerberg, Steve Berry,
David Blackburn, Mariana Colacelli, Bronwyn Hall, Amil Petrin, Frank Verboven, Patrick Van Cayseele
and Hylke Vandenbussche for discussions on earlier versions. This paper has benefited from seminar
participants at University of Minnesota, Yale, Louvain-la-Neuve, KU Leuven, Princeton, NYU, U
of Toronto, UT Austin, UCSC, IESE, Federal Board of Governors, LSE, WZB, NY Fed and conference
participants at IIOC 2005, CEPR Applied IO Workshop 2005, NBER Summer Institute Productivity
Workshop 2005, Midwest Meeting in International Economics 2005, NBER Productivity Workshop
2006, EIIT 2007. Furthermore, I would like to thank Roberta Adinolfi of EURATEX, Sylvie Groeninck
of FEBELTEX, Yannick Hamon and Ignacio Iruarruzaga Diez at the European Commission for providing
me with the relevant conversion tables to construct the quota data set. Contact Author: jdl16@nyu.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Jan De Loecker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Product Differentiation, Multi-product Firms and Estimating the Impact of Trade Liberalization
on Productivity
Jan De Loecker
NBER Working Paper No. 13155
June 2007, Revised November 2007
JEL No. F13,L11
ABSTRACT
In this paper I analyze the productivity gains from trade liberalization in the Belgian textile industry.
So far, empirical research has established a strong relationship between opening up to trade and productivity,
relying almost entirely on deflated sales to proxy for output in the production function. The latter implies
that the resulting productivity estimates still capture price and demand shocks which are most likely
to be correlated with the change in the operating environment, which invalidate the evaluation of the
welfare implications. In order to get at the true productivity gains I propose a simple methodology
to estimate a production function controlling for unobserved prices by introducing an explicit demand
system. I combine a unique data set containing matched plant-level and product-level information
with detailed product-level quota protection information to recover estimates for productivity as well
as parameters of the demand side (markups). I find that when correcting for unobserved prices and
demand shocks, the estimated productivity gains from relaxing protection are only half (from 8 to
only 4 percent) of those obtained with standard techniques.

Jan De Loecker
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jdl16@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Over the last years a large body of empirical work has emerged that relies on the estimation
of production functions to evaluate the impact of policy changes on the eﬃciency of producers
and the industry as a whole. The reason for this is at least twofold. First of all, there is a
great interest in evaluating active policy changes such as trade liberalization, deregulation and
privatization of industries. One of the questions that typically arise is whether the policy change
had any impact on the eﬃciency of firms in the economy. It is in this context that the ability
to estimate a production function using micro data (firm-level) is important as it allows us
to recover a measure for (firm-level) productivity and relate this to changes in the operating
environment. Secondly, the increased availability of firm-level datasets for various countries and
industries has further boosted empirical work analyzing productivity dynamics. Out of these set
of papers, a robust result is that periods of changes in the competitive environment of firms like trade liberalization - are associated with measured productivity gains and that firms engaged
in international trade (through export or FDI) have higher measured productivity.1
The productivity measures that are used to come to these conclusions are, however, recovered
after estimating (some form of) a sales generating production function where output is replaced
by sales. The standard approach has been to use the price index - of a given industry - to
proxy for these unobserved prices. The use of the price index is only valid if all firms in the
industry face the same output price and corresponds with the assumption that firms produce
homogeneous products and face a common and infinite price elasticity of demand (Melitz, 2001).
In the case of diﬀerentiated products this implies that the estimates of the input coeﬃcients are
biased and in addition lead to productivity estimates that capture markups and demand shocks.2
In a second step these productivity estimates are then regressed on variables of interest, say the
level of trade protection or tariﬀs. This implies that the impact on actual productivity cannot be
identified - using a two-step procedure - which invalidates evaluation of the welfare implications.
In this paper I analyze the productivity gains from trade liberalization in the Belgian textile
industry. As in most empirical work that has addressed similar questions, I do not observe output at the firm level and therefore unobserved prices and demand shocks need to be controlled
for. In order to answer this question, I first introduce a simple methodology for getting reliable
estimates of productivity in an environment of imperfect competition in the product market
where I allow for multi-product firms. The estimation strategy is related to the original work
of Klette and Griliches (1996) where the bias of production function coeﬃcients due to using
deflated firm-level sales (based on an industry-wide producer price index) to proxy for firm-level
1

Pavcnik (2002) documents the productivity gains from trade liberalization in Chile, Smarzynska (2004) finds
positive spillovers from FDI in Lithuania and Van Biesebroeck (2005) finds learning by exporting in Sub-Saharan
African manufacturing. Olley and Pakes (1996) analyze the productivity gains from deregulating the US telecom
equipment industry.
2
Obtaining precise productivity estimates by filtering out price and demand shocks has a wide range of implications for other applied fields. For instance in applying recently developed methods to estimate dynamic
(oligopoly) games where productivity is a key primitive (Collard-Wexler 2006).

2

output is discussed. In their application the interest lies in recovering reliable estimates for
returns to scale and not in productivity estimates per se. At the same time a literature emerged
trying to correct for the simultaneity bias without relying on instruments in order to recover
reliable estimates for productivity. The latter is a well documented problem when estimating a
production function with OLS that inputs are likely to be correlated with unobserved productivity shocks and therefore lead to biased estimates of the production function. Olley and Pakes
(1996) introduced an empirical strategy based on a theoretical dynamic optimization problem of
the firm under uncertainty where essentially unobserved productivity in the production function
is replaced with a polynomial in investment and capital. A series of papers used this approach
to verify the productivity gains from changes in the operating environment of firms such as
trade liberalization, trade protection among others. In almost all of the empirical applications
the omitted price variable bias was ignored or assumed away.3 In this paper I analyze productivity dynamics during a period of trade liberalization while correcting both for the omitted
price variable and the simultaneity bias. I use the Olley and Pakes (1996) procedure to control
for the simultaneity bias and their framework turns out to be very instructive to evaluate the
importance of demand shocks in the production function and how they aﬀect the productivity
estimates.4 In addition, to correct for the omitted price variable bias and obtain unbiased coeﬃcients of the production function, I introduce a rich source of product-level data matched to
the production dataset. This unique additional piece of information allows me to introduce a
richer demand system and recover markup estimates in addition to estimates for productivity
which are the ultimate goal. I empirically show that the traditional ‘productivity measures’
still capture price and demand shocks which are likely to be correlated with the change in the
operating environment.
I find that in my data the omitted price variable bias works in the opposite way and matters
more than the simultaneity and the selection bias. An important implication is that my estimates
for returns to scale are significantly higher than one.5 Furthermore, my results suggest that
only half of the measured productivity gains established using standard techniques capture true
productivity gains. The estimated productivity gains from relaxing quota protection are (on
average) 4 percent in contrast to 8 percent when we ignore the fact that firm-level revenue
captures variation in prices as well.
My framework suggests that the channel through which trade liberalization impacts productivity is mostly by cutting oﬀ the ineﬃcient producers from the productivity distribution
and therefore increases the average productivity of the industry. However, the (within-firm)
3
Some authors did explicitly reinterpret the productivity measures as sales per input measures. For instance
see footnote 3 on page 1264 of Olley and Pakes (1996).
4
This does not rule out the use of alternative proxy estimators such as the estimator suggested by Levinsohn
and Petrin (2003), however, with some additional assumptions made on the relation between the unobserved
productivity shocks and markups. See Appendix C for a discussion on this.
5
It is actually quite surprising that in recent papers relying on various proxy estimators to control for the
simultaneity bias, almost no increasing returns to scale are established for those industries with high fixed costs
where we would expect to find them.

3

productivity gains for those producers that remain active are small and sometimes even negligible. These two observations then imply a very diﬀerent interpretation of how opening up trade
impacts individual firms. Furthermore, the reallocation of activities across surviving firms is not
as closely tied to productivity, but rather an interplay of the ability to markup over costs and
productivity.
Combing a production function and a demand system into one framework provides other
interesting results and insights with respect to the product mix and market power. I find that
including the product mix of a firm is an important dimension to consider when analyzing
productivity dynamics. Even if this has no impact on the aggregation of production across
products, it matters since it allows to estimate diﬀerent markups across product segments. In
the context of the estimation of production functions multi-product firms have not received a lot
of attention with the exception of the theoretical work of Melitz (2001). The main reason for this
is the lack of detailed product-level production data: inputs (labor, material and capital) usage
and output by product and firm. Ignoring the product-level dimension has some important
implications on the production technology we assume, i.e. no cost synergies or economies of
scope are allowed. In my data I only observe the number of products produced per firm and
where these products are located in product space (segments of the industry). This does not
allow me to depart from the standard modeling assumptions on the production side as in Melitz
(2001). But it does allow me to specify a richer demand system and therefore enables me to
investigate the productivity response controlling for price and markup eﬀects. For the latter
it is crucial to introduce products as the quota protection that are used at the EU level vary
greatly across product categories. This however does not capture the channel recently described
by Bernard et. al (2003). They document the importance of product mix variation across
producers in a given industry and how firms respond to shocks (trade liberalization) along this
dimension.6
A growing number of papers have studied the impact of various trade policy changes on
productivity in the absence of market power.7 By introducing a rich source of demand variation
I am able to decompose the traditional measured productivity gains into real productivity gains
and demand side related components and evaluate whether opening up to trade is truly changing
the eﬃciency of producers. In addition, the method sheds light on other parameters of interest
such as markups. I estimate markups ranging from 0.16 for the interior segment to 0.23 in the
clothing segment of the textile industry. These numbers are in line with what other studies have
found relying on diﬀerent methods. In the context of trade liberalization, a number of authors
have found strong relationships between trade protection and markups (Konings and Vandenbussche, 2005). My results therefore shed light on the importance of both the productivity and
markup response to a change in a trade regime.
6

These authors define a product as a 5 digit industry code which is a product line. I refer to a product as an 8
digit product code which implies that we expect to see - if anything - bigger numbers on for instance the number
of products per firm.
7
See Tybout (2000) for a review on the relationship between openness and productivity in developing countries.

4

Recent work has discussed the potential bias of ignoring demand shocks when estimating
production functions based on deflated firm-level sales to proxy for output. Katayama et al.
(2003) start out from a nested logit demand structure and verify the impact of integrating a
demand side on the interpretation of productivity. Melitz and Levinsohn (2002) assume a representative consumer with Dixit-Stiglitz preferences and they feed this through the Levinsohn
and Petrin (2003) estimation algorithm.8 Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (forthcoming) discuss the relation between physical output, revenue and firm-level prices. They study this in
the context of market selection and they state that productivity based upon physical quantities
is negatively correlated with establishment-level prices while productivity based upon deflated
revenue is positively correlated with establishment-level prices. The few papers that explicitly
analyze the demand side when estimating productivity or that come up with a strategy to do so
all point in the same direction: estimated productivity still captures demand related shocks.9
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 the standard approach to
estimate production functions is discussed and I introduce a demand system and show the bias
on the production function coeﬃcients. Section 3 introduces the estimation strategy and the
potential bias of using standard productivity estimates to evaluate policy changes. In section 4,
I present the data that includes detailed product-level information in addition to a rich firm-level
dataset of Belgian textile producers. In section 5 I present the coeﬃcients of the production
functions as well as the estimated parameters of the demand system. In section 6 I analyze the
eﬀects of the trade liberalization episode in the EU textiles on productivity, where the trade
liberalization is measured by the drastic fall in product specific quota protection. The quota
information also serves as an important control variable for the unobserved prices through the
introduction of the demand system. The last section concludes.

2

Estimating productivity using production data

I briefly review the traditional problems one runs into when estimating a production function
using typical production data on revenue and various inputs of a sample of firms. Given the
focus is on controlling for unobserved firm specific prices and demand shocks, I will discuss the
advantages of specifying an explicit demand system in more detail. Finally, I show how having
information on the product mix of firms allows me to estimate a less restrictive substitution
pattern across the products of the industry.

2.1

Identification of the production function parameters

Let us start with the production side where a firm i at time t produces (a product) according
to the following production function
8
I will come back to the exact diﬀerences and extensions of my methodology compared to Melitz (2001) and
Levinsohn and Melitz (2002) theoretical setup.
9
See Bartelsman and Doms (2000) for a comprehensive review on recent productivity studies using micro data.
Concerning the topic of this paper I refer to page 592.

5

Qit = Lαitl Mitαm Kitαk exp(α0 + ωit + uqit )

(1)

where Qit stands for the quantity produced, Lit , Mit and Kit are the three inputs labor, materials and capital; and αl , αm and αk are the coeﬃcients, respectively.10 The constant term α0
captures the mean productivity and γ captures the economies of scale, i.e. γ = (αl + αm + αk ).
Productivity is denoted by ω it and uqit is an i.i.d. component.
The standard approach in identifying the production function coeﬃcients starts out with a
production function as described in equation (1). The physical output Qit is then substituted
fit ) using an industry price deflator (PIt ). Taking logs of equation (1) and
by deflated revenue (R
relating it to the (log of) observed revenue per firm rit = qit + pit , we get the following regression
equation
rit = xit α + ω it + uqit + pit
(2)
where xit α = α0 + αl lit + αm mit + αk kit . The next step is to use the industry wide price index
pIt and subtract it from both sides to take care of the unobserved firm-level price pit .
reit = rit − pIt = xit α + ωit + (pit − pIt ) + uqit

(3)

Most of the literature on the estimation of productivity has worried about the correlation between the chosen inputs xit and the unobserved productivity shock ωit . The coeﬃcient on the
freely chosen variables labor and material inputs will be biased upwards as a positive productivity shock leads to higher labor and material usage (E(xit ω it ) > 0).
Even if this is corrected for, from equation (3) it is clear that if firms produce diﬀerentiated
products or have some pricing power the estimates of α will be biased. As mentioned in Klette
and Griliches (1996) inputs are likely to be correlated with the price a firm charges.11 The error
term (uqit + pit − pIt ) still captures firm-level price deviation from the average (price index) price
used to deflate the firm-level revenues. Essentially, any price variation (at the firm level) that is
correlated with the inputs biases the coeﬃcients of interest (α) as E(xit (pit − pIt )) 6= 0. The sign
of the bias could go either way as it depends on the correlation between the price a firm charges
and the level of its inputs which works through the output of a firm. Therefore firm-level inputs
(materials and labor) are correlated with the unobserved price and thus under- or overestimates
the coeﬃcients on labor and materials. This is referred to as the omitted price variable bias.
Another source of bias is introduced by unobserved demand shocks that might lead to a higher
price and induces a correlation between inputs and price.
The omitted price bias might work in the opposite direction as the simultaneity bias - the
correlation between the unobserved productivity shock (ω it ) and the inputs (xit ) - making any
10

The Cobb-Douglas production function assumes a substitution elasticity of 1 between the inputs. The remainder of the paper does not depend on this specific functional form. One can assume e.g. a translog production
function and proceed as suggested below.
11
The interpretation of the correlation is somewhat diﬀerent here since my model is estimated in log levels and
not in growth rates as in Klette and Griliches (1996).

6

prior on the total direction of the bias hard. It is also clear that even when the marginal product
of the inputs (α) are not of interest, the productivity estimate is misleading as it still captures
price and consequently demand shocks.
The same kind of reasoning can be followed with respect to the measurement of material
inputs where often a industry wide material price deflator is used to deflate firm-level cost of
materials. However, controlling for unobserved prices takes - at least partly - care of this. The
intuition is that if material prices are firm specific, a higher material price will be passed through
a higher output price if output markets are imperfect, the extent of this pass through depends
on the relevant markup. The only case where this reasoning might break down is when input
markets are imperfect and output markets are perfectly competitive, which is not a very likely
setup.12

2.2

Introducing demand and product diﬀerentiation

I now introduce the demand system that firms face in the output market. Firms are assumed to
operate in an industry characterized by horizontal product diﬀerentiation, where η captures the
substitution elasticity among the diﬀerent products in a segment and η is finite. As mentioned
in Klette and Griliches (1996) similar demand systems have been used extensively under the
label of Dixit-Stiglitz demand. The key feature is that monopolistic competition leads to price
elasticities which are constant and independent of the number of varieties.13 In addition, I
explicitly introduce unobserved demand shocks that are allowed to be correlated with price and
other demand conditions. In the empirical application I will use product-firm dummies and
product specific quota restrictions as additional controls.
The introduction of an explicit demand side into the revenue production function is very
closely related to the model of Melitz and Levinsohn (2002) and Klette and Griliches (1996).
However, there are some important diﬀerences and extensions I suggest. Firstly, in addition to
the plant-level dataset I will introduce product-level information matched to the plants allowing
me to put more structure on the demand side. They proxy the number of products per firm
by the number of firms in an industry, while I observe the actual number of products produced
by each firm and additional demand related variables. I use this additional source of variation
to identify the elasticity of substitution for diﬀerent segments of the industry. Secondly, aside
from a discussion of the methodology, I empirically show the bias in the production function
coeﬃcients and in the resulting productivity estimates. Finally, I use segment demand shifts,
product dummies and product specific quota restrictions to further instrument for demand
12

If material prices diﬀer across firms, an additional correlation of the input with the unobserved price pi is
introduced through the correlation between output prices pi and material prices pm
i . Note that this is in addition
to the correlation between material mi used and prices pi .This follows from the fact that deflated material costs
m
can be written as (mi + pm
i − pI ).
13
The choice of this conditional demand system does not rule out other specifications to be used in the remainder
of the paper. However, it implies that the inverse of the elasticity of substitution (demand ) is the relevant markup
as the substitution elasticity with respect to other goods (non textile products) is zero.

7

shocks to obtain consistent estimates of the supply side parameters as they provide an exogenous
source of demand side shifts. I rely on my estimates to analyze the potential (within-firm)
productivity gains from the trade liberalization episode in the EU textile industry. The structure
of the demand system I build on implies that all unobserved demand shocks shift the individual
firm’s demand intercept around.
It is clear that the demand system is quite restrictive and implies one single elasticity of
substitution for all products within a given product range - segment - and hence no diﬀerences
in cross price elasticities. In the empirical application the elasticity of substitution is allowed to
diﬀer among product segments. This is in contrast to the commonly used (implicit) assumption
that all firms face one infinite price elasticity of demand. The motivation for modeling demand
explicitly here is to control for unobserved price variation. However the final interest lies in an
estimate of productivity and further relaxing the substitution patterns here would just reinforce
the argument.
The choice of demand system needed to identify the parameters of interest is somewhat
limited due to missing demand data, i.e. prices and quantities. Therefore, one has to be willing
to put somewhat more structure on the nature of demand. However, the modeling approach
here does not restrict any demand system as long as the inverse demand system can generate a
(log-) linear relationship of prices and quantities.
I start out with single product firms and show how this leads to my augmented production
function. In a second step I allow for firms to produce multiple products. The focus is on the
resulting productivity estimates and in the case of multi-product firms these can be interpreted
as average productivity across a firm’s products.
2.2.1

A Simple Demand Structure: Single Product Firms

I follow Klette and Griliches (1996) and later on I extend it by allowing firms to produce multiple
products. I start out wit a simple (conditional) demand system where each firm i produces a
single product and faces the following demand Qit
µ
¶
Pit η
Qit = QIt
exp(udit + ξ it )
(4)
PIt
where QIt is an aggregate demand shifter and here directly relates to the industry output at
time t. As noted by Klette and Griliches (1996) this industry output can easily be computed
using firm-level revenues and the producer price index of the industry.14 Industry output QIt is
P
simply a weighted average of the deflated revenues QIt = ( N
i msit Rit )/PIt where the weights
(msit ) are the market shares. This observation is important for the empirical analysis where
I will use this notion to construct segment-specific output (demand shifters) using firm-specific
product mix information. (Pit /PIt ) is the relative price of firm i with respect to the average price
14
This comes from the observation that a price index is essentially a weighted average of firm-level prices where
weights are market shares (see Appendix A.2). Under the given demand structure it follows that (the first order
proxy for) the price index is a market share weighted average of the firm-level prices.

8

in the industry, udit is an idiosyncratic shock specific to firm i and η is the substitution elasticity
between the diﬀerentiated products in the industry, where −∞ < η < −1. As mentioned
above, I allow for unobserved demand shocks ξ it to be correlated with price and the observed
demand shifters. In discrete choice models like Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes
(1995) where observed product characteristics are introduced this unobserved demand shock ξ it
is interpreted as (product) quality.
Taking logs of equation (4) and writing the price as a function of the other variables results
in the following expression where xit = ln Xit
pit =

1
(qit − qIt − udit − ξ it ) + pIt
η

(5)

As discussed extensively in Klette and Griliches (1996) and Melitz and Levinsohn (2002),
the typical firm-level dataset has no information on physical output per firm and prices.15
Commonly, we only observe revenue and we deflate this using an industry-wide deflator. The
observed revenue rit is then substituted for the true output qit when estimating the production
function. I now substitute expression (5) for the price pit in equation (2) to get an expression
for revenue. From here forward, I consider deflated revenue (e
rit = rit − pIt )
¶
µ
η+1
1
1
qit − qIt − (udit + ξ it )
(6)
reit = rit − pIt =
η
η
η
Now I only have to plug in the production technology as expressed in equation (1) and I have a
revenue generating production function with both demand and supply variables and parameters.
¶
¶
µ
µ
η+1
η+1
1
1
reit =
(α0 + αl lit + αm mit + αk kit ) − qIt +
(ω it + uqit ) − (udit + ξ it )
η
η
η
η

It is clear that if one does not take into account the degree of competition on the output
market (firm price variation), that the analysis will be plagued by an omitted price variable bias
and the estimated coeﬃcients are estimates of a reduced form combining the demand and supply
side in one equation. This leads to my general estimating equation of the revenue production
function
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β k kit + β η qIt + (ω ∗it + ξ ∗it ) + uit
(7)

where β h = ((η + 1)/η)αh with h = l, m, k; β η = −η −1 , ω ∗it = ((η + 1)/η)ω it , ξ ∗it = −η −1 ξ it and
uit = ((η + 1)/η)uqit − η1 udit . When estimating this equation (7) I recover the production function
coeﬃcients (αl , αm , αk ) and returns to scale parameter (γ) controlling for the omitted price
variable and the simultaneity bias, as well as an estimate for the elasticity of substitution η. In
fact, to obtain the true production function coeﬃcients (α) I have to multiply the estimated
η
reduced form parameters (β) by the relevant markup ( η+1
). When correcting for the simultaneity
15

Exceptions are Dunne and Roberts (1992), Jaumandreu and Mairesse (2004), Eslava et al.(2004) and Foster
et al. (2005) where plant-level prices are observed and thus demand and productivity shocks can be estimated
separately. To my knowledge this is a very rare setup.

9

bias I follow the Olley and Pakes (1996) procedure and replace the productivity shock ωit by a
function in capital and investment.
In my empirical analysis I will estimate various versions of (7) as the product information
linked to every firm allows me to put more structure on the demand side, e.g. allowing the
demand elasticity to vary across diﬀerent segments and proxy for unobserved demand shocks
(ξ it ) using product dummies. Adding the extra information from the product space is not
expected to change the estimated reduced form coeﬃcients (β), but it will have an impact on
the estimated demand parameter η and hence on the true production function coeﬃcients (α).16
2.2.2

Multi-product firms

I now allow firms to produce multiple products and the demand system is identical to the one
expressed in equation (4), only a product subscript j is added. Note that the demand is now
relevant at the product level. There are N firms and M products in the industry with each firm
P
producing Mi products, where M = i Mi .17 I divide the industry into S segments that each
capture a part of the various products in the industry and I allow for segment specific price
elasticities of demand. In the single product case the demand system is the same for every firm
i, whereas in the multiple product case the demand is with respect to product j of firm i.
µ
¶
Pijt ηs
Qijt = QIst
exp(udijt + ξ ijt )
(8)
PIst
The demand for product j of firm i is given by Qijt , QIst is the demand shifter relevant at the
product-level, PIst is the industry price index relevant at the product level, η s is the demand
elasticity relevant at the segment level, ξ ijt is unobserved demand shock at the product level
(e.g. quality) and udijt is product j specific idiosyncratic shock.18 Note that the unobserved
demand shock now has subscript j and as I will argue later in the case that it is only product
specific ξ ijt = ξ j , having information on the products a firm produces is suﬃcient to control
for the cross sectional variation. The elasticity of demand η s is now specific to a given product
segment s of the industry.
16

The setup is similar to the approach taken by Klette and Griliches (1996). However, three main problems
remain unchallenged in their method, which are largely recognized by the authors. Firstly, industry output might
proxy for other omitted variables relevant at the industry level such as industry wide productivity growth and
factor utilization. The constant term and the residual in their model should take care of it since time dummies
are no longer an option as they would take all the variation of the industry output. I use additional demand
variables to control for demand shocks not picked up by industry output. Secondly, the residual still captures the
unobserved productivity shock and biases the estimates on the inputs. I proxy for this unobserved productivity
shock using the method suggested by Olley and Pakes (1996) to overcome the simultaneity bias, i.e. by introducing
a polynomial in investment and capital. The third problem is closely related to the solution of the simultaneity
problem. Klette and Griliches (1996) end up with a negative capital coeﬃcient partly due to estimating their
production function in growth rates.
17
In the empirical application, I have 308 (N) firm observations and 2,990 firm-product (M) observations, with
563 unique product categories (j).
18
In the multi-product model I have to aggregate the revenues per product to the firm’s total revenue. The
demand shifters are thus depending on the space, therefore I use the superscript s for the output and price index.
In the empirical analysis - as in the single product case - I replace the output by the weighted average of deflated
segment revenues.

10

As mentioned above, the working assumption throughout this paper is that only the relevant
variables at the firm level are observed, which is an aggregation of the product-level variables.
This is the case in most of the studies using firm-level data to estimate a production function.
However, as I will discuss later on in detail, I have information on the product market linked to
the firm-level data which allows me to put somewhat more structure on the way the product-level
demand and production are aggregated.
Proceeding as in the single product case, the revenue of product j of firm i is rijt = pijt + qijt
and using the demand system as expressed in equation (8) I get the following expression for the
product-firm revenue rijt
µ
µ
¶
¶
ηs + 1
1
ηs + 1
1
1
rijt − pst =
(9)
xijt α − qIst +
(ω ijt + uqijt ) − ξ ijt − udijt
ηs
ηs
ηs
ηs
ηs
I have assumed that the production function qij for every firm i for all its products Mi is given
by the same production function (1) and it implies that the production technology for every
product is the same and that no cost synergies are allowed on the production side. In Appendix
B I relax this assumption and show a reduced form approach to allow for some spillovers in the
production process.
As before I substitute in the production technology as given by equation (1) where now a
product subscript j is added. The aggregation from product to firm-level can be done in various
ways and ultimately depends on the research question and the data at hand. If product specific
inputs and revenues are available, the same procedure as in the single product firm applies,
i.e. estimating a revenue production function by product j. However, observing revenue and
output by product is hardly ever the case and so some assumptions have to be made in order to
aggregate the product-level revenues to the firm level (the unit of observation in most empirical
work). For notation purposes I assume a constant demand elasticity across products (η) and I
aggregate the product-firm revenue to the firm revenue by taking the sum over the number of
P i
products produced Mit , i.e. Rit = M
j Rijt as in Melitz (2001). This leads to the following
equation
¶
µ
η+1
1
ω it +
ξ + uit
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β k kit + β η qIt + β np npit +
(10)
η
|η| it

When allowing for segment specific elasticities η s the term capturing (observed) demand
shifters will be more complicated (see section 5.2.1). Here I assumed that inputs per product
Xit
are used in proportion to the number of products (Xijt = M
) which introduces an additional
it
term β np npit where npit = ln(Mit ). The input proportionality is driven by the lack of productspecific input data such as the number of employees that are used for a given product j. As
mentioned above, in Appendix B I relax the production aggregation from product to the firm
level by essentially introducing a matrix that captures synergies from combining production of
any 2 given segments within a single firm.

11

Productivity and demand shocks are assumed to occur at the firm level and uit captures all
the i.i.d. terms from both demand and supply (aggregated over products).19 The demand shifter
qIst is crucial as it allows me to identify the (segment specific) elasticity of demand through the
assumption that it captures shocks in demand that are independent of the production function
inputs and unobserved productivity. Furthermore it will turn out to be firm specific as I allow
the demand elasticity to diﬀer across products or segments of products. The latter is a result
of allowing for firm specific product mixes and therefore each firm faces a (potential) diﬀerent
total demand over the various products it owns.

3

Estimation strategy and productivity estimates

I now briefly discuss how to estimate the demand and production function parameters. Secondly,
I allow for investment to depend on the unobserved demand shocks (ξ) in the underlying Olley
and Pakes (1996) model and I suggest a simple way (given the data I have) to control for this.
Finally, I discuss the resulting productivity estimate and how it should be corrected for in the
presence of product diﬀerentiation and multi-product firms. I also provide a discussion on the
importance of miss-measured productivity (growth) using the standard identification methods.

3.1

Estimation strategy: single and multi-product firms

Estimating the regression in (7) is similar to the Olley and Pakes (1996) correction for simultaneity, only now an extra term has to be identified.20 As in Melitz (2001) I group the two
unobservables productivity ω it and demand shock ξ it into ‘one unobservable’ ω
e it . Introducing
the demand side clearly shows that any estimation of productivity also captures firm/product
specific unobservables such as product quality for instance.
I assume that the unobserved demand and productivity component follow the same stochastic
process, i.e. a first order Markov process with the same rate of persistence.21 Productivity is
assumed to follow an exogenous process and cannot be changed by investment or other firm-level
decision variables such as R&D or export behavior (De Loecker, 2007).22 Both the productivity
shock ω it and the demand shock ξ it are known to the firm when it makes the decision on
19

Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (forthcoming) do not observe inputs at the plant level, they observe product
specific revenues which allows them to proceed by assuming that inputs are used in proportion given by the share
of a given product in total firm revenue.
20
In the case of multi-product firms an additional parameter has to be identified. The identification depends
on whether one allows the market structures to be diﬀerent for single and multi-product firms.
21
A possible extension to this is to assume that the quality and the productivity shock follow a diﬀerent Markov
process. Therefore one can no longer collapse both variables into one state variable (see Petropoulus 2000 for
explicit modeling of this). For now I assume a scalar unobservable (productivity/quality) that follows a first
order Markov process. However, I can allow for higher order Markov processes and relax the scalar unobservable
assumption as suggested in Ackerberg and Pakes (2005), see later on.
22
Muendler (2004) allows productivity to change endogenously and suggests a way to estimate it. Buettner
(2004) introduces R&D and models the impact of this controlled process on unobserved productivity. Ackerberg and Pakes (2005) discuss more general extensions to the exogenous Markov assumption of the unobserved
productivity shock.

12

the optimal level of inputs (labor and material inputs). The new unobserved state variable
in the Olley and Pakes (1996) framework is now ω
e it = (ω it + ξ it ) and this is equivalent to
Melitz’s (2001) representation. Technically, the equilibrium investment function still has to be a
monotonic function with respect to the productivity shock, ω
e it , in order to allow for the inversion
as in Olley and Pakes (1996)
it = it (kt , ω
et) ⇔ ω
e t = ht (kt , it )

(11)

reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β η qIt + φt (kit , iit ) + uit

(12)

b − β kit ) + eit+1
reit+1 − bl lit+1 − bm mit+1 − bη qIt+1 = c + β k kit+1 + g(φ
it
k

(13)

Here I have been more explicit on the nature of the unobservable ω
e it containing both unobserved demand (quality) and productivity. However, it does not change the impact on investment. A firm draws a shock consisting of both productivity and demand shocks and the exact
source of the shock is not important as a firm is indiﬀerent between selling more given its inputs
due to an increased productivity or say the increased ‘quality perception’ of its product(s). We
could even interpret investment in a broader sense, both as investment in capital stock and advertising. I replace the productivity ω
e it component by a polynomial in capital and investment,
recovering the estimate on capital in a second stage using non linear least squares. The demand
parameters, labor and material are all estimated in a first stage under the identifying assumption
that the function in capital and investment proxies for the unobserved product/quality shock.23

A key parameter that I identify in this first stage is the estimate of the markup (β η ) which is
identified by independent variation in demand shocks either at the industry (qIt ) or segment
level (qIst ) depending on the specification I consider.
Note that the φt (.) is a solution to a complicated dynamic programming problem and depends on all the primitives of the model like demand functions, the specification of sunk costs,
form of conduct in the industry and others (Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry and Pakes, 2005). My
methodology brings one of these primitives - demand - explicitly into the analysis and essentially
adds explicitly information to the problem by introducing demand variables in the first stage.
Remember that this is required in order to recover estimates for true productivity (ω it ) when
firm-level prices are not observed.
The identification of the capital coeﬃcient in a second stage will now improve as the estimate
for φit is now purified from demand shocks due to the introduction of demand variables in the
first stage. This is important as φit is crucial to identify to the capital coeﬃcient. In a second
stage (13) the variation in the variable inputs and the demand variation is subtracted from
the deflated revenue to identify the capital coeﬃcient. As in Olley and Pakes (1996) the news
component in the productivity/quality process is assumed to be uncorrelated with capital in the
same period since capital is predetermined by investments in the previous year.

23

Dynamic panel data econometrics uses lag structure and IV techniques to identify the production function
parameters (Arellano and Bond, 1991).

13

where b is the estimate for β out of the first stage. Note that here I need to assume that
unobserved demand and productivity shock follow the exact same Markov process in order to
identify the capital coeﬃcient. If the demand shock does not follow the same process and
depends on productivity identification is only possible through an explicit demand estimation
as e.g. Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) in order to produce an estimate for ξ it . Another
way out is to assume that the unobserved demand shock is uncorrelated with capital and has
no lag structure, but that would leave us back in the case where it is essentially ignored when
estimating a revenue generating production function.
The correction for the sample selection problem due to the non random exit of firms is as
in the standard framework and leads to adding the predicted survival probability Pit+1 in g(.)
in equation (13). The predicted probability is obtained from regressing a survival dummy on a
polynomial in capital and investment.
Productivity (b
ωit ) is then recovered by plugging in the estimated coeﬃcients in the produce
η
tion function, (e
rit − bl lit − bm mit − bk kit − bη qIt ) eη+1
=ω
b it .
The suggested framework does not rule out alternative proxies for the unobserved productivity shock. Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) use intermediate inputs as a proxy.24 Recently there
has been some discussion of the validity of both proxy estimators. The first stage of the estimation algorithm potentially suﬀers from multicollinearity and the investment or material input
function might not take out all the variation correlated with the inputs (Ackerberg, Caves and
Frazer 2004). The criticism essentially comes from the assumptions of the underlying timing
of the input decisions on labor and materials or investment. If indeed the first stage would
suﬀer from multicollinearity, one can no longer invert the productivity shock and the estimates
would not be estimated precisely. However, it is clear from the Ackerberg et al. (2004) that
the my procedure does not suﬀer from this critique under the following timing assumptions:
labor is chosen without perfect knowledge of the productivity shock. As noted by Olley and
Pakes (1996), one can test whether the non parametric function used in the first stage is well
specified and is not collinear with labor by introducing the labor coeﬃcient in the last stage
when identifying the capital coeﬃcient.25

3.2

Unobserved demand shocks and productivity

So far I have assumed that the unobservable ω
e it - including both unobserved productivity and
unobserved demand shocks (such as quality) - can be substituted by a non parametric function
in investment and capital. The underlying assumption in that case is that investment proxies
both the shocks in productivity (ω it ) and unobserved demand shocks (ξ it ). I now relax this
by allowing investment to explicitly depend on another unobservable - a demand shock - that
24
The choice among the diﬀerent proxy estimators depends on many things such as the share of firms having
non zero investments, and the assumptions one is willing to make. (Appendix C).
25
Also see De Loecker (2007) where this test is implemented and the labor coeﬃcient is found to be insignificant
∗
e − β kit ) + β lit + eit+1 .
throughout all specifications when running rhit+1
= c + β k kit+1 + g(φ
t
k
c

14

varies across firms as suggested in Ackerberg and Pakes (2005). This notion also follows from
the discussion throughout the paper that both demand and production related shocks have
an impact on observed revenue. Note that unobserved demand shocks would not enter the
production function if we would observe physical output or firm-level prices when the investment
policy function does not depend on say quality. However, when investment is allowed to depend
on an unobserved demand shock (quality) as well, it enters through the productivity shock even
when physical output or firm-level prices are observed.
In this section we have a demand shock entering both through the investment policy function
and through the use of revenue to proxy for output at the firm level. The details of the estimation
thus depend on whether the demand shock (quality) enters both into the demand system and
the investment function. In the empirical application I will estimate both versions using firmproduct dummies to control for unobserved product specific demand shocks. This will control for
the cross sectional variation in product specific demand shocks. However, time variant demand
shocks are not picked up. For instance, if we would interpret ξ it to capture quality only it would
imply that quality improvements are not controlled for and hence still end up in the productivity
estimates. I refer to Appendix A.3 for a more detailed discussion on this. I show that if a control
variable sit (e.g. product dummies) for ξ it exists that the first stage of the estimation algorithm
looks as follows.
et (kit , iit , sit ) + uit
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β η qIt + φ
(14)

In the case where the investment policy function does not depend on unobserved demand
shocks, the control variable sit enters just as an additional demand variable (see section 5.2.2).
The use of these extra (product specific) demand side controls are potentially important in
obtaining consistent estimates for the markup(s). In the context of a trade liberalization process
the error term uit will still capture demand shocks due to changes in quota protection. Those
changes in protection are potentially correlated with the aggregate (segment) demand shifters
QIt (QIst ) and might lead to biased estimates of η (η s ). I will come back to this point in section
6 where I introduce the product-specific quota variables and how they impact firm-level demand.

3.3

Inference using standard measured productivity

When comparing with the standard approach to recover an estimate for productivity, it is clear
that when estimating equation
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β k kit + ωm
it + uit

(15)

where I denote ωm
it as measured productivity, that the resulting productivity estimate (residual) is
miss-measured. It captures demand shocks and product mix variation on top of the potentially
diﬀerently estimated coeﬃcients β l , β m , β k and β 0 . For now I assume away the unobserved
demand shock ξ it and focus on the unobserved productivity shock. The resulting measured

15

productivity ω m
it relates to the true unobserved productivity ω it in the following way
¶
µ
η
−
β
q
−
β
np
)
ω it = (ωm
it
η It
np
it
η+1

(16)

The estimated productivity shock consistent with the product diﬀerentiated demand system and
multi-product firms is obtained by substituting in the estimates for the true values (β η , β np and
η). This shows that any estimation of productivity - including the recent literature correcting
for the simultaneity bias (Olley and Pakes 1996 and Levinsohn and Petrin 2003) is biased in
the presence of imperfect output markets and multi-product firms. Assuming an underlying
product market a simple correction is suggested, i.e. subtract the demand variation and the
number of products and correct for the degree of product diﬀerentiation. One can even get
the demand parameter out of a separate (and potentially more realistic) demand regression.
Note that in the case of single product firms operating in a perfectly competitive market the
estimated productivity corresponds to the true unobservable, given that the simultaneity and
selection bias are addressed as well.
It is clear from equation (16) that the degree of product diﬀerentiation (measured by η)
only re-scales the productivity estimate. However, when the demand parameter is allowed to
vary across product segments, the impact on productivity is not unambiguous. The number of
products per firm Mi does change the cross sectional (across firms) variation in productivity
and changes the ranking of firms and consequently the impact of changes in the operating
environment or firm-level variables on productivity.
In a more general framework of time varying number of products per firm (Mit ) the bias in
m
measured productivity ωm
it is given by (17). The traditional measure ω it captures various eﬀects
in addition to the actual productivity shock ω it .
¶
µ
η+1
1
m
ωit +
ξ
ωit = β ηt qIt + β npt npit +
(17)
η
|η| it

This expression sheds somewhat more light on the discussion whether various competition
and trade policies have had an impact on productive eﬃciency. There is an extensive literature
using a two stage approach where productivity is estimated in a first stage and then regressed
on a variable of interest. However, in the first stage the relation of that variable of interest
with demand related variance is omitted. Pavcnik (2002) showed that tariﬀ liberalization in
Chile was associated with higher productivity, where essentially an interaction of time dummies
and firm trade orientation was used to identify the trade liberalization eﬀect on productivity.26
In terms of my framework, this measure of opening up to trade might also capture changes in
prices and in the product mix of firms. Increased measured productivity is clearly more than pure
productivity gains. It can be driven by any of the components in expression (17). It is exactly
the fact that changes in the operating environment are potentially correlated with some or all of
these components that makes inference using standard productivity measures (ωm
it ) problematic.
26

I refer to this paper among a large body of empirical work as the analysis of productivity is done by controlling
for the simultaneity bias and the selection bias as in Olley and Pakes (1996).

16

Measuring increased productivity without taking into account the demand side of the output
market and the degree of multi-product firms might thus have nothing to do with an actual
productivity increase.27 Even in the case of single product firms measured productivity growth
(∆ω m
it ) captures demand shocks and changes in prices. These biased productivity (growth)
measures are then regressed upon variables potentially capturing both cost and demand shifters
making any conclusion drawn out of these set of regressions doubtful.
It is straightforward to show the various biases one induces by using miss-measured productivity in a regression framework. Consider the following regression equation where the interest
lies in δ 1 verifying the impact of dit on measured productivity
ωm
it = δ 0 + δ 1 dit + zit λ + εit

(18)

where zit captures a vector of control variables and εit is an i.i.d. error term. Using expression
(17) it is straightforward to verify the diﬀerent sources of correlation that bias the estimate for
δ1
∂E(ω m
∂E((qIt + ξ it )/|η|) ∂E(npit ) ∂E((η + 1)/η)ω it
it )
=
+
+
(19)
∂dit
∂dit
∂dit
∂dit
where the expectation is conditional upon zit . It is clear that impact of dit on productivity (ω it )
is biased and the specific question and data at hand should help to sign the bias introduced by
the various sources. For instance, if dit captures some form of trade liberalization (or protection),
it is expected to have an impact on the industry’s total output and elasticity of demand and
results in a biased estimate for coeﬃcient δ 1 .
In addition to the various other correlations leading to a biased estimate, the point estimate
of the productivity eﬀect is multiplied by the inverse of the (firm specific) markup. Konings
and Vandenbussche (2005) showed that markups increased significantly during a period of trade
protection after antidumping filings in various industries. The second term in (19) captures the
correlation between the product mix and dit . Bernard, Redding and Schott (2003) suggest that
an important margin along which firms may adjust to increased globalization and other changes
in the competitive structure of markets is through changing their product mix. I will empirically
verify the importance of this bias when evaluating the impact of decreased quota protection in
the Belgian textile industry on estimated productivity in section 5.

4

The Belgian textile industry: Data and institutional details

I now turn to the dataset that I use to apply the methodology suggested above and in a later
stage to analyze the trade liberalization process measured by a significant drop in quota protection. My data covers firms active in the Belgian textile industry during the period 1994-2002.
The firm-level data are made available by the National Bank of Belgium and the database is
27
Harrison (1994) builds on the Hall (1988) methodology to verify the impact of trade reform on productivity
and concludes that ”... ignoring the impact of trade liberalization on competition leads to biased estimates in the
relationship between trade reform and productivity growth”.

17

commercialized by BvD BELFIRST. The data contains the entire balance sheet of all Belgian
firms that have to report to the tax authorities. In addition to traditional variables - such as
revenue, value added, employment, various capital stock measures, investments, material inputs
- the dataset also provides detailed information on firm entry and exit behavior.
FEBELTEX - the employer’s organization of the Belgian textile industry - reports very detailed product-level information on-line (www.febeltex.be). More precisely, they list Belgian
firms (311) that produce a certain type of textile product. The textile industry can be characterized by 5 diﬀerent subsectors: i) interior textiles, ii) clothing textiles, iii) technical textiles,
iv) textile finishing and v) spinning. Within each of these subsectors products are listed together with the name of the firm that produces it. This allows me to construct product-level
information for each firm including the location of those products in the diﬀerent segments of
the textile industry. In Table A.1 I list the segments and the various product categories.
I match the firms listing product information with the production dataset (BELFIRST) and
I end up with 308 firms for which I observe both firm-level and product-level information.28 The
average size of the firms in the matched dataset is somewhat higher than the full sample, since
mostly bigger firms report the product-level data. Even though I loose some firms due to the
matching of the product and the production datasets, I still cover 70 percent (for the year 2002)
of total employment in the textile industry.29
By adding the rich source of product-level data, it is clear that the industrial classification
codes (NACE BELCODE) are sometimes incomplete as they do not necessarily map into markets. If one would merely look at firms producing in the NACE BELCODE 17, there would
be some important segments of the industry left out, e.g. the subsector technical textiles also
incorporates firms that produce machinery for textile production and these are not always in
the NACE BELCODE 17 listings. It is therefore important to take these other segments into
the analysis in order to get a complete picture of the industry.
Before I turn to the estimation I report some summary statistics of both the firm-level and
product-level data. In Table 1 summary statistics of the variables used in the analysis are given.
The average firm size is increasing over time (11 percent). In the last column the producer
price index (PPI) is presented. It is interesting to note that since 1996 producer prices fell,
only to recover in 2000. Sales have increased over the sample period, with a drop in 1999.
However, measured in real terms this drop in total sales was even more sharp. Furthermore I
28

After matching the two sources of data it turns out that a very small fraction - 17 - of firms included in the
FEBELTEX listing are also active in wholesale of specific textiles. I ran all specifications excluding those firms
since they potentially do not actually produce textile and all results are invariant to this.
29
A downside is that the product-level information (number of products produced, segments and which products) is time invariant and leaves me with a panel of firms active until the end of my sample period. Therefore
I check whether my results are sensitive to this by considering a full unbalanced dataset where I control for the
selection bias (exit before 2000) as well as suggested in Olley and Pakes (1996). I can do this as the BELFIRST
dataset provides me with the entire population of textile producers. The results turn out to be very similar as
expected since the correction for the omitted price variable is essentially done in the first stage of the estimation
algorithm. The variation left in capital is not likely to be correlated with the demand variables and therefore I
only find slightly diﬀerent estimates on the capital coeﬃcient.

18

also constructed unit prices at a more disaggregated level (3 digit NACEBELCODE) by dividing
the production in value by the quantities produced and the drop in prices over the sample period
is even more prevalent in specific subcategories of the textile industry and quite diﬀerent across
diﬀerent subsectors (see Appendix A.).
Together with the average price decrease, the industry as whole experienced a downward
trend in sales at the end of the nineties. The organization of employers, FEBELTEX, suggests
two main reasons for the downward trend in sales. A first reason is a mere decrease in production volume, but secondly the downward pressure on prices due to increased competition
has played a very important role. This increased competition stems from both overcapacity
in existing segments and from a higher import pressure from low wage countries, Turkey and
China more specifically.30 Export still plays an important role, accounting for more than 70%
of the total industry’s sales in 2002. A very large fraction of the exports are shipped to other
EU member states and this is important as the quota restrictions are relevant at the EU level.
The composition of exports has changed somewhat, export towards the EU-15 member states
fell back mainly due to the strong position of the euro with respect to the British Pound and the
increased competition from low wage countries. This trend has been almost completely oﬀset
by the increased export towards Central and Eastern Europe. The increased exports are not
only due to an increased demand for textile in these countries, but also due to the lack of local
production in the CEECs.
For each firm in the dataset I observe product-level information. For each firm I know the
number of products produced, which products and in which segment(s) the firm is active. There
are five segments: 1) Interior, 2) Clothing, 3) Technical Textiles, 4) Finishing and 5) Spinning
and Preparing (see Appendix A. for more on the data). In total there are 563 diﬀerent products,
with 2,990 product-firm observations. On average a firm has about 9 products and 50 percent
of the firms have 3 or fewer products. Furthermore, 75 percent of the firms are active in one
single segment. This information is in itself unique and ties up with a recent series of papers by
Bernard et al. (2003) looking at the importance of diﬀerences in product mix across firms where
a 5 digit industry code is the definition of a product. Given I use a less aggregated definition of
a product, it is not surprising that I find a higher average number of products per firm.
Table 2 presents a matrix where each cell denotes the percentage of firms that is active in
both segments. For instance, 4.8 percent of the firms are active in both the Interior and Clothing
segment. The high percentages in the head diagonal reflect that most firms specialize in one
segment, however firms active in the Technical and Finishing segment tend to be less specialized
as they capture applying and supplying segments, respectively. The last row in Table 2 gives
the number of firms active in each segment. Again since firms are active in several segments,
these numbers do not sum up to the number of firms in my sample.
30

An example is the filing of three anti-dumping and anti-subsidy cases against sheets import from India and
Pakistan. Legal actions were also undertaken against illegal copying of products by Chinese producers (Annual
Report of FEBELTEX; 2002). In section 6 I analyze the productivity dynamics during this increased competition
period.

19

The same exercise can be done based on the number of products and as shown in Table 3
the concentration into one segment is even more pronounced. The number in each cell denotes
the average (across firms) share of a firm’s products in a given segment in its total number of
products. The table above has to interpreted in the following way: firms that are active in the
Interior segment have (on average) 83.72 percent of all their products in the Interior segment.
The analysis based on the product information reveals even more that firms concentrate their
activity in one segment. However, it is also the case that firms that are active in the Spinning
segment (on average) also have 27.2 percent of their products in the Technical textile segment.
Firms active in any of the segments tend to have quite a large fraction of their products in
Technical textiles, 8.27 to 27.7 percent. Finally the last two rows of Table 3 show the median and
minimum number of products owned by a firm across the diﬀerent segments. Firms producing
only 2 (or less) products are present in all five segments, but the median varies somewhat
across segments (see Appendix A.1 for a more detailed description of the segments). It is this
additional source of demand variation that I will use to construct segment demand shifters to
estimate segment markups. This is in contrast to Melitz and Levinsohn (2002) who do not
observe any product-level data and have to rely on the number of firms active in the industry
to estimate one markup for the industry.

5

Estimated production and demand parameters

In this section I show how the estimated coeﬃcients of a revenue production function are reduced form parameters and that consequently the actual production function coeﬃcients and
the resulting returns to scale parameter are underestimated. Furthermore, I introduce two additional sources of demand variation at the product and segment level to control for unobserved
firm-level prices The two sources - segment demand shifters and product dummies - allow for
diﬀerent product-level demand intercepts and diﬀerent slopes for the various segments of the
industry. A direct implication is that each firm will face diﬀerent demand conditions as they
diﬀer in their product mix both within and across segments.

5.1

The estimated coeﬃcients of augmented production function

I compare my results with a few base line specifications: [1] a simple OLS estimation of equation
(2), the Klette and Griliches (1996) specification in levels [2] and diﬀerences [3], KG Level and
KG Dif f respectively. Furthermore I compare my results with the Olley and Pakes (1996)
estimation technique to correct for the simultaneity bias in specification [4]. In specification [5]
I proxy the unobserved productivity shock by a polynomial in investment and capital and the
omitted price variable is controlled for as suggested by Klette and Griliches (1996). Note that
here I do not consider multi-product firms, I allow for this later when I assume segment specific
demand elasticities.
I replace the industry output QIt by a weighted average of the deflated revenues, i.e. QIt =
20

P
( i msit Rit /PIt ) where the weights are the market shares. This comes from the observation
that a price index is essentially a weighted average of firm-level prices where weights are market
shares (see Appendix A.2).
Table 4 shows the results for these various specifications. Going from specification [1] to [2] it
is clear that the OLS produces reduced form parameters from a demand and a supply structure.
As expected, the omitted price variable biases the estimates on the inputs downwards and hence
underestimates the scale elasticity. Specification [3] takes care of unobserved heterogeneity by
taking first diﬀerences of the production function as in the original Klette and Griliches (1996)
paper and the coeﬃcient on capital goes to zero as expected (see section 1). In specification
[4] we see the impact on the estimates of correcting for the simultaneity bias, i.e. the labor
coeﬃcient is somewhat lower and the capital coeﬃcient is estimated higher as expected. The
omitted price variable bias is not addressed in the Olley and Pakes (1996) framework as they
are only interested in a sales per input productivity measure. Both biases are addressed in
specification [5] and the eﬀect on the estimated coeﬃcients is clear. The correction for the
simultaneity and omitted price variable go in opposite direction and therefore making it hard
to sign the total bias a priori.
The estimate on the capital coeﬃcient does not change much when introducing the demand
shifter as expected since the capital stock at t is predetermined by investments at t − 1, however,
it is considerably higher than in the Klette and Griliches (1996) approach. The correct estimate
of the scale elasticity (αl +αm +αk ) is of most concern in the latter and indeed when correcting for
the demand variation, the estimated scale elasticity goes from 0.9477 in the OLS specification to
1.1709 in the KG specification. The latter specification does not take control for the simultaneity
bias which results in upward bias estimates on the freely chosen variables labor and material.
This is exactly what I find in specification [5], i.e. the implied coeﬃcients on labor drops when
correcting for the simultaneity bias (labor from 0.3338 to 0.3075).31
The estimated coeﬃcient on the industry output variable is highly significant in all specifications and is a direct estimate of the Lerner index. I also show the implied elasticity of demand
and markup. Moving across the various specifications, the estimate of the average Lerner index
(or the markup) increases as I control for unobserved firm productivity shocks. Moving from
specification [2] to [3] I implicitly assume a time invariant productivity shock which results in
a higher estimated Lerner index (from 0.2185 to 0.2658). In specification [5] productivity is
modelled as a Markov process and no longer assumed to be fixed over time. Controlling for
the unobserved productivity shock leads to a higher estimate of the Lerner index (around 0.30)
as the industry output variable no longer picks up productivity shocks common to all firms as
31
Note that here my panel is only restricted to having firms with observations up to the year 2002 in order
to use the product-level information and thus allows for entry within the sample period. However, as mentioned
before my estimates of the production function are robust to including the full sample of firms. To verify this,
I estimate a simple OLS production function on an unbalanced dataset capturing the entire textile sector. The
capital coeﬃcient obtained in this way is 0.0956 and is very close to my estimate in the matched panel (0.0879),
suggesting that the sample of matched firms is not a particular set of firms.

21

picked up by investment and capital.
Finally, an interesting by-product of correcting for the omitted price variable is that I recover
an estimate for the elasticity of demand and for the markup. The implied demand elasticities
are around −3 and the estimated markup is around 1.4.32 These implied estimates are worth
discussing for several reasons. First of all, this provides us with a a check on the economic
relevance of the demand model I assumed. Secondly, the implicit working assumption in most
empirical work is that η = −∞ and the estimates here provide a direct test of this. Thirdly,
they can be compared to other methods (Hall 1988 and Roeger 1995) that estimate markups
from firm-level production data.
The message to take out of this table is that both the omitted price variable and the simultaneity bias are important to correct for, although that the latter bias is somewhat smaller in
my sample. It is clear that this will have an impact on estimated productivity. The estimated
reduced form parameters (β) do not change much when controlling for the omitted price variable
in addition to the simultaneity bias correction since the control is (in these specifications) not
firm specific. However, it has a big impact on the estimated production function parameters (α),
which by itself is important if one is interested in obtaining the correct marginal product of labor
for instance. The industry output variable captures variation over time of total deflated revenue
and as Klette and Griliches (1996) mention therefore potentially picks up industry productivity
growth and changes in factor utilization. If all firms had a shift upwards in their production
frontier, the industry output would pick up this eﬀect and attribute it to a shift in demand
and lead to an overestimation of the scale elasticity. In my approach, the correction for the
unobserved productivity shock should take care of the unobserved industry productivity growth
if there is a common component in the firm specific productivity shocks (ω t ).
In the next section I introduce product-level information that allows for firm specific demand
shifters as firms have diﬀerent product portfolios over the various segments of the industry. Estimated productivity will be diﬀerent due to diﬀerent estimated parameters (β) and additional
demand controls capturing the shifts in demand for the products of a firm in a given segment
of the industry. The estimated coeﬃcients on the inputs (β) will potentially change as I further
control for unobserved prices and the correlation of inputs with the output price through the
introduction of additional rich demand side variation. The implied production function parameters (α) are expected to change as well due to a potentially diﬀerent reduced form parameter
β and diﬀerent markup estimates for the various segments.
32
Konings, Van Cayseele and Warzynski (2001) use the Hall (1988) method and find a Lerner index of 0.26
for the Belgian textile industry, which is well within in the range of my estimates (around 0.30). They have to
rely on valid instruments to control the for the unobserved productivity shock. A potential solution to overcome
this is a method proposed by Roeger (1995) were essentially the dual problem of Hall (1988) is considered to
overcome the problem of the unobserved productivity shock, however one is no longer able to recover an estimate
for productivity.

22

5.2

Segment specific demand, unobserved product characteristics and pricing
strategy

So far, I have assumed that the demand of all the products (and firms) in the textile industry
face the same demand elasticity η and I have assumed that the demand shock udijt was a pure
i.i.d. shock. Before I turn to the productivity estimates, I allow for this elasticity to vary across
segments and I introduce product dummies. In Appendix A.2 I present the evolution of producer
prices in the various subsectors of the textile industry and it is clear that the price evolution
is quite diﬀerent across the subsectors suggesting that demand conditions were very diﬀerent
across subsectors and from now on I consider the demand at the ’segment’ level.
Firstly, I construct a segment specific demand shifter - segment output deflated - and discuss
the resulting demand parameters. Secondly, I introduce product dummies to control for product
specific shocks, essentially controlling for ξ j . Finally, I split up my sample according to firms
being active in only 1 or more segments. Firms producing in several segments can be expected to
have a diﬀerent pricing strategy since they have to take into account whether their products are
complements or substitutes. Note that here the level of analysis is that of a segment, whereas
the pricing strategy is made at the individual product level.
5.2.1

Segment specific demand parameters

In this section I will show how introducing data on the (firm-specific) number of products
produced and the location of products in the various segments, enables us to estimate segment
specific markups. The latter is important as it allows us to control for markup diﬀerences across
firms with diﬀerent product portfolios. To see this, just take the situation where we estimate one
markup for the industry and then apply the correction to obtain true productivity. If markups
do diﬀer across segments, productivity diﬀerences across firms will still capture diﬀerences in
markups. This correction is important when we want to relate the productivity dynamics to
changes in trade protection, especially since the latter varies quite significantly across products
and thus segments.
The number of products produced by a firm Mi allows us to create segment specific demand
shifters which are consistent with the demand system introduced in the previous section. Just
as before we now allow for segment specific demand shifters QIst and by definition are given by
PNs
msist Rist
QIst = i=1
(20)
PIst
where Ns is the number of firms in segment s, msist is the market share of firm i in segment
s, Rist is the revenue of firm i in segment s and PIst is the average price in segment s. The
two terms msist and Rist on the right hand side are typically not observed. Using Mi we can
construct segment specific demand shifters that uses product mix variation across firms and I

23

use Mi to compute
Mis
Mi
Rist
P
i Rist

Rist = Rit
msist =

(21)
(22)

where Mis and Mi are the number of products firm i has in in segment s and in total, respectively.
Now that we have segment output (QIst ) it suﬃces to weigh across segments according to
is
Sis = M
Mi to obtain a firm-specific total demand shifter. All firms now (potentially) face 5
diﬀerent (segments) demand shifters and the product-mix variance in addition to the segment
demand shifters are used to identify the segment markups β ηs . The latter are - just like in
the case of the single markup - the coeﬃcients on the 5 terms ln(Sis QIst ) in the augmented
production function.33
In this way I weigh the various demand shifters by firm across segments according to how
important a segment is for a firm’s total revenue. This firm-specific importance is measured
by the share of the number of products in a given segment. For example a firm with 9 out
of its 10 products located in segment 1 will get a weight of 0.9 on demand shocks specific for
segment 1. This additional source of variation across firms (using the firm-specific product mix)
is then used to identify segment specific markups. It is clear that this approach might introduce
some measurement error by forcing firm-segment revenues to be proportional to the share of
the number of products sold in a given segment. However, as long as the proportionality is not
violated in some systematic way across products and segments, it is not expected to bias my
estimates in any specific way.
In this way the demand parameter is freed up to be segment-specific s by interacting the
segment demand shifter (segment output) with the segment share variable Sis .34 This implies
that I will now recover markups for s = {1 (Interior), 2 (Clothing), 3 (Technical ), 4 (Finishing),
5 (Spinning and Preparing)}. Note that the demand elasticity is now identified using firm
specific variation as the share variable is firm specific and Tables 3 and 4 show the variation in
the product mix of firms across segments.35
I now turn back to the general setup of the paper and denote qist = ln(Sis QIst ) which
captures the segment specific demand shifter weighted by the number of products a firm has in
a given segment . The augmented production function I estimate is clearly extended by allowing
33
Note that here I have constrained the number of products per firm Mi to be time-invariant as in my dataset.
Obviously when the product mix is observed at each point in time this introduces another rich source of identifying
variation.
34
I have also estimated demand parameters one level deeper, see Appendix A.1 for the structure of the segments.
This leads to a model with 51 diﬀerent demand elasticities and identification is somewhat harder as the number
of observations for some of the products is insuﬃcient. However, for a set of subsegments I recover significant and
meaningful estimates for markups.
35
As mentioned before, I do not observe the change of the product mix over time. It is reassuring, however,
that based on the US Census data (Bernard et al. 2003) firms only add or drop about 1 product over a five year
period, or less than 2 products over a nine year period which corresponds to my sample length (1994-2002). To
the extend that this variation is not picked up by the proxy for ωi , it potentially biases the input coeﬃcients.

24

η to vary by segment s
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit +

5
X

β ηs qist + β np npit + φt (iit , kit ) + uit

(23)

s=1

I present the estimated coeﬃcients β ηs and the distribution of the estimated demand parameter
in Table 5. One can immediately read of the implied demand parameters for the various segments
in the textile industry for those firms having all their products in one segment (Sit = 1).
Introducing multi-product firms in this framework explicitly implies a correction for the
number of products produced. As mentioned before, since I do not observe the product specific
inputs at the firm level, I have assumed that the product specific input levels are proportional
to the total firm input, where the proportion is given by the number of products produced
(ln Mi = npi ). The coeﬃcient on this extra term is negative and highly significant, however, it
is hard to interpret especially in the context of the control function (ω it = h(iit , kit )) as it is quite
plausible that the investment decision of a firm depends on the number of products produced.
The first row in Table 5 shows the estimated coeﬃcients implying significantly diﬀerent
demand parameters for the various segments. I also include the implied demand parameters
relevant for firms having all their products in a given segment. For instance, firms having all
their products in the segment Interior face a demand elasticity of −5.3. In panel B of table
5 I use the firm specific information on the relative concentration (Sis ) and this results in a
firm specific elasticity of demand and markup which are in fact weighted averages over the
relevant segment parameters. I stress that this comes from the fact that firms have multiple
products across diﬀerent segments and therefore the relevant demand condition is diﬀerent for
every firm.36
5.2.2

Unobserved product characteristics

I now introduce product dummies to control for product specific unobserved demand shocks (ξ j ).
Note that in my empirical implementation the unobserved demand shock - which is potentially
correlated with the other demand variables (segment output) - is now time invariant and only
product specific (ξ j ) due to the lack of time-varying product-mix information (as opposed to
being firm and time specific in the theoretical setup).
In terms of section 3.2 the product dummies proxy for the unobserved demand shocks - that
are product specific and potentially impacts the investment decision. I assume time invariant
unobserved product characteristics and there are 563 products (K) in total (and a firm produces
9 of these on average) which serve as additional controls in the first stage regression (24). The
product dummies are captured by P RODik where P RODik is a dummy variable being 1 if firm
i has product k. The variation across firms in terms of their product mix allows me to identify
the K product fixed eﬀects and they have a specific economic interpretation.
36

The same is true for the estimated production function coeﬃcients, since they are obtained by correcting for
the degree of production diﬀerentiation which is firm specific (η i ).

25

Note that I introduce the product dummies motivating the need to correct for product
specific demand shocks such as unobserved quality. However, they will also capture variation
related to the production side and those two types of variations are not separable.37 The
identifying assumption for recovering an estimate on the capital coeﬃcient is that productivity
and the unobserved demand shock are independent. However, using the product dummies in
the proxy for productivity, the identifying assumption becomes less strong, i.e. I filter out
time invariant product unobservables. Note that in the standard approach for identifying the
production coeﬃcients, demand variation is not filtered out, both observed and unobserved.
Here I allow for product unobservables and demand shocks to impact investment decisions, on
top of proxying for the demand shocks by segment output and product dummies. Note that I
assume that ξ ijt = ξ j and I only control for product time invariant demand shocks as opposed
to time varying firm-product specific demand shocks.
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit +

5
X
s=1

e (iit , kit , P RODi1 , ..., P RODiK ) + uit (24)
β ηs qst Sis + β np npi + φ
t

In Table 5 I show that the demand parameters do not change too much as expected, as well
as the production related coeﬃcients. However, the point estimates are more precise and 62 out
of the 652 products are estimated significantly diﬀerent from the reference product confirming
the importance of controlling for time invariant product characteristics. As mentioned above the
interpretation of these coeﬃcients is somewhat harder as the product dummies are introduced to
proxy for unobserved demand shocks, however, they will also pick up product-specific production
related diﬀerences. As stressed before, all these extra controls come into play if the interest lies
in getting an estimate on productivity taking out demand related variation.
In terms of economic interpretation, Table 5 suggests that firms operating in the Finishing
segment (only) face less elastic demand. The high elastic demand segments are Interior and
Spinning capturing products - like linen, yarns, wool and cotton - facing high competition from
low wage countries.38 In Appendix A.1 I relate these demand parameters to changes in output
prices at more disaggregated level and I find that indeed in those sectors with relative high
elastic demand, output prices have fallen considerably over the sample period.
5.2.3

Single versus multi-product firms

So far I have assumed that the pricing strategy of firms is the same whether it produces one or
more products, or whether it is active in one or more segments. Remember that the revenue
37

I introduce the product dummies without interactions with the polynomial terms in investment and capital
since that would blow up the number of estimated coeﬃcients by K. This then coincides with assuming that the
quality unobservable does not enter the investment policy function in the first stage and just correcting for the
demand unobservable. However, it matters for the second stage, i.e. this variation is now not subtracted from
deflated sales (h
r) like the variable inputs. This would imply that the time invariant product dummies would proxy
the unobserved demand shock completely. Therefore, the resulting productivity will still capture time variant
demand shocks - say improved product quality.
38
Increased international competition in the Interior and Spinning segments is documented in section 6 where
quota protection is discussed.

26

observed at the firm-level is the sum over the diﬀerent product revenues. Firms that have
products in diﬀerent segments are expected to set prices diﬀerently since they have to take
into account the degree of complementarity between the diﬀerent goods produced. I relax this
by simply splitting my sample according to the number of segments a firm is active in. The
underlying model of price setting and markups can be seen as a special case where own and
cross elasticities of demand are restricted to be the same within a segment.
In the third row of Table 5 I present the estimated demand parameters for firms active in
only 1 segment and for those active in at least 2. As expected the estimated demand elasticities
for the entire sample are in between both. Firms producing products in diﬀerent segments face
a more elastic (total) demand since a price increase of one of their product also impacts the
demand for their other products in other segments.39 This is not the case for firms producing
only in 1 segment, leading to lower estimated demand elasticities. It is clear that the modeling
approach here does allow for various price setting strategies and diﬀerent demand structures.
From the above it is clear that productivity estimates are biased in the presence of imperfect
competitive markets and ignoring the underlying product space when considering firm-level
variables. It is clear that the data at hand and the research question will dictate the importance
of the various components captured by traditional productivity estimates. In the next section I
analyze the productivity gains from the trade liberalization in the Belgian textile industry and I
compare my results with the standard productivity estimates, which are in fact sales per input
measures and not necessarily lead to the same conclusions.

6

Trade liberalization and productivity gains

In this section I introduce product-level quota restrictions as additional controls for the unobserved firm-level price variable in the demand system and consequently in the augmented
production function. In section 5 I showed that the industry output and segment output variables were highly significant, however, they implied rather high markups and in turn relatively
high returns to scale point estimates. Including the quota restriction variable is expected to
lead to lower estimates on the demand shifters QIst if anything as firms protected by quota are
expected to have higher market share - if anything - and produce more. I will correct for the
potential upward bias in the Lerner index. In addition the quota variable will control for additional variation in unobserved firm-level prices as producers are expected to be able to set higher
prices if import is restricted even more so since quota tend to apply on suppliers with lower costs
of production (wages). I model the quota restriction variable as an additional residual demand
shock in the demand system and it will impact each firm demand intercept diﬀerently according
to the firm’s product mix.
39

Note that now the implied demand elasticities are given by the weighted sum over the various segments a
firm is active in, where weights are the fraction of the number of products in a segment in the total number of
products owned.

27

First I introduce the quota data and discuss how it relates to the firm-level data. Secondly, I
introduce the quota restriction measure into the augmented production function. The resulting
estimated productivity is then used to verify to what extent that abolishing the quota on imports
has contributed to within-firm productivity gains in the Belgian textile industry and how results
using standard techniques to estimate productivity diﬀer from the methodology suggested in
this paper. In contrast to within-firm productivity changes, aggregate industry productivity can
increase by the mere exit of lower productivity firms and/or the reallocation of market share
towards more productive firms.40 As shown in Syverson (2004), demand shocks might in turn
impact the aggregate productivity distribution.

6.1

The quota data: raw patterns and a measure for trade liberalization

The quota data comes straight from the SIGL database constructed by the European Commission
(2003) and is publicly available on-line (http://sigl.cec.eu.int/). Note that this data is at the EU
level since Belgium has no national wide trade policy and so quota at the EU level are the relevant
quota faced by Belgian producers. This database covers the period 1993-2003 and reports all
products holding a quota. For each product the following data is available: the supplying
country, product, year, quota level, working level, licensed quantity and quantity actually used
by the supplying country.41 From this I constructed a database listing product-country-year
specific information on quota relevant for the EU market.
Before I turn to the construction of a variable capturing the quota restriction relevant at
the firm level, I present the raw quota data as it shows the drastic changes that occurred in
trade protection during my sample period 1994-2002. In addition to observing whether a given
product is protected by a quota, the level of allowed import quantities measured in kilograms
(kg) or number of pieces - depending on the product category - is provided. In total there are
182 product categories and 56 supplying countries, where at least one quota on a product from
a supplier country in a given year applies. In terms of constructing a trade liberalization or
protection measure various dimensions have to be considered.
Given the structure of the demand system and how the quota restriction will impact firmlevel demand I create a composite variable that measures the extent to which a firm is protected
(across its products). A first and most straightforward measure is a dummy variable that is 1 if
a quota protection applies for a certain product category g on imports from country e in year t
(qregt ) and switches to zero when the quota no longer applies. However, increasing the quota
levels is also consistent with opening up to trade and thus both dimensions are important to
look at. Table 6 below shows the number of quota that apply for the sample period 1994-2002.
40
It is clear that decompositions of aggregate industry productivity using biased measures of firm-level productivity will provide diﬀerent answers as to how important net entry, reallocation and within productivity growth
are. In fact given the framework suggested here, it is easy to show how we over- (under) estimate the various
components of aggregate productivity. Under the empirical relevant scenario that entrants charge lower prices, it
is clear that the importance of entry is underestimated since ωM
it = ω it + (pit − pIt ).
41
Appendix A.4 describes the quota data in more detail and provides two cases on how quota protection changed.

28

In addition I provide the average quota levels split up in kilograms and number of pieces, both
expressed in millions.
It is clear from the second column that the number of quota restrictions have decreased
dramatically over the sample period. By 2002 the number of quota fell by 54 percent over a
nine year period and these numbers refer to the number of product-supplier restricted imports.
Columns 3 to 6 present the evolution by unit of measurement and the same evolution emerges:
the average quota level increased with 72 and 44 percent for products measured in kilograms
and number of pieces, respectively. Both the enormous drop in the number of quota and the
increase in the quota levels of existing quota, points to a period of significant trade liberalization
in the EU textile industry. It is essentially this additional source of demand variation I will use
to identify the demand parameters in the augmented production function and verify how this
gradual opening up to foreign textile products has impacted firm-level productivity.
As mentioned above the product classifications in the quota data are diﬀerent from the firmlevel activity information and have to be aggregated to the firm-level revenue and input data.
The average quota restriction (qr) that applies for a given product g is given by
X
qrgt =
aet qregt
(25)
e

where aet is the weight of supplier e in period t. This measure is zero if no single quota applies to
imports of product g from any of the supplying countries at a given time, and one if it holds for
all supplying countries. A final step is to relate the quota restriction measure to the information
of the firm revenue and production data. The 182 diﬀerent quota product categories map into
390 diﬀerent 8 digit product codes. The latter correspond to 23 (l) diﬀerent 4 digit industry
classifications (equivalent to the 5 digit SIC level in the US) allowing me to relate the quota
restriction variable to the firm-level variables. Aggregating over the diﬀerent product categories
leaves me with a quota measure of a given 4 digit industry code. I consider the average across
products within an industry l (qrit ) where a firm i is active in as given by (26).
qrit =

1 X
qrgt
Ngt

(26)

g∈l(i)

In Figure 1 I show the evolution of the quota restriction variable given by (26) split up by
segment. Again the same picture emerges, in all segments the average quota restriction has
gone down considerably over the sample period, however, there are some diﬀerences across the
various segments and it is this variation that will help to estimate the segment specific demand
elasticities.
The construction of the quota restriction measures provides me with an additional control
for the unobserved price variable and it is assumed to enter the demand system (4) as part of the
residual demand shock in the demand system in addition to the pure i.i.d. component udit and
unobserved demand shocks ξ it . This implies that it is assumed to be independent (conditional
on the other controls) of the input and investment choices.
29

6.2

Introducing quota restrictions in the demand system

I now introduce the average quota restriction qrit in the demand system where I now have the
following expression.
µ
¶
Pit η
Qit = QIt
exp(udit + ξ it + qrit )
(27)
PIt
The interpretation of this model is to estimate the elasticity of substitution (demand) that is
consistent with international competition. It implies that the intercept for each firm is allowed
to diﬀer according to the protection of its products.42 I allow for segment specific demand
elasticities and multi-product firms and I control for time invariant unobserved product eﬀects
using product dummies. This leads to the following augmented production function (28)
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit +
+φt (iit , kit ) +

K
X

5
X

β ηs qist + β qr qrit + β np npi

s=1

λk P RODik + uit

(28)

k=1

where the term β qr qrit captures the quota measures.43 Before I present the estimated coeﬃcients,
I note that introducing the quota restriction information helps estimating the β ηs and potentially
the production function parameters. Table 7 presents the estimated Lerner indices (β ηs ) and
compares them with the specification where the extra demand variation captured by the quota
restriction is not included. I also recover product specific estimates and about 20 products
are estimated significantly diﬀerent from their respective segment average (see Appendix A.3).
These can be interpreted as the product of segment specific Lerner indices and time invariant
product shocks ξ j under the assumption that the investment decision does not depend on the
unobserved demand shock. This is the assumption implicitly made in expression (28) as they
do no longer enter in the control function φt (iit , kit ).
The last 4 rows show the estimated production coeﬃcients and the implied returns to scale.
The estimate on the quota restriction variable immediately provides information on how standard
estimated productivity estimates incorporate demand shifters.44 We could immediately verify
42

I have also estimate a change in the slope of the demand curve (elasticity). The identification is somewhat
harder as firms can be active in diﬀerent segments experiencing diﬀerent changes in the protection, however, the
results are invariant.
43
A well documented problem of using trade liberalization or protection measures in a regression framework
is that they are potentially endogenous as firms might lobby for protection. In order to verify whether in my
sample producers of certain product categories were able to keep higher level of protection, I ran a regression of
qrge2003 on qrge1993 (N = 1, 097) finding a strong negative relation which suggests that protection in all product
categories decreased over time. In addition, when analyzing the productivity eﬀects I include product category (l)
dummies controlling for (time invariant) diﬀerences in lobbying-for-protection activities across producers active
in diﬀerent product categories.
44
All the results are based on unweighted averages. I have also experimented using the quota levels to construct
the weights. These would capture the importance of a given quota protection in the overall import restriction
and the extent to which import demand for a given product can be substituted away to another supplier. Due to
the diﬀerent unit of measurement in the levels, the interpretation of a change in qr is less clear.

30

how the trade liberalization impacted productivity by decomposing the coeﬃcient on the quota
restriction variable qrit into the (segment) markup and the productivity eﬀect. However, we can
only do this when the quota restriction does not impact the investment choices and if productivity
is a simple linear function of qrit only (ω it = θω qrit + ω
e it ). Given the structure
h³
´ of productivity
i
η+1
1
and the demand system, we know that the coeﬃcient on qrit is given by
+
θ
ω
η
|η| . Using
the range of estimates for η it is clear that the coeﬃcient of −0.09 on qrit implies a negative
value for θω as expected but rather big in magnitude (around 0.3). I will turn to the impact of
the quota liberalization on productivity in the next section.
As expected, the coeﬃcients on the segment output are estimated lower confirming the prior
that the quota restriction measure is positively correlated with the segment output, i.e. higher
protection, higher domestic production. As noted by Tybout (2000), the eﬀect from restricting
imports is that firms might exploit their enhanced market power and that protection is likely to
increase the market size for domestic producers.
The estimates on the inputs are quite similar after introducing the additional demand information as expected, since these are just reduced form parameters. However the implied
production coeﬃcients do change since the estimated demand elasticities change and this is
reflected in the lower estimated returns to scale. Note that the capital coeﬃcient is estimated
lower compared to Table 4 where no product-firm dummies were used. The latter capture time
invariant product diﬀerences and improves the estimation of the capital coeﬃcient by purifying
the error term in the final stage (13) from any product-firm specific time invariant unobservables capturing quality diﬀerences on top of the observed demand variation across segments.
This could also point to a positive correlation of capital intensity and output prices.
Finally, in Appendix A.3 I verify whether the estimates of the segment specific markups are
sensitive to the underlying assumptions of the production process such as the timing of inputs
with respect to the productivity shock and the substitution elasticity among inputs and I find
that my estimated demand parameters are robust to this.

6.3

The impact of relaxing trade protection on productivity

The coeﬃcient on the quota restriction variable is estimated highly significant and with a negative sign, -0.0886. As previous studies have shown productivity gains are associated with trade
liberalization, although measured in diﬀerent ways these studies essentially establish a highly
significant positive correlation between productivity and opening up to trade.45 The estimated
productivity shock in a standard OP setup would then still include markups and demand shifts
introduced by the change in trade policy. Therefore it is crucial to purify productivity estimates
from the price and demand related variation in order to get at the true impact of trade liberalization on productivity and productivity growth. The distinction between both is important
as to know whether opening up to trade does impact productivity growth and hence has a long
45

See Tybout (2000) for an overview and e.g. Pavcnik (2002) for a country study.

31

run impact on the eﬃciency of an economy.
The interpretation in my specification is somewhat more complicated. To the extent that
the polynomial in capital and investment picks up the unobserved productivity shock, the quota
restriction variable picks up demand shocks. However, it is clear that it will also pick up
variation related to true productivity that is not controlled for by the polynomial in investment
and capital. It is exactly the relation between productivity and the trade liberalization measure
that is of interest.
In order to verify the extent to which trade liberalization - measured by a decrease in quota
restrictions - has impacted the productivity of Belgian textile producers I follow the standard 2
stage approach and show how the results change when using my corrected productivity estimates.
I consider the following regression
ω
b it = δ 0 + δ 1 qrit + δ 2 nqrit + εit

(29)

where ω
b it refers to the estimated productivity and I will consider various versions of (29). In
all regressions I include quota product classification dummies (23 categories) capturing time
invariant productivity (growth) diﬀerences among categories. Table 8 presents the estimates of
δ 1 under various specifications.
Before I turn to each specification, it is clear that - across all specifications - using the standard OP productivity estimate leads to an overestimation of the impact of trade liberalization.46
Note that a decrease in the quota restriction variable corresponds with less quota protection or
opening up of trade. So a negative coeﬃcient implies productivity gains from relaxing quota
restrictions. In all specifications the sign is negative and highly significant and the interpretation
of the coeﬃcient is the productivity gain for abolishing quota on all products from all countries.
Specification I is the level regression and implies a 6.37 percent higher productivity for
firms not protected by a single quota and using OP the estimate is much higher, 10.68 percent.
Given the Markov assumption of productivity in the estimation algorithm and knowing that
firm productivity estimates are highly persistent over time, specification II introduces lagged
productivity as a regressor. The impact of the quota restriction variable is estimated more precise
and somewhat lower. In specification III and IV , I run the regression in growth rates revealing
the same pattern as in specification I. In specification IV , however, I include lagged levels of
the quota restriction variable. Controlling for the lagged levels of the quota restriction measure
leads to a higher point estimate on δ 1 , showing that the impact of relaxing quota restrictions
on productivity depends on the initial level of the quota. If the quota protection was initially
low, there is not much impact on productivity. Specification V considers long diﬀerences (3 year
period) and the results are robust to this, although estimated somewhat less precise due to the
significant drop in observations.
46

Using the estimates one can derive that the segments with a relative high level of protection have higher
markups as expected (e.g. Tybout 2000). This - together with the scaled point estimate - leads to a biased
estimate of the eﬀect of relaxing quota protection on standard estimated productivity (OP).

32

In order to recover an estimate of the elasticity of productivity with respect to quota restrictions, I evaluate this at the mean (of the change in quota restriction) by segment. Table 9 shows
the impact of a 10 percent decrease in the quota restriction measure on productivity for the
various segments and it further compares my results with those relying on the OP productivity
estimates. A 10 percent decrease in the quota restriction measure can come about by products
being no longer protected from all or some supplying countries.47
As established in the previous table trade liberalization leads to higher productivity, however, there are some diﬀerences across segments. A 10 percent decrease in my quota restriction
measure leads only to a 1.6 percent higher productivity in the Finishing segment, as opposed to
a 4.37 percent increase in the Interior segment. This result is what one would expect given the
diﬀerent paths of the quota restriction variable by segment as shown in Figure 1. The Finishing
segment started out with a relatively low level of protection in 1994 (0.3) and stays rather flat
after 1996. The other segments - with higher estimated elasticities - had much higher levels
of protection initially, e.g. the Interior segment was highly protected (qr = 0.85) in 1994 and
by 2002 protection was significantly lower (qr = 0.3). It is clear that the productivity gains
are much smaller (more than halved) and this is what one would expect for firms operating
in an advanced economy, as opposed to firms active in more developing regions. The results
show that decomposing the residual from a sales generating production function into productivity and demand related factors, is important to evaluate the impact of trade liberalization on
productivity.
Furthermore in Table 9, I present the elasticities evaluated at the mean of the change in
the quota restriction for two diﬀerent periods, 1994-1997 and 1998-2002. The first period is
characterized by a sharper fall in the quota protection (see Table 9) and therefore leads to
higher estimated elasticities. The sharp fall of the number of quota in the period 1994-1997 is
consistent with the process of the preparation of EU enlargement towards Central and Eastern
Europe (CEE). By the year 1998 almost all trade barriers between the EU and the candidate
countries of CEE were abolished as part of the Europe Agreements (EC 2005). The Europe
Agreements were setup to establish free trade in industrial products over a gradual, transition
period. This implied that industrial products from the associated countries (mostly CEE) have
had virtually free access to the EU since the beginning of 1995 with restrictions in only a
few sectors, such as agriculture and textiles. However, even in the last period (1998-2002)
the productivity gains are still estimated around 3 percent with the exception of the Finishing
segment which had a relatively low level of quota protection throughout the sample period.
Finally, as mentioned before another channel through which the EU trade policy relaxed
quota restrictions is by increasing the level of existing quota for a set of supplying countries.
In order to verify the impact of this on productivity I consider only those industry categories
(4 digit NACE) that have some form of protection, i.e. where I observe a positive level of
47

The average quota restriction measure is 0.43 and the average change in this measure is -0.05, which is around
10 percent.

33

protection and the unit of measurement of a quota level is constant within a given industry code
(23 categories). This dimension of opening up to trade has been the predominant strategy for
the EU when it comes to imports from outside CEE and other new EU member states and not
as much through abolishing quota. In Table 10 I list the supplying countries where relaxing
import restrictions mainly occurred through higher levels of quota. I report the increase in the
average level per quota during my sample period 1994-2002. The countries listed have gained
access to the EU textiles market under a significant increase of quota levels.
For instance the average quota level on textile products from Pakistan has more than doubled
over a nine year period (129 and 144 percent depending on product category). This process is
not captured by the quota restriction variable that picks up whenever a quota on a given product
from a supplying country is abolished.
In order to verify the impact of increased quota levels - in addition to the abolishment of
quota - I include a variable that measures the total level of quota (in logs) in a given industry in
the regression framework of specification II. Specification V I in Table 10 shows the results of
including the level variable. The quota restriction variable has a negative sign as before and the
coeﬃcient on the level variable is estimated with a positive sign: an increase in the level of quota
is consistent with increased competition from foreign textiles products and has a positive eﬀect
on productivity. The point estimate is an elasticity and implies that if quota levels increase by
10 percent that productivity increases with 1.9 percent.
The simultaneous abolishment of quota protection and the increase in the quota levels are
associated with higher productivity of Belgian textile producers. Productivity gains were higher
for firms active in segments which initially were highly protected as they had to restructure
more in order to face the increased competition from non-EU textile producers. However, the
magnitude of the productivity gains are fairly small compared to those obtained with standard
techniques. As mentioned before, the results presented in Table 10 can be interpreted as a
decomposition of measured productivity gains from relaxing trade protection into true productivity gains and demand shocks. Here, I find that around 50 percent is only picking up actual
productivity gains.
My results suggest that the channel through which trade liberalization impacts productivity
is mostly by cutting oﬀ the ineﬃcient producers from the productivity distribution and therefore
increases the average productivity of the industry. However, the (within-firm) productivity
gains for those producers that remain active are small and sometimes even negligible. These
two observations then imply a very diﬀerent interpretation of how opening up trade impacts
individual firms. Furthermore, the reallocation of activities across surviving firms is not as
closely tied to productivity, but rather an interplay of the ability to markup over costs and
productivity.

34

7

Conclusion

In this paper I suggest a method to correct for the omitted price variable in the estimation
of productivity. I have introduced a simple demand side and I explicitly allow firms to have
multiple products. I introduce a simple aggregation from product space into firm space and
derive a straightforward estimation strategy. I show that measured productivity increases need
not to reflect actual productivity increase. This casts some doubt on the recent empirical
findings that link changes in the operating environment - such as trade protection - on firmlevel productivity (growth) in a two-stage approach. I illustrate this methodology by analyzing
productivity in the Belgian textile industry using an unique dataset that in addition to firm-level
data has product-level information. Adding extra product-level information to the plant-level
data appears to be a successful first step in separating out demand variation and product mix
from estimated productivity.
The results here are obtained using a tractable and fairly standard demand system. The
extent to which the results established in this paper are robust to using a richer demand system
is ultimately an empirical question. However, it is clear that independent of a specific demand
system, the resulting productivity estimates do change quite drastically if one is no longer
ignorant about the product level and the degree of product diﬀerentiation in an industry, and
how these factors diﬀer over time and firms.
I analyze the impact of trade liberalization on firm performance using the method developed
in this paper. Trade liberalization is measured by the abolishment of quota restricted imports
and by increased levels of maintained quota. The quota restriction measures serve as additional
variables to control for the unobserved price and the resulting estimates for productivity are
therefore further purified from demand variation. While I find positive significant productivity
gains from relaxing quota restrictions, the eﬀects are estimated considerably lower than using
standard productivity estimates. The latter still capture price and markup variation (across
product segments and time) which are correlated with the change in demand conditions due to
a change of trade policy, leading to an overestimation of productivity gains from opening up to
trade.

35

Appendix A: The Belgian textile industry and the quota dataset
A.1 The Belgian textile industry:
I present the structure of the diﬀerent segments, sub-segments and the products in my
dataset in Table A.1. The diﬀerent levels are important to structure the regressions and serve
as additional sources of variation to identify demand parameters. The number in parentheses
indicates the number of subsegments within a given segment whereas the last row indicates the
number of products within a given segment. I also estimated demand elasticities at the level of
the subsegments, i.e. 52 diﬀerent parameters.

Table A.1.: Segment Structure: Number of Subsegments and Products per Segment
Interior (9)
Bed linen
Carpets
Kitchen linen
Mattress ticking
Table linen
Terry toweling articles
Trimming
Upholstery & furnishing fabr.
Wallcoverings
19
Technical (9)
Agrotech
Buildtech
Geotech
Indutech
Medtech
Mobiltech
Packtech
Protech
Sporttech
231

Clothing (18)
Fabrics
Knitwear
Accessories
Accessories
Baby clothes & children’s
Babies’ wear
Men’s wear
Bath
Nightwear & underclothing
Children’s wear
Others
Fabrics for ...
Rain-, sportswear & leisure
... Nightwear
Women’s wear
... Outerwear
Workwear & protective suits
... Sportswear
Stockings- tights- socks
Underwear
61
36

Finishing (7)
Carpeting
Knitted fabrics
Material before spinning
NonWoven
Woven fabrics
Yarns
Specialities

132

Spinning (9)
Blended aramid, polyamid or polyacrylic
Blended artificial yarns
Blended cotton or linen yarns
Blended polyester yarns
Blended polypropylene or chlorofibre yarns
Blended yarns
Filament Yarns
Spun Yarns (> 85% of 1 fibre)
Synthetic Fibres
84

36

A.2. Producer prices and demand elasticity
As mentioned in the text a producer price index is obtained by taking a weighted average over a representative number of products within an industry, where weights are based on
sales (market shares). In the case of Belgium the National Institute of Statistics (NIS) gathers
monthly information of market relevant prices (including discounts if available) of around 2,700
representative products (an 8 digit classification - PRODCOM - where the first 4 are indicating the NACEBELCODE). The index is constructed by using the most recent market share as
weights based on sales reported in the oﬃcial tax filings of the relevant companies. The relevant
prices take into account both domestic and foreign markets and for some industries both indices
are reported. I present unit prices at the 3 digit NACEBELCODE (equivalent to 4/5 digit ISIC
code). I constructed these by dividing total value of production in a given subcategory by the
quantity produced. Table A2 gives the PPI for the various subcategories with 1994 as base year
except for the 175 category (Other textile products, mainly carpets). I do not use these to deflate firm-level revenues since I have no information in which category (ies) a firm is active since
the product classification cannot be uniquely mapped into the NACEBELCODE and firms are
active in various subcategories. The codes have the following description: 171 : Preparation and
spinning of textile fibres, 172 : Textile weaving, 173 : Finishing of textiles, 174 :.Manufacture
of made-up textile articles, except apparel, 175 : Manufacture of other textiles (carpets, ropes,
...), 176 : Manufacture of knitted and crocheted fabrics and 177 : Manufacture of knitted and
crocheted articles.
Table A.2.: Producer Prices (Unit Prices) at Disaggregated Level
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
demand elasticity

171
172
100
100
99.4 96.7
100.9 94.5
103.7 94.5
102.8 96.0
95.0 95.8
94.3 94.6
96.7 93.2
97.3 94.2
-5.4675

173
100
110.4
101.1
101.3
108.0
100.6
119.3
108.4
110.7
-3.0628

174
100
111.0
117.9
108.5
117.6
118.2
106.2
107.7
103.1
-3.0628

175
100
99.2
101.5
99.6
102.0
104.1
107.2
n.a.

176
100
100.9
103.4
93.9
93.3
94.8
84.1
86.9
85.8
n.a.

177
100
100.7
94.8
97.5
97.6
92.9
95.5
101.3
106.1
-3.6470

Several observations are important to note. Firstly, there is considerable variation across
subcategories of the textiles industry in terms of price changes over the period 1994-2002. The
sector Manufacture of knitted and crocheted fabrics (176) has experienced a severe drop in
output prices (14.2 percent) over the sample period, whereas the output prices in the Finishing
of Textiles (173) has increased with more than 10 percent. Secondly, the evolution in the various
subcategories is not smooth, periods of price increases are followed by decreases and the other
way around. Thirdly, most of the price decreases occur at the end of the nineties when imports
from Central and Eastern Europe were no longer quota restricted as agreed in the Europe
Agreements. It is interesting to note that the segment (Spinning) with the most elastic demand
(-5.3135) has indeed experienced a negative price evolution (2.7 percent). The latter segment
also captures weaving activities which in turn also experienced a price decrease (5.8 percent).
The segment (Finishing) with the least elastic demand (-3.2051) has had a sharp increase in its
output prices (10.7 percent). The estimated demand elasticities from Table 5 are given in the
last row for those subcategories I could map into segments.

37

A.3. Unobserved demand shocks and estimating production function
Formally, I relax the assumption that investment only depends on the capital stock and
the unobserved productivity shock. I now have two unobservables (ω it , ξ it ) and the investment
function is now iit = it (kit , ω it , ξ it ). The demand unobservable ξ it is assumed to follow a Markov
process that is independent of the productivity process. We now need a second control sit - say
advertisement expenditures - to proxy the unobservable in order to control for the productivity
shock. I denote the bivariate policy function determining (iit , sit ) as Υ(.) and assume it is a
bijection in (ωit , ξ it ) conditional on the capital stock kit
µ ¶
iit
= Υt (kit , ωit , ξ it )
(A.1)
sit
As Ackerberg and Pakes (2005) show this allows us to invert and rewrite the unobservable
productivity as a function of the controls in the following way
ω
e it = Υ−1
t (kit , iit , sit )

(A.2)

The revenue generating production function is as before and the first stage of the estimation
algorithm now looks as follows
reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β k kit + β η qIt + Υ−1
t (kit , iit , sit ) + uit
e (kit , iit , sit ) + uit
= β + β lit + β mit + β qIt + φ
0

l

m

η

t

(A.3)

e = β kit +Υ−1 (kit , iit , sit ). The non parametric function is in three variables, investment,
where φ
t
k
t
capital and an additional control, where the latter controls for the unobserved demand shocks
ξ it . In addition to the standard Olley and Pakes (1996) methodology I control for both observed
and unobserved demand shocks coming from the use of revenue in stead of physical output and
from the notion that demand shocks might have an impact on the level of investments.
The second stage hardly changes compared to (13) since the process of the demand shock is
assumed to be independent of the productivity shock. Consider the revenue generating production function at time t + 1
reit+1 = β 0 + β l lit+1 + β m mit+1 + β k kit+1 + β η qIt+1 + E(e
ωit+1 |It ) + υit+1 + uit+1

where I have used the fact that productivity and the demand shock follow a first-order Markov
process, i.e. ω
e it+1 = E(e
ω it+1 |e
ω it ) + υ it+1 , where υ it+1 is the news term. The capital coeﬃcient is
e is diﬀerent compared
estimated as before where the only diﬀerence is that the estimate for φ(.)
to the standard case (12) and leads to more precise estimates for the capital stock.
b
eit − β k kit ) + eit+1
reit+1 − bl lit+1 − bm mit+1 − bη qIt+1 = β 0 + β k kit+1 + ge(φ

(A.4)

where eit+1 = υit+1 + uit+1 . Variation in output purified from variation in variable inputs and
observed demand shock that is correlated with the (observed) control sit is no longer potentially
contributed to the variation in capital.
In the previous section I collapsed productivity and quality into one unobservable ω
fit . Note
that here it implies that I include variables proxying for the quality unobservable (like advertisement expenditures, product dummies as suggested in section 5.2.2.) which take out additional
variation related to the demand side, leading to diﬀerent estimates for φit in the N LLS estimation. When estimating the capital coeﬃcient in equation (A.4) the identifying assumption is
that the demand shocks are independent of the productivity shocks.
When allowing for productivity to depend on unobserved demand shocks,
I would no longer
£
¤
be able to identify the capital coeﬃcient as the non parametric function g φit − β k kit , Υ−1
t (kit , iit , sit )
depends on investment at time t. This leaves no more independent variation in the capital stock
38

to identify β k as kit+1 = (1 − δ)kit + iit . In fact the only way out is to assume either that this
demand unobservable (such as quality) is uncorrelated with capital and ends up in the error
term eit+1 .
In the Table A.3 I present estimates of product specific eﬀects that are obtained by introducing product dummies to control for unobserved demand shocks in the demand system. I recover
about 20 products that are estimated significantly diﬀerent from zero. This implies that they
diﬀer significantly in their ξ j values from their respective segment average under the identifying
assumption that the investment policy function does not depend on unobserved demand shocks.
Table A.3 Product specific Lerner estimates (Specification (28))
Segment
Product
Product Specific Eﬀects
Clothing

Technical

Finishing

Spinning

Rainwear, sportswear and leisure wear: Jackets
Rainwear, sportswear and leisure wear: Sportswear
Accessories - Labels
Textile draining or irrigation
Technical sewing thread / Technical weaving
Canvas for film sets and theatre scenery
Technical textiles for papermaking industry
Textiles for medical care - Hospital linen
Upholstery fabrics for car seats
Upholstery fabrics for caravans seats (trailers)
Special Finishes: Mercerising
Special Finishes: Spotrepellent
Material before spinning : Cleansing
Woven fabrics: Flame retardant
Yarns Package dyeing
Yarns Sectional warping
Yarns Waxing
Blended artificial yarns CTA/PA
Filament Yarns - PA 6

39

0.4686
0.3132
0.1985
0.7184
0.3458
0.2386
0.4897
0.2432
0.2760
1.4764
1.0276
0.5649
0.6877
1.8124
0.2928
0.3388
0.3829
0.3476
0.3889

A.4. The quota data
The quota data comes straight from the SIGL database constructed by the European Commission (2003) and is publicly available on-line (http://sigl.cec.eu.int/). The quota data is
provided using a specific product data classification, the MFA classification. In order to match
this to the firm-level data I had to map the MFA classification code into the NACE rev.1 industry code through the PRODCOM classification. I do face the problem that the industry
classification is more aggregated than the quota classification which can lead to measurement
error in the quota restriction variable.
The 182 product categories used in the SIGL database with the relevant unit of measurement
(kilograms or units) can be found on-line at http://trade.ec.europa.eu/sigl/products.html.
The list of 56 supplying countries facing a quota at some point during the period 19942002 on any of the 182 product categories are: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bosnia-Herzegovina+Croatia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, China, Czech
Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Former Yug Rep of Macedonia, Georgia, Hong Kong, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Kazakstan, Kirghistan, Laos, Latvia, Lithuania, Macao, Malaysia, Malta, Moldova,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, North Korea, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia,
Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Syria,
Taiwan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Vietnam.
Finally, I present two examples that illustrate how the liberalization of trade occurred in the
textile industry. I present the evolution of the quota level (level) and the actual fill rate (FR)
for two products on imports from China and Poland, respectively.

Table A.4.: Two Examples of Decreased Quota Protection
Example 1

Example 2

Garments other knitted or crocheted
Imports from China

Bed linen, other than knitted or crocheted
Imports from Poland

Year

Level (x1000, kg)

FR (%)

Level (x 1000, kg)

1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

21,000
21,630
23,422
24,125
24,848
25,594
26,362
27,153
27,968
30,349
32,932

87.76
99.04
122.85
92.92
103.37
109.00
104.46
99.50
109.81
105.18
105.12

2,600
2,730
3,436
3,787
3,977

Product
Supplier

FR (%)

60.30
96.19
96.18
89.14
89.41
quota abolished

The table above clearly shows the detailed level of information that is available at each point
in time for each product-supplier pair. The liberalization for Bed linen imported from Poland
took place under the abolishment of the quota in 1998. Whereas for Garments from China, the
increased competition came under the form of increased quota levels (by 88 percent). For both
cases, the quota were binding over the span of the period that we study.

40

Appendix B: Production synergies
When aggregating the product-level production function to the firm-level, I have assumed
that there are no cost synergies or complementarities in producing several products within one
firm. However, we know that the textile sector captures both supplying (Spinning and Finishing)
and applying segments (Technical textiles). Firms that produce both type of products can expect
to potentially benefit from combining both activities (or more). Therefore, I relax the assumption
on the production technology by introducing a parameter σ sr capturing the complementarity
in production of combining diﬀerent products (here segments), where r and s are the diﬀerent
segments. More formally the aggregation from product-level production into firm-level is given
by (B.1)
5
5 X
X
Qi = (Lαi l Miαm Kiαk ) exp(ω i +
σ sr Sisr + uqi )
(B.1)
s=1 r=s

where Sisr is 1 if a firm i is active in both segment r and s and zero otherwise and σ sr the
corresponding coeﬃcients. Proceeding as before, I obtain the following augmented production
function (B.2).

reit = β 0 + β l lit + β m mit + β k kit + β np npit +

5
X

β ηs qst Sis +

s=1

5
5 X
X

β σsr Sisr + ω∗it + uit (B.2)

s=1 r=s

The estimated segment demand elasticities are somewhat more negative, however, the same
economic interpretations apply, i.e. Interior and Spinning are the most elastic segments (-6.81
and -6.76). I now present the estimated coeﬃcients on the extra term Sisr in Table B.1.

Table B.1: Estimated Product Complementarity
β σsr

r

1
2
3
4
5

1
-0.37*

2
0.15**
-0.27*

s
3
0.39*
0.36*
-0.61*

4
0.04
0.08
0.28*
-0.39*

5
0.35*
0.06
0.23*
0.22*
-0.41*

Note: * significant at 1% level, **: at 10% level

A positive sign on the coeﬃcients in the table above reflects a (on average) higher output
conditional on inputs and demand conditions for a firm active in any two given segments. Firms
combining any activity with Technical textiles (3) generate a higher output. To obtain the entire
firm relevant eﬀect, we have to add up the relevant terms, e.g. for a firm active in segment 1
and 3: −0.37 + 0.39 = 0.02, suggesting gains from diversification. The latter is also reflected in
the negative coeﬃcients on the head diagonal. Note that here I only allow test for pair eﬀects
in contrast to estimating all potential combinations of segments (31 parameters) .

41

Appendix C. Alternative Proxy Estimators
As mentioned in Appendix A of Levinsohn and Petrin (2002) the LP methodology needs
firms to operate in a competitive environment and take output and input prices as given in
order for the intermediate input to be monotonic increasing in productivity to be able to invert
the productivity shocks and proceed as in Olley and Pakes (1996). Models of imperfect competition on the output market do not satisfy those assumptions and the proof depends on the
specific degree of competition. Melitz (2001) needs to assume that more productive firms do
not set disproportionately higher markups than the less productive firms in order to use the
LP procedure. The monotonicity needed in Olley and Pakes (1996) does not depend on the
degree of competition on the output market, it just needs the marginal product of capital to be
increasing in productivity.
I now discuss which additional assumptions one needs in the LP framework in order to allow
for non price taking firms. As in LP consider the simple static maximization problem of the firm
where the production function is given by Qi = f (Li , mi , ω i ) where capital is a fixed input. The
latter is consistent with the OP framework where the capital stock at period t is determined at
t − 1 through investment and the capital stock. The LP estimator - just like the OP procedure crucially relies upon an invertibility assumption, i.e. demand for intermediate inputs has to be
monotonic increasing in productivity. Their proof (Appendix A in Levinsohn and Petrin 2000)
works under the assumption of a competitive setting where firms take both input and output
prices as given. I now relax this assumption and allow for a more general setting and I show
the extra assumption one has to make in order to use the LP approach in setting as discussed
in the main text. The profit function of the firm is given by
π i = pi (Q)Qi − pL Li − pm mi
I now drop the firm index i and the first order conditions for the inputs labor and materials are
given below
fL (L, m, ω) = pL /p
fm (L, m, ω) = pm /p
and assuming the existence of all second order derivatives, the LP approach works if demand for
intermediate inputs are monotonic increasing in the productivity. Diﬀerentiating the FOC with
P
respect to productivity (ω) and introducing the elasticity of demand η = dQ
dP Q and −∞ < η < 0,
I obtain the following system
¶ µ ∂L ¶ µ
¶
µ
−pfLω + fL (pQ )fω
pfLL + fL 2 (pQ ) pfLm + fL fm (pQ )
∂ω
=
∂m
−pfmω + fm (pQ )fω
pfmL + fL fm (pQ ) pfmm + fm 2 (pQ )
∂ω
and we can use Cramer’s rule to identify the sign of ∂m
∂ω and establish conditions under which
we can still invert the intermediate input demand function, where the sign of the denominator is
p 1
always positive since we are working under the maximizing profit condition. Note that pQ = Q
η
which shows the extra assumptions we will need in order for the demand for intermediate inputs
to be increasing in the productivity shock
¶
µµ
¶µ
¶ µ
¶µ
¶¶
µ
∂m
fL fω 1
fL fm 1
fL 2 1
fm fω 1
= sign
fLω +
fmL +
− fLL +
fmω +
sign
∂ω
Q η
Q η
Q η
Q η
Compared to price taking scenario under which LP work, I have four new terms related to the
degree of competition (η). In the case of price taking firms LP need the assumption that
fLω fmL > fLL fmω

(D.1)

whereas now we need
fLω fmL Q +

¢
1
1¡
(fLω fL fm + fL fω fmL ) > fLL fmω Q +
fLL fm fω + fL 2 fmω
η
η
42

(D.2)

It is clear that the assumption under the general setting is somewhat more complicated, essenη
≥ 1). Proceeding with the proof as in LP (2000) since (D.2)
tially introducing the markup ( η+1
holds everywhere, it holds that
m(ω 2 ; .) > m(ω 1 ; .) if ω 2 > ω 1
The intuition on the extra terms in equation (D.2) is that markups starts playing a role as
also noted by Melitz (2001). To see this, consider equation (D.2) and label the terms in the
inequality ad follows A + B > C + D. Note that A > C is the suﬃcient assumption needed in
the price taking scenario. Furthermore we know that B > 0 and it is generally hard to sign D,
the condition (D.1) is now given by
fLω fmL − fLL fmω >

1
(D − B)
η

(D.3)

Although the exact conditions are not of interest here, this appendix has shown that relaxing the
assumptions of the nature of competition on the output market, has an impact on the validity
of the LP estimation algorithm through the invertibility conditions Note that the LP condition
is a special case of D.3 where η = −∞.
As mentioned in the text, recently Ackerberg et al. (2004) analyzed the various proxy
estimators used in the literature (OP and LP) and verified how robust they are with respect to
the timing of inputs that takes place in the production process. They study the underlying data
generating process both proxy estimators assume to identify the production function coeﬃcients.
Based on their observation I verify whether my estimated demand parameters (markups) are
at all sensitive to the underlying assumptions in the production process by using a modified
OP estimator. I consider the results discussed in the main text (baseline) and compare them
with the estimated markups obtained from a more flexible approach. The flexible approach
essentially no longer takes a stand on whether all firms face the same factor prices, face unions
and more importantly it no longer matters when the productivity shock enters in the timing of
the inputs labor and material. The first stage is then reduced to the following regression
rit = β η qIt + β qr qrit + φt (lit , mit , kit , iit ) + uit

(30)

Table C.1: Estimated Markups under Alternative Specifications
Specification
Baseline
Flexible
Baseline + Trade protection
Flexible + Trade protection

Industry
0.31
0.34
0.27
0.22

Interior
0.24
0.12
0.16
0.10

Clothing
0.35
0.17
0.24
0.12

Segment specific
Technical Finishing
0.31
0.34
0.17
0.17
0.21
0.22
0.13
0.14

Spinning
0.26
0.12
0.19
0.10

Table C.1 above shows, the estimated demand parameters are well within the range of the
less flexible model used in the main text. Note that the flexible approach described in this
appendix allows for a general production function where productivity shocks are additive in the
log specification and thus allows for flexible substitution patterns among inputs (such as the
translog production function). However, in order to recover the production function parameters
α, the similar assumptions used in the main text have to be imposed in the second stage of
the Ackerberg et al. (2004) approach. The advantage of the flexible approach is that we can
estimate the markups in a flexible way in the first stage as robustness check. The last two
rows then give us the range of the estimated markups for a given segment, e.g. for the Interior
segment the estimated markup lies between 0.16 and 0.10.
43

References
[1] Ackerberg, D,.Caves, K and Frazer, G. 2004. Structural Estimation of Production Functions, U.C.L.A. mimeo
[2] Ackerberg, D, Benkard, L., Berry, S. and Pakes, A. 2005. Econometric Tools for Analyzing
Market Outcomes, Paper prepared for Handbook of Econometrics, J.J. Heckman ed.
[3] Ackerberg, D. and Pakes, A. 2005. Notes on Relaxing the Scalar Unobservable Assumption
in Olley and Pakes, mimeo, Harvard University.
[4] Arellano M. and Bond, S. 1991. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
evidence and an application to employment equations, Review of Economic Studies, vol.58,
277-297.
[5] Bartelsman, E. J. and Doms, M. 2000. Understanding Productivity. Lessons from Longitudinal Micro Data, Journal of Economic Literature
[6] Bernard, A.B., Redding, S. and Schott, P.K. 2003. Product Choice and Product Switching,
NBER WP 9789
[7] Berry, S. 1994. Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Diﬀerentiation, Rand Journal
of Economics, 252, 242-262.
[8] Berry, S., Levinsohn, L. and Pakes, A. 1995. Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,
Econometrica, 63, 841-890.
[9] Buettner, T. 2004. R&D and the Dynamics of Productivity, mimeo, London School of
Economics.
[10] Collard-Wexler, A. 2006. Productivity Dispersion and Plant Selection in the Ready-Mix
Concrete Industry, mimeo, New York University.
[11] De Loecker, J. 2007. Do Exports Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from Slovenia,
Journal of International Economics, 73, 69—98.
[12] Dunne, T. and Roberts, M.J. 1992. Costs, Demand and Imperfect Competition as Determinants of Plant-Level Output Prices, DP CES 92-5, Center for Economic Studies, US Bureau
of the Census.
[13] Eslava, M., Haltiwanger, J., Kugler, A. and Kugler, M. 2004. The Eﬀects of Structural Reforms on Productivity and Profitability Enhancing Reallocation: Evidence from Colombia,
CEPR DP 4569.
[14] Ericson, R. and Pakes, A. 1995. Markov Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
Empirical Work, Review of Economic Studies, Vol 62 1, 53-82
[15] European Commission. 2005, website, http://europa.eu.int/comm/enlargement/pas/.
[16] Febeltex. 2003.Anual Report 2002-2003 FEBELTEX, Belgium.
[17] Foster L., Haltiwanger, J. and Syverson, C. forthcoming. Reallocation, Firm Turnover and
Eﬃciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?, American Economic Review.
[18] Hall, R.E. 1988.The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in US Industry, Journal of
Political Economy, 96 5, 921-947.
[19] Harrison, A.E. 1994. Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Reform: Theory and
Evidence, Journal of International Economics, 36, 53-73.
[20] Jaumandreu, J. and Mairesse, J. 2004. Using price and demand information to identify
production functions, mimeo.
44

[21] Katayama, H., Lu, S. and Tybout, J. 2003. Why Plant-Level Productivity Studies are Often
Misleading, and an Alternative Approach to Inference, NBER WP.
[22] Klette, T.J. and Griliches, Z 1996. The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When
Output Prices are Unobserved and Endogenous, Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol 11
4, 343-361.
[23] Konings, J., Van Cayseele P. and Warzynski, F. 2001. The Dynamics of Industrial markups
in Two Small Open Economies; Does National Competition Policy Matters?, International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 19, 841-859.
[24] Konings, J. and Vandenbussche, H. 2005. Antidumping Protection and Markups of Domestic Firms, Journal of International Economics, vol. 65 1, 151 - 165.
[25] Levinsohn, J. and Melitz, M. 2002. Productivity in a Diﬀerentiated Products Market Equilibrium, Harvard mimeo.
[26] Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A. 2000. Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
for Unobservables., NBER WP 7819.
[27] Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A. 2003. Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
for Unobservables., Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70, pp. 317-342.
[28] Melitz, M. 2001. Estimating Firm-Level Productivity in Diﬀerentiated Product Industries,
Harvard mimeo.
[29] Muendler, M.A. 2004. Estimating Production Functions When Productivity Change is Endogenous, UCSD WP 05.
[30] Olley, S. and Pakes, A. 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry, Econometrica, Vol 64 6, 1263-98.
[31] Pakes, A. 1994, The Estimation of Dynamic Structural Models: Problems and Prospects,
Part II. Mixed Continuous-Discrete Control Models and Market Interactions, Chapter 5,
pp. 171-259, of Advances in Econometrics: Proceedings of the 6th World Congress of the
Econometric Society, edited by J.J. Laﬀont and C. Sims.
[32] Pavcnik, N. 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence
from Chilean Plants, Review of Economic Studies, 69 1, 245-76
[33] Petropoulos, W. 2000..Productivity in an industry with diﬀerentiated products, University
of Michigan, mimeo.
[34] Roeger, W. 1995. Can Imperfect Competition Explain the Diﬀerence between Primal and
Dual Productivity Measures? Estimates for US Manufacturing, Journal of Political Economy, 103 2, 316-330.
[35] Smarzynska, B. 2004. Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages, American Economic Review,
94 3, 605-627.
[36] Syverson, C. 2004. Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example., Journal of
Political Economy, 112 6, 1181-1222.
[37] Tybout, J. 2000. Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol March, 11-44.
[38] Van Biesebroeck, J. 2005. Exporting Raises Productivity in the Sub-Saharan African Manufacturing, Journal of International Economics, 67 (2), 373-391.

45

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1994

1995
clothing

1996
finishing

1997

1998
interior

1999

2000
spinning

2001

2002

technical

Figure 1: Evolution of Quota Protection Measure (qr) by Segment (1994-2002)

46

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Belgian Textile Industry
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Average

Employment
89
87
83
85
90
88
90
92
99
89

Total Sales
18,412
19,792
18,375
21,561
22,869
21,030
23,698
23,961
26,475
21,828

Value Added
3,940
3,798
3,641
4,365
4,418
4,431
4,617
4,709
5,285
4,367

Capital
2,443
2,378
2,177
2,493
2,650
2,574
2,698
2,679
2,805
2,551

Materials
13,160
14,853
14,313
16,688
17,266
15,546
17,511
17,523
17,053
16,062

PPI
100.00
103.40
99.48
99.17
98.86
98.77
102.98
102.67
102.89

Note: I report averages for all variables in thousands of euro, except for sales where I report total by year.

Table 2: Number of Firms and Production Structure Across Diﬀerent Segments
Firms
Interior
Clothing
Technical
Finishing
Spinning
# firms

Interior
77.0

Clothing
4.8
58.9

Technical
15.8
33.9
35.1

Finishing
7.3
7.1
19.6
39.6

165

56

97

48

Spinning
1.8
1.8
17.5
12.5
47.5
40

Note: The cells do not have to sum up to 100 percent by row/column, i.e. a firm can be active in more than 2 segments

Table 3: Number of Products and Production Structure Across Diﬀerent Segments
Products
Interior
Clothing
Technical
Finishing
Spinning
median
min

Interior
83.72
3.03
7.01
5.75
3.72
2
1

Clothing
2.78
79.28
8.97
3.52
0.65
6
2

Technical
8.27
15.36
70.16
15.53
27.20
8
1

Finishing
4.41
1.86
9.06
72.85
7.40
11
2

Spinning
0.80
0.48
4.79
2.35
61.04
9
1

Note: The cells do sum up to 100 percent by row. This table has to be read from the rows only.

47

Table 4: The Estimated Coeﬃcients of the Production Function

labor
materials
capital

OLS
[1]
β

KG Level
[2]
β
α

0.2300
(0.0095)
0.6298
(0.0074)
0.0879
(0.0072)

0.2319
0.2967
(0.0095) (0.0316)
0.6284
0.8041
(0.0074) (0.0770)
0.0868
0.1111
(0.0072) (0.0137)
0.2185
(0.0749)
-4.58
1.28
1,291

output

η
markup
Nr Obs

1,291

KG Diﬀ
[3]
β

OP
[4]
β

Augmented
[5]
β
α

0.2113
(0.0112)
0.6278
(0.0085)
0.0931
(0.0081)

0.2126
0.3075
(0.0112) (0.0623)
0.6265
0.9063
(0.0084) (0.1746)
0.1037
0.1500
(0.0063) (0.0337)
0.3087
(0.1335)
-3.24
1.45
985

α

0.2451
0.3338
(0.0198) (0.0343)
0.5958
0.8115
(0.0131) (0.0519)
0.0188
0.0256
(0.0105) (0.0143)
0.2658
(0.0462)
-3.76
1.36
1,291

985

Note: β: estimated coeﬃcients, α: production function coeﬃcients.
Bootstrapped standard errors are given in parentheses.

Table 5: Estimated Demand Parameters and Implied Firm Elasticities
A: Estimated Demand Parameters
β ηs
No product dummies
η s ( Sis = 1)
β ηs

Interior
0.1888*
(0.0742)
-5.2966
0.2315*
(0.0541)
-4.3196
0.2641*
-3.7864
0.1673*
-5.9773

Clothing
0.2742*
(0.1029)
-3.6470
0.3140*
(0.0756)
-3.1847
0.3550*
-2.8169
0.2267*
-4.4111

Technical
0.2593*
(0.0907)
-3.8565
0.2952*
(0.0648)
-3.3875
0.3575*
-2.7972
0.2253*
-4.4385

Finishing
0.3265*
(0.1042)
-3.0628
0.3178*
(0.0756)
-3.1466
0.4563*
-2.1915
0.2241*
-4.4623

Product dummies
(563 products)
η s ( Sis = 1)
One Segment
β ηs
(667 obs)
ηs
>1 Segments
β ηs
(318 obs)
ηs
B: Implied Firm-Specific Demand Elasticities and markups
η
η
η+1
mean
-4.4486
1.3033
s.d.
0.6915
0.0676
minimum
-5.4059
1.2269
maximum
-3.1627
1.4624

Standard errors are given in parentheses and * denotes significance at 1 percent level.

48

Spinning
0.1829*
(0.0774)
-5.4675
0.2437*
(0.0585)
-4.1034
0.2556*
-3.9124
0.1455*
-6.8729

Table 6: Number of Quota and Levels in Millions

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
change

Number of quota
protections
1,046
936
824
857
636
642
636
574
486
-54%

kg
# quota Level
466
3.10
452
3.74
411
3.70
413
3.73
329
4.21
338
4.25
333
4.60
298
5.41
259
5.33
-44%
72%

nr of pieces
# quota Level
580
8.58
484
9.50
413
7.95
444
9.28
307
9.01
304
10.53
303
9.77
276
11.06
227
12.37
-60%
44%

Table 7: The Impact of Additional Demand Information: Quota Restriction
Specification (28)
without Quota Information with Quota Information
0.2426*
0.1643*

Interior
Clothing
Markups

β ηs

(0.0589)

(0.0658)

0.3475*

0.2381*

(0.0821)

(0.0915)

Technical

0.3126*

0.2134*

(0.0710)

(0.0796)

Finishing

0.3364*

0.2219*

(0.0824)

(0.0927)

Spinning

0.2577*

0.1853*

(0.0637)

(0.0690)

β qr

-0.0886*

quota restriction

(0.0362)

βl
βm

0.2514*

0.2513*

(0.0124)

(0.0123)

0.6785*

0.6808*

(0.0100)

(0.0100)

βk

0.0515*

0.0506*

(0.0101)

(0.0122)

returns to scale

[1.30; 1.50]

[1.16; 1.30]

Note: * indicates significant at 1%

49

Table 8: Impact Trade Liberalization on Productivity
Specification (# obs)

Estimated coeﬃcient

I (1,291)

qr

II (1,088)

qr

III (1,088)
IV (1,088)

Productivity Estimated using
augmented model
OP
-0.0637**
-0.1068*
(0.0366)

(0.0296)

-0.0430*

-0.0612*

(0.0195)

(0.0193)

4qr

-0.0699*

-0.1254*

(0.0312)

(0.0327)

4qr

-0.1172*

-0.1605*

(0.0374)

(0.0393)

qrt−1

-0.0468*

-0.0348*

(0.0206)

(0.0216)

-0.1347*

V (765)

4qr

-0.0455**
(0.0272)

(0.0299)

V I (890)

qr

-0.0584*
(0.0229)
0.0019*
(0.0008)

-0.0664*
(0.0226)
-0.0000
(0.0008)

level

Note: std errors in parentheses, * and ** denote significant at 5 or lower and 10 percent, resp.
All regressions include quota-product classification dummies (23 categories), except for VI.

Table 9: Productivity Impact of a 10 percent Decrease in Protection Measure
Productivity
Augmented model
(1994-1997)
(1998-2002)
OP

Interior
4.37
8.20
2.28
8.06

Clothing
3.60
4.21
3.23
6.45

Technical
4.82
7.32
3.32
8.63

Finishing
1.60
3.05
0.72
2.86

Spinning
4.49
5.71
3.75
8.04

Overall
4.07
6.53
2.59
7.28

Note: The figures are elasticities evaluated at the mean by segment over the relevant period.

50

Table 10: Change in Average Quota Level (1994-2002)
Supplying Country
Belarus
China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
North Korea
Pakistan
Peru
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Uzbekistan
Vietnam

Products measured in
kilograms # pieces
146
60
83
38
62
49
56
127
90
78
58
66
92
129
144
127
61
69
36
28
45
130
556
-92
55

Changes are expressed as a percentage.

51

