NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT SPIKES:
NEW FACTS AND A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM EXPLORATION
Francois Gourio
Anil K Kashyap
Working Paper 13157
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13157

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

Kashyap thanks the Center for Research in Securities Prices, Initiative on Global Financial Markets
and the Stigler Center all at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business for research support.
We thank Shawn D. Klimek from the U.S. Census and Olga Fuentes and Simon Gilchrist from Boston
University for very kind help in providing data. We thank participants in the SNB conference and
in seminars at the Universities of Chicago, Pompeu Fabra (CREI), Texas (Austin), Kellogg Graduate
School of Management, the Paris School of Economics, the NBER Monetary Economics Program,
the AEA meetings, the BU macro lunch, and in the GSB Macro and Finance lunches for helpful suggestions;
Ricardo Caballero, Janice Eberly and Robert E. Lucas Jr. for helpful conversations; Jeffrey Campbell,
Russell Cooper, Nobu Kiyotaki, and Edward Prescott for discussing our paper; and Robert King for
many constructive comments. We also thank Doriana Ruffino, Sandra Shao, and Jin Xu for excellent
research assistance. The data, a technical appendix, and Matlab programs to run the model are posted
on the following web page: http://people.bu.edu/fgourio/extintpaper.html. All errors here are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Francois Gourio and Anil K Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Investment Spikes: New Facts and a General Equilibrium Exploration
Francois Gourio and Anil K Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 13157
June 2007
JEL No. E22,E32
ABSTRACT
Using plant-level data from Chile and the U.S. we show that investment spikes are highly pro-cyclical,
so much so that changes in the number of establishments undergoing investment spikes (the "extensive
margin") account for the bulk of variation in aggregate investment. The number of establishments
undergoing investment spikes also has independent predictive power for aggregate investment, even
controlling for past investment and sales. We re-calibrate the Thomas (2002) model (that includes
fixed costs of investing) so that it assigns a prominent role to extensive adjustment. The recalibrated
model has different properties than the standard RBC model for some shocks.
Francois Gourio
Department of Economics
Boston University
264 Bay State Road Room 400
Boston, MA 02215
fgourio@bu.edu
Anil K Kashyap
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
Economists are sharply divided over the aggregate significance of the heterogeneity of
plant-level investment. On the one hand, there is unanimous agreement that individual
plants sometimes forgo investing at all and at other times have dramatic surges in
investment.1 Caballero (1999), in his survey for the Handbook of Macroeconomics,
argues that accounting for this “lumpiness” is critical: “it turns out the changes in the
degree of coordination of lumpy actions play an important role in shaping the dynamic
behavior of aggregate investment.” On the other hand, Thomas (2002) presents a model
where this is not true: “in contrast to previous partial equilibrium analyses, [the] model
results reveal that the aggregate effects of lumpy investment are negligible. In general
equilibrium, households’ preference for relatively smooth consumption profiles offsets
changes in aggregate investment demand implied by the introduction of lumpy plantlevel investment.” This “irrelevance result” inspired Prescott (2003) to argue “partial
equilibrium reasoning to an inherently general equilibrium question cannot be trusted.”
In this paper, we make three contributions to this debate. First, we introduce several new
facts about surges in investment (that we call spikes). In particular, we show that for both
U.S. and Chilean plants, most of the variation in the total investment rate is due to
variation in investment of firms undergoing spikes. Moreover, this approximation
derives its explanatory power from changes in the number of firms making large
investments (the “extensive margin”), and not changes in the average size of the spikes
(the “intensive margin”). We also find that information on prevalence of spikes in one
year has predictive power for forecasting aggregate investment (even controlling for the
past level of investment or sales): years with relatively more spikes are followed by years
with relatively less investment.
We then try to construct a model that not only generates spikes on average, but also
variation in spikes over the business cycle. To do this we start with the Thomas (2002)
model, which is a tractable dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model that
naturally yields lumpy investment. The heterogeneity in this model derives from variation
in the fixed costs that firms must pay in order to invest. We find that the exact model, as
originally calibrated, has trouble fitting the facts about cyclical patterns in lumpiness. But
by changing the calibration we can match better these facts.
While we make several changes, the critical one is to alter the distribution of fixed costs
that firms face. In order for the extensive margin to matter, this distribution must have
the property that many firms face roughly the same sized fixed cost in deciding whether
to invest. When the distribution has this type of compression, it becomes possible for a
shock to move many firms across the threshold from not investing to investing.
Conversely, if the distribution exhibits little compression, then firms become much less
likely to synchronize their decisions and the extensive margin matters less. Importantly,
even if part of the distribution is “compressed” there can still be substantial heterogeneity
in the overall distribution and hence in the level of fixed costs that firms pay to adjust.
1

See among others Becker et al. (2006), Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1995), Cooper, Haltiwanger
and Power (2000), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), Doms and Dunne (1998).

2

The third contribution is to explore the aggregate response of investment to various
shocks when extensive adjustment is important. The Thomas model, as originally
calibrated, implies that the fixed costs which generate spikes are essentially “irrelevant”
for aggregate dynamics. In particular, the aggregate dynamics (summarized for example
by the impulse response of investment to a productivity shock) are the same as the
standard real business cycle (RBC) model, which has no adjustment costs of any kind. In
our calibration, the qualitative response of investment to a productivity shock is
somewhat different from the standard RBC model. More importantly, we find that the
original Thomas model and the RBC model also exhibit virtually identical response when
the distribution of firms capital levels move away from the steady-state distribution (for
instance, as might occur if a temporary tax change leads firms to accelerate investment
spending). In contrast, under our calibration, aggregate investment behaves differently
than it would in the RBC model. Hence for this kind of shock the fixed cost seems to
matter substantially.
We conclude, therefore, that although general equilibrium attenuates the differences
between the fixed cost model and the RBC model, it does not eliminate these differences.
In other words, the irrelevance result is not a generic finding that comes from the general
equilibrium, but rather a result that depends on the details of how the model is calibrated,
especially regarding the production side.
The remainder of the paper is organized into three sections. The first documents the
aforementioned empirical regularities. Next we review the Thomas model and explain
our calibration. We then explore the predictions of the re-calibrated model regarding the
sensitivity to various disturbances. We close with a brief summary.

2. Empirical Evidence on Lumpiness over the Business Cycle
To analyze lumpiness we study two establishment-level data sets covering manufacturing
plants in Chile and the U.S. Capital stocks are constructed through a perpetual inventory
method; importantly, we do not have access to the underlying micro data for the U.S.
Census, but instead have tabulations that group plants according to their current
investment rates. A brief description of the data construction is given in Appendix 1. We
start by reviewing three measurement issues before reporting our main results.
The first issue is how to handle very small rates of investment, for example where
investment is not exactly zero, but less than one or two percent of capital. If fixed costs
of investing are present, then we would expect to find few cases of this sort. Yet, it
appears empirically many plants report making these tiny investments. We suspect that
these cases represent some sort of maintenance or replacement investment (for which the
fixed cost presumably does not apply). So in what follows, we will typically aggregate
the plants with near zero investment with those that report exactly zero investment.

3

On the other side, there is no clear definition of what constitutes an investment spike.
The papers by Cooper, Haltiwanger and Power (1999), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2005),
and Becker et al (2006) all define spikes to be cases where investment relative to the
beginning of period capital is greater than 20 percent. To maintain comparability with
these papers we use this threshold as a primary definition. But the results for the case
where we set the threshold to be 35 percent are very similar.
The last conceptual issue that arises relates to aggregation. To summarize the distribution
of firms or establishments we must take a stand on whether each observation will be
equally weighted or weighed by some other characteristic such as the plant’s capital. We
see equal-weighting as problematic (or at least inferior to capital-weighting) for several
reasons.
First, at a sufficiently fine level of aggregation every decision is lumpy; no one disputes
that integer constraints and the like are relevant for truly tiny firms.2 Conversely for the
entire economy there are never any zeros and spikes are rare. So as firm sizes vary, so
will all measures of lumpiness. This means that as the size distribution of firms in a
sample changes, either because of changes in the underlying population or because of
changes in the sample coverage, the statistics on zeros and spikes will change. We would
like our measurement to reflect more than just the mechanical effects that derive from the
composition of the sample.
Conversely, one way to partially offset the attenuation of the zeros and spikes that results
from aggregation is to weight the data based on firm size. Loosely speaking by giving
firms with large capital stocks more weight when they report a zero or a spike we make
up for the zeros or spikes that might be occurring within some of these organizations that
are otherwise obscured. As a bonus, a capital-weighted average of investment rates
delivers a measure that equals the aggregate investment in the sample divided by the total
capital in the sample.
A final consideration comes from our specific interest in the general equilibrium effects
of lumpiness. Intuitively we expect general equilibrium effects that operate through
prices to depend on aggregate indicators of lumpiness. This suggests another potential
reason that actions of larger firms (or establishments) are more important than smaller
firms. For all these reasons we will emphasize our findings that pertain to the capitalweighted data.
Figures 1 and 2 show the effects of varying the definitions of spikes and zeros, and of
changing the aggregation schemes. In each figure we report four panels; the two panels
on the left show the time series patterns for the prevalence of zero (dashed lines) and near
zero investment (defined to include establishments with I/K less than two percent). The
bottom panel shows the data when the observations are aggregated according to the
capital stock for each establishment, while the top panel treats all plants identically. The
right hand panels graph spikes, with the solid lines showing the percentages based on I/K
2

The model that we introduce below, like most models, abstracts from differences in size. So even if we
wanted to account for this effect it would be difficult.

4

greater than 20 percent and the dashed lines showing the 35 percent spikes; again the top
and bottom differ based on the weighing scheme. Figure 1 gives the results for the U.S.
data, while Figure 2 shows the data for our Chilean sample.
For both the U.S. and Chilean samples it is clear that many establishments are not
investing in any given year, whereas at the same time there are other establishments
where investment is spiking. The full distribution of the investment rates for each sample
is shown in Table 1. Fuentes, Gilchrist and Rysman (2006) stress the fact that emerging
markets such as Chile tend to have more plants that are not investing than in developed
economies such as the U.S. Comparing the dashed lines in the upper left panel in each
figure shows that the (unweighted) percentage of establishments with exactly zero
investment is two to three times higher in the Chilean sample.
The figures also show that the level of zeros is sensitive to the weighting schemes used.
As would be expected, fewer large firms report literally zero investment, so the reported
percentages of zeros drops precipitously in the capital-weighted figures compared to the
equally-weighted figures. The capital weighting makes less of a difference for level
estimates for the near zeros and even less difference for the spikes.3 For the rest of this
section, we concentrate on capital weighted series.
The figures show that regardless of the weighting scheme that is used, the 20 and 35
percent thresholds for spikes are extremely highly correlated. For example, the
correlation between the capital weighted series for U.S. spikes of 20 percent and 35
percent (the lower right panel in Figure 1) is 0.95. For the remainder of the section, we
concentrate on the 20 percent spikes.
One final noteworthy feature of Figures 1 and 2 is that several of the lumpiness proxies
show trends; below when we look at the aggregate investment rates we will also find
trends for those series too. These low frequency changes are outside of the scope of our
investigation and in most of our analysis we will remove them by regressing the series on
a linear time trend (although using a Hodrick-Prescott filter delivers very similar results
for all of our findings).
The general facts that we have mentioned thus far about the prevalence of zeros and
spikes have been documented in a number of other studies. Some of these studies also
describe the cyclicality of the lumpiness. Figure 3 shows the (de-trended) capital
weighted shares of establishments with either spikes or with near zeros, along with the
(de-trended) aggregate investment rate for each sample; the aggregate rate is calculated
by taking the capital weighted average of the establishment level rates and we denote this
as Itot/K. (The weighting scheme also means that Itot/K is the ratio of aggregate
investment to aggregate capital in our sample.)

3

The pairwise correlations for the weighted and capital weighted series for Chile (US) are as follows: exact
zeros = 0.82 (0.60), near zeros = 0.94 (0.23), 20 percent spikes = 0.92 (0.90), and 35 percent spikes = 0.90
(0.87).

5

In each country, the spikes are strongly pro-cyclical and near-zeros are strongly countercyclical. The correlation between the capital-weighted spikes and the aggregate
investment rate (both detrended) is 0.87 for the US sample and 0.96 for the Chile sample;
and the correlation between the capital-weighted near zeros and the aggregate investment
rate (both detrended) is -0.94 for the U.S. sample and -0.56 for the Chilean sample. Thus,
Figures 1, 2 and 3 show all the standard characteristics of plant-level investment.
In the remainder of this section we document several new facts regarding the connection
between aggregate investment and investment spikes. In Figure 4, we decompose the
aggregate investment rate into two parts. One part (shown by the lines with the circles) is
the total investment done by those establishments where there is a spike (i.e. I/K > 20
percent), divided by the total stock of capital for all the firms in the sample; we label this
series I20/K. The remainder of investment, that we dub I(0-20)/K, represents investment
of plants with investment rates between 0 and 20 percent over total capital, and is shown
in the line with inverted triangles.
The relative levels of I20/K and Itot/K indicate that the spikes account for about half of
total investment in each country; in other words, I20/Itot is about 0.5. More importantly,
the investment rate constructed for the spiking firms tracks the movements in the
aggregate investment rate closely; the correlations between the de-trended series is 0.99
for each sample. Clearly, the bulk of the variation in the aggregate Itot/K is accounted for
by changes in I20/K. The share of variance of Itot/K accounted to by I20/K (as opposed
to the residual I(0-20)/K)) is 97 percent for the U.S. sample and 86 percent for the Chile
sample.4 The converse of these observations is that there is little variation in total
investment explained by the firms investing between zero and 20 percent. Thus, for the
purposes of modeling investment fluctuations it is critical to understand the timing of the
investment spikes.5
To go further and understand how spikes matter for business cycles, we start from the
following identity:

I 20 I 20 K 20
≡
•
≡ IPA20 • ADJ 20
K
K 20 K
I 20
→ Log (
) ≡ log(IPA20) + log( ADJ 20 )
K
where I20 ≡ ∑ I i ,t , K20 ≡ ∑ Ki ,t −1 ,
Ii ,t

Ki ,t −1

> 0.20

Ii ,t

Ki ,t −1

> 0.20

(1)

K≡

∑

Ii ,t

Ki ,t −1

Ki ,t −1

≥0

4

This is measured as Cov (I20/K,I/K) / Var (I/K). This calculation splits a covariance term and allocates its
explanatory power equally between the two remaining terms. If instead we use an exact decomposition that
preserves all three terms, for the U.S. the numbers are: Var(I20/K) / Var(I/K) = 0.964, Var( I(0-20)/K)) /
Var(I/K)= 0.024 and 2Cov(I20/K, I(0-20)/K) / Var(I/K) = 0.012. For Chile, these numbers are Var(I20/K) /
Var(I/K) = 0.759, Var( I(0-20)/K)) / Var(I/K)= 0.036 and 2Cov(I20/K, I(0-20)/K) / Var(I/K) = 0.205.
5
This fact is also present, to a lesser degree, in Figure 8 of Cooper, Haltiwanger and Power (2000). The
difference may be due to the fact that they use a balanced panel of rather large establishments. These
authors also mention that spikes are procyclical but do not focus on this feature of the data.

6

In words, equation (1) simply says that the total investment done by the plants
experiencing spikes can vary either because of a change in the investment per adjuster
(IPA20, the intensive margin) or because of a change in the (capital-weighted) number of
firms adjusting (ADJ20, the extensive margin). This approach is analogous to the one
proposed by Klenow and Kryvstov (2005) for studying price dynamics, where they
decompose inflation into changes in the number of firms resetting their prices and
changes in the average size of price changes for those firms resetting their price.
Figure 5 shows a graph of Log(I20/K), along with Log(IPA20) and Log(ADJ20) (after
each series has had a linear time trend removed) for the U.S. and Chilean samples. The
striking conclusion is that the extensive margin, ADJ20, drives variation in spikes.
One way to conveniently summarize the information in the picture is to compute the
following pair of statistics:

ShareADJ20 ≡

I20
I20
))
covariance(log(IPA20),log(
))
K
K
and ShareIPA20 ≡
I20
I20
variance(log(
))
variance(log(
))
K
K

covariance(log(ADJ20),log(

These shares by construction must sum to one. If the proportion of firms with spikes
ADJ20 is constant, they would be zero and one, and if the average investment rate of
firms with spikes is constant, they would be one and zero. For the U.S. sample
ShareADJ20 is 0.87, while for the Chilean sample it is 0.925.6 The dominant role of the
extensive margin also appears when the threshold for identifying spikes is 35 percent
instead of 20 percent. This fact also holds for different de-trending methods (e.g. the
Hodrick-Prescott filter, or just considering growth rates).
Our last new fact about spikes is that they contain additional predictive content beyond
just information that they convey about the past level of investment. The spirit of many
models of lumpiness (e.g. Caballero and Engel (1999)) is that the cross-sectional
distribution of firms’ capital stock relative to the level that would prevail absent any
adjustment costs should be an important determinant of aggregate investment. It is
empirically difficult to construct this cross-sectional distribution, but there is a simple
way to test for this possibility. We estimate regressions of the form:
Itott
Itott −1
Salest-1
= α + β Trend t + γ
+ φ
+
K t-2
K t −1
K t −2

H

∑ ω ADJ 20
h =1

h

t −h

(2)

6

Our decomposition splits a (small) covariance term equally between ShareADJ20 and ShareIPA20. If
instead we use an exact three way decomposition, the results for the U.S. (Chile) are as follows:
Var(logADJ20)/Var(logI20/K)= 0.850 (0.903), Var(logIPA20)/Var(logI20/K)= 0.114 (0.052) and
Cov(logADJ20,logIPA20)/Var(logI20/K) = 0.036 (0.044).

7

So the novelty is that we add the (capital-weighted) share of adjusters to an otherwise
standard accelerator type investment equation.7 This type of accelerator style equation
has repeatedly been shown to be an effective forecasting equation in horse-races of
different specifications (Bernanke, Bohn and Reiss (1988) and Oliner, Rudebusch and
Sichel (1995)).
Table 2 shows estimates of equation (2). The first six rows show the estimates for the
U.S. data, while the last six rows show the estimates for the Chilean sample. For the U.S.
data the lagged dependent variable is always estimated to have a positive and highly
significant coefficient. The sales proxy is positively related to investment, but not always
significant. Conversely in the Chilean sample the sales variable is always estimated to
have a positive and very significant effect on investment, but the lagged dependent
variable does not systematically influence investment.
Our main coefficients of interest are the ω’s that measure the effects of past spikes on
current investment. For the U.S. sample, the coefficients on both the first and second
lags of ADJ20 are significant, whereas in the Chilean data, only the second lag is
consistently significant.8 Importantly, the estimated signs of the ω’s are all negative,
suggesting that investment is depressed in the period after an investment surge. This
correlation is to be expected based on fixed costs models (and would be of the opposite
sign if the past ADJ20 variable was standing in for productivity shocks or other factors
that raise investment demand).
Taken literally, the coefficients suggest that the echoes from the spikes have a
quantitatively important effect on investment. For the U.S. sample (Chile) the standard
deviation of the spike variable is 0.046 (0.093), compared to the standard deviation of the
investment rate of 0.017 (0.054). Taking the specifications where h=1, (shown in rows 5
and 11), the estimates for the U.S. (Chile) sample imply that a one standard deviation
increase in ADJ20 predicts an increase of the investment rate of 0.7 (0.57) of a standard
deviation.
Collectively, these new facts provide guidance about how to model lumpiness.
Aggregate investment is largely driven by investment spikes; so a successful model
should have the property that I20/Itot is substantial and that variations of I/K are
accounted for by variation in I20/K. Moreover, the spikes matter because of adjustment
along the extensive margin, i.e. a change in the number of firms making large
investments; these spikes are sufficiently important that they have independent predictive
power for aggregate investment, even controlling for past investment and sales. We now
attempt to construct a model that has these properties, and we concentrate especially on
matching the fact that ShareADJ20 is large.
3. A DSGE model with fixed costs of adjusting capital

7

For the U.S. sample, we have shipments data which correspond to sales for establishment data.
When the spikes are measured with the 35 percent threshold then both lags one and two are significant in
both samples.

8

8

We first review the Thomas model and then discuss how we calibrate it.
3.1 A brief review of the Thomas model

Thomas (2002) offers an elegant and compact model for analyzing the importance of
fixed costs of adjusting capital on aggregate investment in a dynamic, stochastic general
equilibrium framework.9
The economy has a fixed number of plants (normalized to be of measure one). In what
follows, we refer to these as “plants” or “firms” interchangeably. Each plant has the
production function: y=Akψ n υ , where y is output, A is aggregate productivity (TFP), k is
capital, and n is labor. There are decreasing returns to scale so that ψ + υ < 1 and there is
no entry or exit.
In each period, each plant has the opportunity to adjust its factor usage. Labor can be
freely varied, but adjusting capital can only be done if the firm pays a fixed cost. The
fixed cost, ξ , is a random variable that is independently and identically distributed across
time and plants and comes from the cumulative distribution G. This distribution has
finite support and the maximum fixed cost is called B. The firms that choose to pay the
fixed cost, which we call “adjusters”, bear no marginal adjustment costs: they can buy or
sell capital at price 1. The fixed cost is measured in units of labor. Owing to the fixed
cost, firms will not always adjust capital.
Much of the model’s tractability derives from its inherent symmetry that leads all firms
choosing to invest at a given point to pick the same new level of capital, k0,t+1; this is
because there is no heterogeneity except in the fixed cost drawn today and the current
capital. So firms are distinguished by the time since their last investment. Regardless of
whether a firm invests, its capital depreciates at rate δ. Therefore,

k 0,t +1 = (1 − δ ) k j ,t + i j ,t when ij,t > 0 and otherwise k j +1,t +1 = (1 − δ ) k j ,t ,
where kj,t is the capital of a plant of vintage j at time t, and ij,t is the investment of a plant
of vintage j at time t, conditional on the plant deciding to pay the fixed cost.
A firm that last adjusted capital j periods ago, henceforth a vintage j firm, will operate
with capital kj (and labor nj). This implies the following maximization problem for a
plant:

(

)

max E 0 ∑ m t ( At k ψjt n υjt − w t n jt − i jt − ξ t w t 1i jt ≠ 0 ) ,
i jt , n jt

t≥0

subject to the capital accumulation laws above, where mt is the stochastic discount factor
(the ratio of marginal utilities in period t to period 0), and wt is the real wage.
9

The setup is similar to the sticky price model of Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999).

9

The TFP process, At, evolves according a first-order autoregressive process around a
deterministic trend:
At = ΘtA zt , log z t = ρ log zt −1 + ε t , ε t is distributed independently N (o, σ 2 ).
The combination of the fixed depreciation rate and the finite upper bound on the fixed
cost guarantees that all firms will eventually find it optimal to invest; in other words, this
structure delivers a maximum vintage J by which time all firms will invest. The solution
to the problem involves finding that maximum vintage (J), along with the capital stock
for each of the intervening vintages (kj), and the percentage of total firms in each vintage
(θj).
Thomas shows that firm’s investment decisions follow a cutoff rule: in any given vintage,
and in any period, there is a threshold fixed cost, such that firms which draw a fixed cost
below the threshold will invest and upgrade their capital, and firms which draw a fixed
cost above the threshold will let the capital depreciate. We call αj the proportion of firms
which are below the threshold (and so choose to adjust). In her simulations Thomas
chooses a uniform distribution for the fixed costs, between 0 and B. The level of fixed
costs B is chosen to match two facts reported by Doms and Dunne (1998): i) in the
average year, 8 percent of plants raise their real capital stocks by 30 percent or more; ii)
these plants account for 25 percent of aggregate investment.
The rest of the model is intentionally chosen to follow the real business cycle (RBC)
literature. So, for instance, Thomas adopts a utility function with indivisible labor of the
form Ut= log ct − ζ nt . Thus, aside from the fixed costs and the mild decreasing returns,
the calibrated parameters, displayed in the second column of Table 3, are very standard.10
Indeed, when the upper bound of fixed costs, B, is set to 0, all firms adjust their capital
each period, and equate their marginal product of capital and labor; in this case, there is a
representative firm, and the model collapses to a standard RBC model with decreasing
return to scale.
This model is solved numerically by a standard log-linearization around the steady-state.
First, one finds the optimal J, the maximum time-since-last-adjustment such that all firms
want to invest. Second, one solves the system of non-linear equations that define the nonstochastic steady-state. Finally, one computes the log-linear approximation itself. The
log-linear method is advantageous here since the state space of the model is large: it
includes the TFP shock, and the cross-sectional distribution of capital (the θj’s and the
kj’s). 11

10

Also, the model is calibrated to annual rather than quarterly data, because the plant-level evidence is
based on annual surveys.
11
For more details on the solution, we refer the reader to our separate technical appendix (available on
http://people.bu.edu/fgourio).

10

3.2 Calibration of the Model

In the first three rows of Table 4 we report several statistics comparing the prominence of
spikes in both of our samples and in the baseline model. Given that Thomas chose B to
match the Doms-Dunne facts on spikes, it is not surprising that the model also matches
the prevalence of spikes in our sample. In her original calibration of the model, however,
spikes only account for about 62 percent of the total variance of investment and the
extensive margin accounts for only 51 percent of the variance of spikes; in the data both
these percentages are roughly 90 percent.
In Appendix 2, we describe several exercises that show how varying different parameters
one at a time change the extensive-intensive decomposition. We focus on three key
parameters in these experiments: the maximum size of fixed costs, B, the distribution of
fixed costs, G, and the curvature of the production function (ψ+υ). Intuitively one
expects these parameters to be critical since B and G govern the costs of adjusting capital
and the curvature governs the benefits (by determining the loss in profits that result from
having an inefficient plant size).
The results in Appendix 2 suggest that the key determinant of this decomposition is the
shape of the CDF. The intuition for this conclusion is that increasing the number of plants
doing positive investment requires marginal plants to switch from inaction to action; this
decision depends on the fixed costs for the indifferent plants. If marginally inactive plants
face the same fixed cost as marginally active plants, increasing the number of plants
investing is inexpensive. Hence, the marginal cost of changing the extensive margin
depends on the shape of the CDF of fixed costs.
Thomas, following Caballero and Engel (1999), chooses G to be uniform. With this type
of CDF (or any other that has a second derivative that is close to zero everywhere),
increasing the number of plants investing requires activating plants that have substantial
differences in the fixed costs they are facing. Put differently, for any particular level of
fixed costs, even a marginal change in the number of investing plants always involves
firms with relatively different levels of fixed costs. In this case it will be efficient to rely
more on intensive adjustment. On the other hand, when the CDF is sufficiently
“compressed”, i.e. so that many firms face nearly-identical fixed costs, the opposite result
obtains: increasing the number of plants investing need not be very costly. This means
that the extensive margin can be important.
The compressed CDF that is considered in most of the experiments that follow is
displayed in Figure 6. This particular CDF implies that the fixed costs for most firms
bunch around B and B/2, but as we show below all of our results also obtain if there was
bunching only around one level of fixed cost and there is considerable heterogeneity in
the rest of the distribution.12 Hence, what matters is the “compression” and not the lack
of heterogeneity.
12

The formula for this CDF is G(x) = H(x/B) where B is the upper support and H is defined on the interval

[0,1] as H(x) = (F(x)-F(0))/(F(1)-F(0)), with F(x) = 1/(2*π)*(arctan(σl*(x-1/2)) + arctan(σ2*(x-1))). This

11

Before turning to the results, we note one other observation regarding the original
Thomas calibration. As reported in the fourth column of Table 4, total expenditure due to
adjustment costs is roughly 1/5 of one percent of total investment spending. This cost
seems small on an anecdotal basis, if we think of the costs of the planning, budgeting,
and committee work that accompany most investments. There are also obvious cases
when adjustment costs are much larger: think of the re-tooling of a factory, or the
temporary closure of a retail store to redesign it.
One recent study that computes adjustment costs is by Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006).
They study a host of specifications that include convex and non-convex adjustment costs,
including fixed costs, quadratic costs, gaps between the buying and selling price of
capital, and productivity distortions created by capital adjustment. Using U.S. plant level
data, they find statistically significant costs of each type, either when estimated in
isolation or when several costs are simultaneously present. The total implied adjustment
costs in this model and all the others (e.g. the one including just fixed costs) are
substantial. For instance, their preferred estimates suggest that profits are reduced 20
percent during investment spikes. They simulate the model and find that on average
spending on adjustment costs is equal to 0.91 percent of capital. Given that investment
for their sample is about 12.2 percent of capital, this implies that adjustment costs
average roughly 7.5 percent of investment; in other words, they find adjustment costs
roughly 40 times the size assumed by Thomas. Abel and Eberly (2002) in their study of
listed firms find a similar magnitude of adjustment costs (between 1.1 and 9.7 percent of
investment). So in what follows we also explore the predicted variation in total
adjustment costs paid relative to investment. From a theoretical standpoint, it is hardly
surprising that lumpiness is quantitatively irrelevant when fixed costs are small. This is
another motivation to explore the effect of varying B, the parameter which governs the
level of fixed costs.
Our first experiment is to substitute the compressed distribution of fixed costs from
Figure 6 for the uniform distribution. If we keep Thomas choice of B=0.002, then plants
adjust continuously13; hence to obtain some lumpiness, we set B=0.008. The results are
shown in row 4 of Table 4. With these changes the extensive margin in the model rises
to 92.6 percent and the variance of Itot/K due to I20/K rises to 99.9 percent. Thus, the
model becomes much closer to the data on these two critical dimensions. The only
shortcoming is that expenditure on adjustment costs remains less than one percent of total
investment spending.
To see that the improvement in fit comes solely from the compression, the next row in
the table shows the findings when the uniform distribution is used and B is set to 0.0053.
distribution implies that many firms draw either a cost around B/2 or a cost close to B. The parameters
sigma1 and sigma2 govern how concentrated around B/2 and B the fixed costs are. For all the experiments
in Table 3 we set σl =150 and σ2=33.3.
13
This is because the chance of getting a very low fixed cost is low, so that in contrast to Thomas, there is
no option value of waiting for a low fixed cost.

12

With this level of B the average adjustment costs faced by firms is the same as in row 4.
With this specification ShareADJ20 drops back towards the level in the baseline Thomas
specification. The contrast between rows 4 and 5 quantifies the intuition given above
about the importance of compression.
Our next step is to increase B to move the expenditure in adjustment costs to a more
plausible level. Row 6 shows the result when B is equal to 0.03. This change increases
the resources spent on adjustment so that they are nearly two percent of investment.
Notice that the number of vintages also rises so that J=24. This occurs because as the
costs become higher, firms tolerate larger deviations from their target capital before
adjusting. Indeed, if we double B again, to B=0.06, then J=45 and the expenditure on
adjustment costs rises to just over three percent of investment. In this case, roughly 96
percent of the plants do not invest.
To limit this waiting it is necessary to give firms higher benefits from adjusting their
capital stock; to do so we change the curvature of the profit function (which in this model
comes from the decreasing returns to scale but could also have been introduced by
assuming monopolistic competition in the product market). The curvature determines the
cost to having the capital stock deviate from its static optimal level. Subsequent to
Thomas’ paper a large empirical literature has estimated this curvature to be between 0.5
and 0.7, markedly lower than one (see e.g., Cooper and Haltiwanger (2005), Fuentes,
Gilchrist and Rysman (2006), and Hennessy and Whited (2005)). Thus, there are both
empirical and theoretical reasons to consider calibrations with more curvature.
Comparing rows 6 and 7 shows the effect of changing curvature. Here we set the return
to scales to 0.6, and find that relative to row 6 this doubles the resources spent on
adjustment costs, and reduces the maximum vintage J, so that firms adjust faster. The
extensive margin remains dominant.
This suggests that a calibration that raises B and involves more curvature could lead to a
model that has both non-trivial spending on adjustment and important extensive
adjustment. Our preferred calibration confirms this hunch. For these results we increase
B to 0.06 and keep the returns to scale equal to 0.6; the full set of parameters we choose
are shown in the last column of Table 3 and the resulting moments are shown in row 8 of
Table 4. We now find that the extensive margin is critical and that spending on
adjustment costs is substantial.
This calibration is not fully optimized, i.e. it is likely that by changing more of the
baseline parameters we can match the moments more closely. But, we believe that further
improvements would not change our main conclusions that compression in the
distribution of fixed costs is key to matching the dominant role of the extensive margin,
and a combination of high fixed costs and curvature leads to non-trivial spending on
adjustment costs.
One defect of our preferred specification is that nearly all the investment is spikes. This
comes because we have no maintenance motives for investing. Row 9 adds a

13

maintenance motive to our calibration. Maintenance is modeled as follows. At the
beginning of the period, a fraction of plants is hit by a “breakdown shock” which
decreases its capital stock. The plants that suffer these breakdowns must invest
immediately 8% of their capital to compensate for the capital destruction. This
investment is not subject to the fixed cost. Once the breakdown has (or not) occurred, the
usual sequence of events takes place, with each plant drawing a fixed cost and then
deciding to adjust or to wait. We chose the fraction of firms to be 30%. Clearly, adding
these breakdowns improves our ability to match the cross-sectional distribution of
investment rates, by generating small investments. Hence spikes now make up only 77%
of total investment. Most importantly, introducing these breakdowns does not affect our
other results noticeably (and it does not affect the impulse responses shown in the next
Section).14
Other Distributions of Fixed Costs
Given the central role played by the CDF of fixed costs, it is important to check that the
feature of our distribution that is driving our results is indeed the “compression”. For this
purpose, we consider two other distributions, which are displayed in Figure 7. The
distribution in the top panel has much more variance than the one we use in our preferred
calibration, since about 50% of firms draw a fixed cost that is roughly uniformly
distributed between 0.03 and 0.06 (i.e. the cumulative distribution function is linear in
this interval). Thus, studying this distribution allows us to check whether compression
rather than lack of heterogeneity is important.
The distribution from the bottom panel has only one point of compression rather than two
as in our preferred calibration.15 With this distribution virtually all firms draw B, in
which case the model is closer to the first generation of Ss models16 rather than the ones
studied by Caballero and Engel (1999) and Thomas (2002). Therefore, this distribution
exhibits compression with even less heterogeneity than our baseline CDF.
As rows 10 and 11 illustrate, the extensive margin remains dominant when either of these
distributions for fixed costs is substituted for our benchmark distribution. Based on other
cases we considered we are convinced that compression is a necessary ingredient for
14

This is not surprising. Consider an exogenous breakdown process which requires firms to have small
investment rates; this will create some small investment rates in every period, but since this “maintenance
investment” will not change over the business cycle it will have almost no effect on aggregate dynamics.
Indeed, if there are types of investment for which the fixed cost does not apply or is different, calibrating
the model to match the cross-sectional distribution of investment rates is not informative about the business
cycle behavior. These considerations are why we concentrate on matching the (capital-weighted) business
cycle statistics of the cross-section (rather than the average properties).
15
The formulas for the CDF of the top panel of Figure 8 is G(x) = H(x / B), with H(x) = (F(x)-F(0))/(F(1)F(0)), and F(x) = 1/π*(1/4*arctan(σl*(x-1/2)) + ¾*arctan(σ2*(x-1))), and σl =30 and σ2=5. The formula for
the CDF of the bottom panel of Figure 8 is G(x) = H(x / B), with H(x) = (F(x)-F(0))/(F(1)-F(0)), and F(x) =
1/(2*π)*(arctan(σl*(x-.95)) + arctan(σ2*(x-1))), and σl =80 and σ2=10.
16

Sheshinksi and Weiss (1977) and (1983), Caplin and Spulber (1987), Caplin and Leahy (1991).

14

delivering substantial extensive adjustment, but the exact nature of the compression is not
critical.17 In particular, the only heterogeneity in this set up comes from the differences
in fixed costs, and therefore we believe the results in row 10 are especially important
because they show that allowing for not trivial heterogeneity does not necessarily
overturn the basic intuition about the importance of compression.
Relation to the Literature
While these findings are robust to the changes that we have investigated, the literature on
this class of models is growing quickly and suggests several additional experiments that
merit consideration. Khan and Thomas (2006) extend the Thomas (2002) model to allow
for idiosyncratic productivity shocks. They do not find any significant effect of fixed
costs on aggregate dynamics. Their baseline calibration has relatively low adjustment
costs and only modest curvature. Moreover, they maintain the assumption of a uniform
distribution of fixed costs. Given this, and that the productivity shocks are log-normally
distributed, the marginally inactive firms will not be similar to the marginally active ones.
They also concentrate on the response of investment to TFP shocks (and not other
shocks), and on whether the model generates nonlinearities. We concentrate on the
simpler question of whether aggregate dynamics are different in the fixed cost model and
in the RBC model. Interestingly, Khan and Thomas emphasize that general equilibrium
feedbacks affects plant-level investment dynamics, which would imply that the panel data
estimates from partial equilibrium models that we use may be misleading.
We conjecture that our results would hold if the idiosyncratic productivity shocks do not
eliminate the compression associated with our parameterization of the fixed costs, but
would go away if they did. The shape of the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks would
likely matter as well, and we conjecture that a compressed distribution for idiosyncratic
shocks could also generate results close to ours. For instance, if the distribution of
idiosyncratic shocks was degenerate with only a few very different values, then one could
have firms with different and extremely volatile histories, but at any given time the
relevant cross-sectional distribution could still be compressed.
Bachmann, Caballero and Engel (2006) also explore issues that we do not consider. Like
us, their model presumes higher curvature, and higher fixed costs to reproduce “sectoral
level” volatility. They then calibrate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of
consumption to match aggregate volatility. With these features, they obtain like us
differences between the impulse responses of their model and the RBC model. They
emphasize that their specification also implies that the elasticity of aggregate investment
with respect to a TFP shock is time-varying. This feature is absent from our model
because it is log-linear. There are two main differences between our paper and theirs.
First, we keep the same preferences as Thomas (2002), i.e. log utility of consumption and
linear disutility of leisure (as in Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988)). Since the dispute is
about whether general equilibrium offsets are central to this debate, we believe this is the
appropriate place to start. Second, we focus on the shape of the distribution of fixed costs

15

while they emphasize the role of sectors.18 If we follow Bachmann et al. and allow for
preferences with higher intertemporal elasticity of substitution (than the log case) we find
also more smoothing than in our baseline.
4. Aggregate Dynamics and the Irrelevance Result

We conclude our analysis by revisiting the Thomas (2002) “irrelevance result” using our
new calibration of the fixed cost model.
4.1. The Thomas result

Thomas compared the effect that aggregate productivity shocks have on investment when
the fixed cost is positive and when the fixed cost is zero. In the latter case, the model
simplifies to the standard RBC model (with decreasing returns to scale) without any
adjustment cost. The bottom panel of Figure 8 plots the impulse response of the two
models to the productivity shock.19 The striking result is that the two models are virtually
indistinguishable, with the two lines sitting on top of each other. The response on impact
of the fixed cost model is about 99.8 percent of the response of the RBC model.
This result holds for many variations of parameter values. For instance, changing the
elasticity of labor supply or the source of shocks does not affect the result. Increasing the
level of fixed costs (B), while maintaining a uniform distribution, also makes little
difference: for instance, when B is multiplied by a factor of 10, i.e. B = 0.02, so that the
maximum vintage is J=20, the impact response of the fixed cost model is 98 percent of
the response of the RBC model. That is, larger fixed costs lead to a slightly smaller
response of investment, but the difference between the two models remains negligible.
This is in stark contrast with the partial equilibrium analysis, where fixed cost models
typically generate two features in the impulse response: first, aggregate investment
becomes of course smoother than without any adjustment costs; second, investment
becomes subject to oscillatory dynamics (aka “echo effects”, or replacement cycle).
Thomas argued that the general equilibrium nature of the model was responsible for the
inconsequential impact of the micro lumpiness.
While there is little doubt that general equilibrium effects are important, there is still a
tension between the preference for smooth consumption of households and the lumpy
investment demand of firms. We see no good theoretical reason why all the effects of
fixed costs would disappear in general equilibrium. Intuitively, this has to be a
quantitative question: depending on the curvature of the utility function and the
parameters that govern the investment demand of firms, the race between consumption
18

Another recent paper on the topic is Svenn and Weinke (2005). In contrast to Thomas (2002) or
Caballero and Engel (1999), they use a Calvo-style time-dependent adjustment rule for capital.
Interestingly, they find that given this rule, the irrelevance result holds in the RBC model but not in a New
Keynesian model.
19
In a one-shock linear model, the impulse response function (IRF) summarizes the full dynamics of the
system. Hence, models which have the same IRF have exactly the same dynamics in all respects.

16

smoothing and investment lumpiness will go one way or the other. Consistent with this
intuition, we show below that general equilibrium is not the whole story. Depending on
microeconomic assumptions, features typical of the partial equilibrium responses with
fixed costs may still arise in general equilibrium.
4.2 Impulse response to a technology shock with our calibration

We start by displaying in the top panel of Figure 8 the impulse response function of
aggregate investment to a productivity shock for our preferred calibration from Section 3,
along with the RBC model with the same parameters but zero fixed costs. While the
general shape of the impulse response is the same, the two models differ qualitatively in
two respects. First, the response is initially smaller in the fixed cost model: on impact the
response of the fixed cost model is only 89 percent of the response of the RBC model.
This reflects simply that investment becomes smoother in the presence of adjustment
costs. Second and more interestingly, the fixed cost model exhibits a noticeable hump 12
periods after the shock. We call this hump an “echo effect” because it is caused by the
initial surge in investment: as many firms adjust initially, the distribution shifts toward
more recent vintages, which are less likely to invest. This makes the investment response
smaller than the RBC model for a while, until the units which invested at time 0 need to
invest again to replace their capital. Clearly, this result depends on the shape on the
hazard rate (the probability of adjusting as a function of vintage, i.e. alpha). For our
calibration, the hazard rate is initially steeply convex: the alphas (probability of
adjustment) are very small for the first vintages before rising noticeably after 12 periods.
(Of course, adjustment is random, and probabilities of adjustment move over time, but
the average shape of the hazard rate still plays an important role.) The quantitative
differences between the responses of the two models to a TFP shock are modest.20
4.3 The dynamic effects of a change in the cross-sectional distribution with our
calibration

When we consider disturbances which affect more directly the shape of the crosssectional distribution, the differences between the two models become much larger. In
general the cross-sectional distribution is endogenous to shocks, but there are several
cases when we might expect it to shift abruptly for exogenous reasons: for instance,
Bloom (2006) considers the effect of a rise in uncertainty which leads many firms to
delay capital adjustment. Another trigger could be an investment tax cut. In Appendix 3,
we simulate the effects of an unexpected, temporary cut in the price of capital, such as an
investment tax credit. That experiment is somewhat complicated to analyze, because not
only must one specify the size and duration of the change, but one must also account for
the fact that the tax change changes the level of capital by different amounts in the fixed
cost model and the RBC model (since they are not equivalent any more).

20

With different parameter values (e.g. higher fixed costs, higher depreciation rate, or lower returns to
scale), the two qualitative differences (smoothing and echo) between the RBC model and fixed cost model
can be made somewhat larger.

17

To side-step these complications, we consider the following thought experiment: assume
that many firms have invested in the past two years, so that the distribution is distorted
with more firms in the first two vintages and fewer firms in all the other vintages. Does
changing the initial cross-sectional distribution in this way affect aggregate investment?
This experiment is at the heart of the debate in the fixed cost literature. Figure 9 presents
the exact perturbations that we consider and Figure 10 gives the aggregate investment
responses. The RBC model displays the usual, monotonic, smooth convergence to the
steady-state given a high starting initial capital (since many firms have invested recently).
The fixed cost model, for our calibration, differs in two respects from the RBC model:
first, the response of investment is smaller than in the case of the RBC model (except in
the first two periods). This is because many firms have invested recently, so that there is
less investment demand as fewer firms are close to the point where they want to invest.
Second, we obtain a magnified “echo effect” when firms which had invested recently
finally re-invest after 8 to 11 periods. These features are typical of partial equilibrium
fixed cost models.
These features arise largely because of our choice of fixed cost distribution: this
distribution G implies that the hazard rate is initially very low and then rises steeply; the
initially lower response of aggregate investment stems directly from the first feature, and
the echo stems from the second feature. In other words, the compression of the CDF that
is necessary for amplifying the importance of extensive adjustment essentially guarantees
that the change in the initial cross-sectional distribution will matter for the subsequent
aggregate dynamics. Overall, we conclude that a shock which affects the shape of the
cross-sectional distribution has very different effects when fixed costs are positive than
when they are nil.21
We emphasize that all of these results are obtained with log utility. As a point of
reference the bottom panel of Figure 10 shows the same experiment in the baseline
Thomas model. The RBC model and the Thomas model yield essentially identical
predictions even for this experiment. This equivalence for us is proof that general
equilibrium effects are not the only reason why Thomas found no aggregate effect of
fixed costs. Depending on microeconomic assumptions, i.e. on the calibration, the
equivalence result need not hold.

5. Conclusions

We make three contributions to the debate over the aggregate significance of plant-level
investment lumpiness. Remarkably, the basic plant-level facts on the lumpiness of
investment are fairly similar in Chile and the U.S. In each country, we show that
investment spikes drive total investment. The spikes draw their predictive power from
changes in number of plants making large investments, rather than changes in the size of
average investment per plant. We use these statistics regarding the decomposition

21

To keep our experiment simple, we picked the initial cross-sectional distribution arbitrarily, but similar
results are obtained when one runs a true investment tax credit in the model.

18

between the intensive and extensive margins of adjustment to summarize the
microeconomic facts about lumpiness that we ask a model to match.
We use the Thomas (2002) model to examine these facts. This model augments a
relatively standard RBC model by assuming that firms must pay a fixed cost (that is
randomly drawn each period) in order to adjust its capital. As originally calibrated,
however, the model fails to generate a dominant role of investment spikes and a dominant
role of the extensive margin. To fit these facts we change the distribution of fixed costs
from which firms sample and make it more “compressed” than the distribution
considered by Thomas. We also argue that the original calibration has an average level
of fixed costs which is too low and a profit function that has too little curvature.
Our final contribution is to study the properties of the model using our preferred
calibration. In the original Thomas model the aggregate dynamics for investment
following a productivity shock were indistinguishable from an RBC model with no
adjustment costs. In our model this type of shock plays out somewhat differently.
Moreover, for shocks that directly reshape the cross-sectional distribution of capital, the
two models have very different implications: in general, the fixed cost model predicts that
investment is more depressed for a while; moreover, the fixed cost model generates an
echo effect which is absent in the RBC model.
Our conclusion from the last exercise is that there is nothing generically related to DSGE
models that guarantees that plant-level investment lumpiness is smoothed away. Rather
we agree with Thomas that there can be substantial differences between the importance
of lumpiness in a GE models and partial equilibrium models. However, many have gone
farther and concluded that GE makes fixed costs to investment completely irrelevant for
the business cycle. Both our empirical and theoretical work shows this conclusion is
premature; in particular, the details of how the production side is modeled matter. Given
the currently available information our calibration is reasonable, but we recognize much
more work needs to be done in this respect to determine how these models should be
estimated and calibrated.

19

References

Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 2002, “Investment and q with Fixed Costs: An
Empirical Analysis”, (working paper).
Bachmann, Ruediger, Caballero Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, 2006, “Lumpy
Investment in Dynamic General Equilibrium”, working paper MIT.
Becker, Randy, Haltiwanger John, Jarmin, Ron, Klimek, Shawn and Dan Wilson, 2006,
“Micro and Macro Data Integration: The Case of Capital”, in A New Architecture for the
U.S. National Accounts, edited by Dale Jorenson, Steve Landefeld and William
Nordhaus, University of Chicago Press, pp. 541-609.
Bernanke, Benjamin S. Bohn, Henning and Peter C. Reiss, “Alternative Nonnested
Specification Tests of Time Series Investment Models” in Journal of Econometrics, Vol.
37, No. 2, March 1988, pp. 293-326.
Bloom, Nick, 2006, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks: Firm Level Estimation and a
9/11 Simulation”, mimeo Stanford University.
Caballero Ricardo J. 1992. “A Fallacy of Composition,” American Economic Review
82(5):1279-1292.
Caballero, Ricardo J. 1999. “Aggregate Investment”, Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Vol. 1B, Elsevier Science.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, 1999, “Explaining Investment
Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Approach”, Econometrica, 67
(July), pp. 783-826.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Engel, Eduardo M. R. A., and John C. Haltiwanger, 1995, “PlantLevel Adjustment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics”, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, no. 2, pp. 1-54.
Campbell, Jeffrey and Jonas Fisher, 2000, “Aggregate Employment Fluctuations with
Microeconomic Asymmetries”, American Economic Review, 90(5):1323-1345.
Cooper, Russell W., and John C. Haltiwanger, 2006, “On the Nature of Capital
Adjustment Costs”, Review of Economic Studies, 73(2), pp. 611-634 .
Cooper, Russell W., Haltiwanger, John C. and Laura Power, 1999, “Machine
Replacement and the Business Cycle: Lumps and Bumps”, American Economic Review,
89(4), pp. 921-946.
Doms, Mark, and Timothy Dunne, 1998, “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing
Plants”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 1 pp. 409-429, (April).

20

Dotsey, Michael, King, Robert G. and Alexander L. Wolman, 1999, “State-Dependent
Pricing and the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 114 pp. 655-690, (May).
Foote, Christopher, “Trend Employment Growth and the Bunching of Job Creation and
Destruction”, Quarterly Journal of Economics. 113(3): 809-834.
Fuentes Olga, Simon Gilchrist and Marc Rysman, 2006, “Irreversibility and Investment
Dynamics for Chilean Manufacturing Plants”, mimeo Boston University.
Hansen, Gary D., 1985, “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 16, pp. 309–327.
Hennessy, Christopher A. and Toni M. Whited, 2005, “Debt Dynamics”, Journal of
Finance, LX(3), pp. 1129-1165.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Jonathan A. Parker, 2006, “Taxes and Growth in a Financially
Underdeveloped Country: Evidence from the Chilean Investment Boom”, NBER
Working Paper 12104.
Khan, Aubhik, and Julia K. Thomas, 2005, “Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of
Nonconvexities in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics”, mimeo.
Klenow, Peter J., and Oleksiy Kryvtsov, 2005, “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
Pricing: Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?”, NBER Working Paper 11043.
Newey, Kenneth D.and Whitney K Newey, 1987, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix”, Econometrica
55(3) , pp. 703-708.
Oliner, Stephen .D., Rudebusch Glenn D. and Daniel E. Sichel, 1995, “New and Old
Models of Business Investment: A Comparison of Forecasting Performance”, Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 27 (August 1995), pp. 806-32.
Prescott, Edward C., 2003, “Non-Convexities in Quantitative General Equilibrium
Studies of Business Cycles”, (working paper).
Rogerson, Richard, 1988, “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 21, pp. 3-16.
Sheshinski, Eytan, and Yoram Weiss, 1977, “Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment”,
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 44(2), pp. 287-303.
Sheshinski, Eytan, and Yoram Weiss, 1983, “Optimum Pricing under Stochastic
Inflation”, Review of Economic Studies, vol. 50(3), pp. 513-529.

21

Sveen, Tommy and Lutz Weinke, 2006, “Lumpy Investment, Sticky Prices, and the
Monetary Transmission Mechanism”, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Thomas, Julia K., 2002, “Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle,” Journal
of Political Economy, CX, pp. 508-534.

22

Appendix 1: Data

The purpose of this appendix is to briefly describe the data that we analyze in section 2.
US Census data:
One of our data sets relates to U.S. establishment-level data between 1972 and 1998.
These data were kindly provided by Shawn Klimek of the Census Bureau. The capital
expenditure data are taken from the Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of Manufactures
(ASM) and the details of the data construction are given in Becker et al (2006). Their
core calculation involves building up a capital stock series using a perpetual inventory
method.
The data provided to us were sorted establishments into different categories according to
the ratio of investment to beginning of period capital (Ii,t/Ki,t-1). Totals for investment and
(beginning of period) capital were computed by summing across all establishments in a
given category for each year; for example, data for total investment for firms with Ii,t/Ki,t-1
> 0.2 would be one entry in the spreadsheet that we received. By summing across
categories we get total investment (or total capital) for the year.
Chilean data:
Our second data set is a plant-level census of manufacturing plants with ten or more
employees from Chile. These data are collected by the National Statistics Institute of
Chile and the series we exploit were provided to us by Olga Fuentes and Simon Gilchrist,
who constructed real capital stocks and real investment series from a perpetual inventory
equation, with industry-specific investment prices and depreciation rates. The data we use
is an unbalanced panel which has on average 1780 plants per year, from 1981 to 1999.
We delete firms with missing observations. We sort firms based on their investmentcapital ratio using the same procedure we use for the Census data.
The spreadsheets with these data are available on the following web page:
http://people.bu.edu/fgourio/extintpaper.html

23

Appendix 2: Additional Comparative Dynamics and the Extensive-Intensive
Decomposition

This appendix studies how different parameters affect the extensive-intensive
decomposition that we emphasize in the paper. The key finding is that some parameters
have a weak or counter-intuitive effect on this decomposition. Understanding this
“negative” result seems relevant from a technical point of view, because similar issues
have arisen in the sticky price literature following the work of Klenow and Kryvstov
(2005). Our results raise warning flags regarding some intuitive approaches to calibrating
these models, because these approaches may not be robust. For instance, we show a
higher fixed cost can increase, not decrease, the importance of the extensive margin over
the business cycle.
To start, consider first the Thomas model when there are no aggregate shocks. Due to
depreciation, there is some firm-level variation in investment: firms let their capital
depreciate, and readjust after a few periods, depending on their draws of fixed costs. The
model thus generates a cross-sectional distribution of investment rates. We can think of
the aggregate investment in this economy (which is constant over time) as the product of
the number of investing firms, times the average investment that each of these firms is
doing. In this economy, which is the non-stochastic steady-state22 of the full Thomas
model, the following intuitive results hold:
-

an increase in the level of fixed costs leads to an increase in the maximum vintage
J, a reduction in the number of firms investing, and an increase in the average
amount invested per firm investing;

-

an increase in the curvature of the profit function (i.e. a reduction in returns to
scale) leads to a decrease in J, an increase in the number of firms investing, and a
reduction in the average amount invested per firm investing;

-

an increase in the depreciation rate or in the growth rate of the economy reduces J,
increases the number of firms investing, and reduces the average investment per
firm investing.

Hence, these parameters all have intuitive effects on the relative importance of the
extensive and intensive margins: increasing the cost of adjusting the extensive margin
(the fixed cost) reduces its importance, and increases the importance of the intensive
margin.
Next consider the business cycle implications when aggregate shocks are added to this
model. To gain some intuition, suppose that a positive technology shock occurs. This
will raise the marginal product of capital and lead firms to want to accumulate more
capital. As a result, more firms find it worth paying the fixed cost and the number of
firms “adjusting” rises. But, a second margin is also important: the capital stock of firms
22

By “nonstochastic” we mean the model without aggregate productivity shocks; we maintain the random
idiosyncratic shocks to the level of the fixed cost.

24

that do adjust, denoted by k0,t+1, increases too. This means that the typical investment per
adjuster will increase. Hence the model will generate a mix of extensive and intensive
margins: both the number of adjusters and the investment per adjuster will typically be
procyclical.
A natural conjecture is that the results for the nonstochastic steady-state quoted above
extend to the business cycle extensive-intensive decomposition. That is, one may think
that higher fixed costs lead not only to a smaller number of firms adjusting on average,
but also to a smaller importance of the variation over time in the number of firms
adjusting. The panel A of Table A-1 considers the effect of increasing solely B, starting
from the Thomas calibration. The main result is that ShareADJ20 actually increases.
(And so does ShareADJ0, the number of firms which are doing any kind of positive
investment, not only spikes.) Quantitatively, this effect is not very large: comparing rows
1 and 6 shows that a ten fold increase in B moves ShareADJ20 by 12 percentage points.
(Moreover, we found that with other parameter values, this effect was often even
smaller.)
Our interpretation of these results (related to Klenow and Kryvstov (2005)) is as follows.
In the low B economy, no matter if you choose to change your adjustment threshold in
response to a shock, the probability of adjusting in the next two or three years is very
large. So there is a limited incentive to tie an adjustment to aggregate shock and the
variation in the amount of investment per adjusting firm is naturally low.
In contrast, when B is high, the maximum vintage rises and most firms will wait many
periods and undertake larger investments when they do adjust. In this case, making sure
that capital is high when productivity is high becomes more important and firms have a
stronger incentive to invest when there is a favorable aggregate shock. Thus, in a high B
environment two opposing forces are operative. There are more vintages and hence more
variation in the investment per adjuster, but there also is a stronger incentive to
synchronize when investments occur, leading to more variation in the number of
adjusting firms. Because of these two countervailing effects, varying B has ambiguous
effects on how a productivity shock will change the extensive/intensive decomposition.
In a number of experiments that we considered besides those reported in Table A-1, these
two effects seem to roughly cancel, so that the amount of extensive adjustment is little
affected by varying B. Dotsey, King, and Wolman (1999) and Klenow and Kryvstov
(2005) mention similar “counterintuitive” results when discussing the effect of trend
inflation rate on business cycle dynamics. Hence, these considerations seem to arise in
other contexts as well.23
When we change the benefits to adjusting, by changing either the depreciation rate or the
curvature of the profit function, we obtain similarly counterintuitive results. Panel B in
23

See Foote (1998) and Campbell and Fisher (2001) for a similar debate on the theoretically unclear effect
of trend growth on employment dynamics, and Caballero (1992) for a general exposition of the problem.
These models have a somewhat different microeconomic structure (e.g., linear costs of adjustment and
idiosyncratic shocks) but appear to be related to our findings.

25

Table A-1 shows that lowering the curvature has mixed effects. Neither the percentage of
firms adjusting or the extensive margin monotonically responds to this change.
Moreover, the total effect on ShareADJ20 is modest, even though range of curvature
parameters in these experiments varies all the way from 0.95 to 0.6.
Panel C shows that raising the depreciation rate lowers the number of firms investing and
has ambiguous effects on the share of adjusters; notice the non-monotonicity in
ShareADJ20 in these experiments. Thus, it seems that even if the changes in the
incentive to adjust on average are clear, the effect of how firms respond to shocks may
not be.
In contrast, changing the CDF of fixed costs has strong and reliable effects on both the
steady-state of the model and the importance of the share of adjusters over the business
cycle. This was already clear from Table 4. Another interesting experiment is to add a
small probability of drawing a zero fixed cost. This captures the idea of very large
idiosyncratic shocks which dwarf the fixed cost, and which lead firms to adjust. As
expected, firms then tend to wait until they draw this zero fixed cost to adjust.
Consequently, the share of firms adjusting is almost constant over the business cycle,
equal to the number of firms drawing this zero fixed cost.

26

Appendix 3: An investment tax credit

The four panels of Figure A-1 show the response to an investment tax credit (ITC) in our
model. The experiment we consider is an unexpected decrease in the price of capital
goods by 1%, which is financed by lump-sum taxes, and which lasts for two years. The
first panel shows the response of aggregate investment in the RBC model and in the
preferred calibration of the cost model in section 3. On impact, the adjustment costs of
course lead to a more muted response. The more interesting part is what happens once
the ITC has ended, i.e. starting in period three. The two year reduction in the cost of
capital leads many firms to pull forward their investment and thus the distribution of
plants is distorted. The second panel of Figure A-1 drops the first two years to highlight
what happens starting in period 3. The responses for the two models are not strictly
comparable since the total investment during the ITC differs so that the total level of
capital as of period 3 differs.
The third panel rescales the response of the RBC model so that it enters period 3 with the
same level of capital as the model with our preferred calibration. With this adjustment,
investment in the wake of the ITC is now smaller in the fixed cost model and the fixed
cost model continues to show echo effects. Finally, the fourth panel plots the difference
between the fixed cost model and the (rescaled) RBC model, multiplied by 10 to
demonstrate the effect of a 10% ITC. Looking at the last two panels the qualitative
differences between the RBC and fixed cost models that we saw the ad-hoc experiment in
section 4.3 are preserved in this ITC experiment, though they are smaller.
The four panels of Figure A-2 give the same analysis for the Thomas calibration.
Importantly, the key third panel shows no difference between the RBC model and the
fixed cost model. Consequently, the comparison of the fourth panels of Figures A-1 and
A-2 respectively quantifies the importance of our calibration for this ITC experiment. In
the Thomas calibration, the difference between the two models is extremely small (less
than 0.15%, on impact), while for our calibration it is substantial (more than 2% on
impact).
We also considered ITCs which were anticipated, and found similar effects.

27

Table 1: Distribution of Investment Rates for U.S. and Chilean Plants

U.S. Sample
Equal
Weighted
(Percent)
I/K=0
15.8
0<I/K<2
15.1
2≤I/K<8
29.7
8≤I/K<12
11.5
12≤I/K<20
11.6
20≤I/K<35
8
35≤I/K
8.3

U.S. Sample
Capital
Weighted
(Percent)
3.4
12.1
33.3
14.4
16
10.8
10

Chilean Sample Chilean Sample
Equal
Capital
Weighted
Weighted
(Percent)
(Percent)
41.31
18.55
11.04
17.24
17.78
26.32
6.76
9.44
8.44
11.84
7.36
8.83
7.31
7.78

28

Table 2: Forecasting of Aggregate Investment by Share of Plants undergoing Investment
Spikes.
Dependent variable is Itott/Kt-1 , the ratio of the sum of investment across all plants to the sum of beginning
of period capital across all plants; the lag of this variable is denoted Itott-1/Kt-2, Rows of the table show
regressions with different right hand side variables. Salest-1/Kt-2 is the (lag of) total plant-level shipments
divided by the (lag of) the total capital at all establishments. A time trend is always included (but not
shown). ADJ20 is defined below the table. For the U.S. sample, the time period is 1974 to 1998. For the
Chilean sample the time period is 1981 to 1999. The standard errors are computing using the Newey-West
(1987) correction with three lags.

Row

Sample

R2

Itott-1/Kt-2

1

U.S.

0.748

2

U.S.

0.738

3

U.S.

0.776

4

U.S.

0.893

5

U.S.

0.786

6

U.S.

0.866

7

Chile

0.809

8

Chile

0.848

9

Chile

0.802

10

Chile

0.847

11

Chile

0.839

12

Chile

0.856

Salest-1/Kt-2

0.743
(0.101)
0.690
(0.094)
1.255
(0.180)
1.553
(0.165)
1.257
(0.153)
1.531
(0.167)
0.353
(0.292)
0.151
(0.257)
0.999
(0.804)
1.152
(0.753)
0.462
(0.764)
0.790
(0.629)

Coefficient estimates
(standard errors)
ADJ20t-1

ADJ20t-2

0.0078
(0.0098)
-0.204
(0.044)
-0.228
(0.035)
-0.258
(0.039)
-0.250
(0.033)

0.0199
(0.009)
0.010
(0.008)

-0.161
(0.048)
-0.157
(0.055)

0.055
(0.017)
-0.331
(0.341)
-0.454
(0.272)
-0.156
(0.339)
-0.323
(0.264)

0.054
(0.018)
0.034
(0.12)

-0.405
(0.061)
-0.331
(0.075)

ADJ20 is defined as

I 20 I 20 K 20
≡
•
≡ IPA20 • ADJ 20
K
K 20 K
where I20 ≡ ∑ I i ,t , K20 ≡ ∑ Ki ,t −1 ,
I i ,t

Ki ,t −1

>0.20

Ii ,t

Ki ,t −1

> 0.20

K≡

∑

I i ,t

Ki ,t −1

Ki ,t −1

≥0

29

Table 3: Parameters in the Thomas (2002) Calibration and in our Preferred Calibration.
Parameter
Depreciation rate (δ)
Persistence of TFP shock (ρ)
Returns to scale (ψ + υ )
Share of capital in Production Function ψ
Share of capital in Output ψ /ψ + υ
B (maximum fixed cost)
Discount factor (β)
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Frisch elasticity of labor supply

Thomas (2002)
0.06
0.9225
0.905
0.325
0.359
0.002
0.954
1
Infinite

Preferred Calibration
0.06
0.9225
0.60
0.2155
0.359
0.06
0.954
1
Infinite

In our preferred calibration, the CDF for G is G(x) = H(x / B) where B is the upper
support and H is defined on the interval [0,1] as H(x) = (F(x)-F(0))/(F(1)-F(0)), with
F(x) = 1/(2*π)*(arctan(σl*(x-1/2)) + arctan(σ2*(x-1))). We set σl =150 and σ2=33.3.

30

Table 4: Steady-State and Business Cycle Lumpiness Statistics for various calibrations.
Row

J

Total Adjustment
Costs / Total I %

Mean % Plants
I/K>0.20

Mean I20/Itot

% Variance
of Itot/K due to
I20/K

Share ADJ 20

20.8
16.6
19.7

49.9
57.3
85.9

97.0
86.0
62.4

87.0
92.5
51.7

1
2
3

Data US
Data Chile
Thomas (2002)
Calibration

NA
NA

5

NA
NA
0.21

4

Thomas with
Compressed CDF
and B=0.008
Thomas with Uniform
CDF and B=0.0053
(i.e. same mean as row 4)
Thomas with
Compressed CDF and
Higher B (B=0.03)

11

0.87

12.2

99.9

99.9

92.6

9

0.34

17.1

93.9

81.9

55.2

24

1.97

6.4

99.9

99.9

100.0

Thomas with
Compressed CDF and
Lower return to scales
(0.6), and Higher B=0.03
Preferred Calibration
= Thomas with
Compressed CDF and
Lower return to scales
and higher B=0.06
Preferred Calibration
with Breakdowns
CDF with more variance
CDF with only one spike

16

3.97

8.3

99.9

99.9

115.6

23

6.24

5.9

99.9

99.9

84.5

23

5.58

5.9

77.4

100.1

86.0

22
16

5.27
7.41

9.7
7.8

99.7
99.9

99.5
99.9

81.2
75.8

5
6

7

8

9
10
11

Notes: Results from simulations of the model (500 simulations of 200 periods each). See
the text for the full characteristics of the alternative calibrations. The definitions of I20,
Itot, and ShareADJ20 are:
I20 ≡ ∑ I i ,t , Itot ≡ ∑ I i ,t ,
I i ,t

Ki ,t −1

K20 ≡

I i ,t

>0.20

∑

Ii ,t

Ki ,t −1

> 0.20

Ki ,t −1

Ki ,t −1, K ≡

≥ 0.0

∑

I i ,t

Ki ,t −1

Ki ,t −1

≥0.0

The %Variance of Itot/K due to I20/K is Cov(I20/K, Itot/K)/Var(Itot/K), and the
ShareADJ20 is Cov(log(K20/K),log(I20/K))/Var(log(I20/K)) where the logs of the
various series are de-trended using the Hodrick-Prescott filter (with a smoothing
parameter equal to 100 since these are annual simulations).

31

Table A-1: Additional Comparative Dynamics in the Thomas Model.
Row

J

Mean % of
Plants with
I/K=0

Mean % Plants
I/K>0.20

Share
ADJ0

Share ADJ 20

Panel A: Effect of Changing B (the maximum value of fixed costs) in the Thomas calibration
1

B=0.002 (Thomas)

5

72.7

19.7

66.1

51.8

2

B=0.004

8

77.6

18.0

68.2

53.9

3

B=0.005

9

79.1

17.3

68.8

54.7

4

B=0.008

11

81.9

15.7

70.3

58.0

5

B=0.01

13

83.1

14.9

71.3

59.6

6

B=0.02

20

86.4

12.5

74.0

64.1

Panel B: Effect of Changing returns to scale in the Thomas calibration
7

Scale = 0.95

7

76.6

18.5

67.9

53.4

8

5

72.7

19.7

66.3

51.6

9

Scale = 0.905
(Thomas)
Scale = 0.8

4

69.0

20.0

64.7

54.6

10

Scale = 0.6

4

68.0

20.0

65.8

59.3

Panel C: Effect of changing the depreciation rate in the Thomas calibration
11

Delta = 0.04

7

76.8

13.6

67.4

66.7

12

Delta = 0.06
(Thomas)

5

72.7

19.7

65.5

51.5

13

Delta = 0.08

4

68.6

28.2

64.9

54.4

14

Delta = 0.10

3

64.8

30.3

61.5

47.0

Notes: Results from simulations of the model (500 simulations of 200 periods each). The
parameters are as in Thomas (2002), i.e. the first column of Table 3, except for one
different
parameter
in
each
row.
Share
ADJ0
is
defined
as
Cov(log(K0/K),log(I/K))/Var(log(I/K)) where K0 is the total of capital of plants doing a
positive investment. Share ADJ20 is Cov(log(K20/K),log(I20/K)/Var(log(I20/K)). All
series in logs are HP filtered (with a smoothing parameter equal to 100 since these are
annual simulations).

32

Figure 1: Investment Lumpiness in U.S. Manufacturing Plants
Share of Zeros or Near Zeros

30
20
10

25

15
10
5
0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995

10

0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
% of plants (capital-weighted)

% of plants (capital-weighted)

20

15

5

0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
25

Share of Spikes

20
% of plants

% of plants

40

30
20

10

0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995

Notes:
Left Panels: “Near Zeros” are defined as plants with 0 ≤ I/K < 0.02 and are shown in the
solid line. Plants with I/K = 0 are shown with dashed line.
Right panels: Solid line is plants with I/K > 0.2. Dashed line is I/K > 0.35.
Top-panel is in number of plants, and bottom-panel is capital-weighted.

33

Figure 2: Investment Lumpiness in Chilean Manufacturing Plants

Share of Zeros or Near Zeros

25

% of plants

40
20
0

% of plants (capital-weighted)

20

1985

1990

10

40

20

1985

1990

0

1995

60

0

15

5

1995

% of plants (capital-weighted)

% of plants

60

Share of Spikes

1985

1990

1995

1985

1990

1995

30
20
10
0

Notes:
Left Panels: “Near Zeros” are defined as plants with 0 ≤ I/K < 0.02 and are shown in the
solid line. Plants with I/K =0 are shown with dashed line.
Right panels: Solid line is plants with I/K > 0.2. Dashed line is I/K > 0.35.
Top-panel is in number of plants, and bottom-panel is capital-weighted.

34

Figure 3: Cyclicality of Near Zero Investment and Investment Spikes in U.S. and
Chilean Manufacturing Plants
US

0.08

Itot/K
near zeros
spikes

0.06
0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Chile

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05
Itot/K
near zeros
spikes

-0.1

1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998

Notes: Itot ≡

∑

Ii ,t

K i , t −1

≥ 0.0

I i ,t , K ≡

∑

Ii ,t

K i , t −1

K i ,t −1 , Near zeros is the capital-weighted share of plants

≥ 0.0

with near-zero investment and spikes is the capital-weighted share of plants with a spike.
Each series shown in the figure are residuals from a regression that remove a linear time
trend.

35

Figure 4: Decomposition of Aggregate Investment for U.S. and Chilean Manufacturing
Plant into Investment Spikes and Remaining Investment.
US
I20/K
I(0-20)/K
Itot/K

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Chile
I20/K
I(0-20)/K
Itot/K

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

Notes:

1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
I20 ≡

∑

Ii ,t

K i , t −1

> 0.20

I i ,t , Itot ≡

∑

Ii ,t

K i , t −1

≥ 0.0

∑

I i ,t , I(0-20) ≡
0.0 ≤

I i ,t

K i , t −1

I i ,t , K ≡
≤ 0.20

∑

I i ,t

K i , t −1

K i ,t −1

≥ 0.0

36

Figure 5: Decomposition of de-trended Aggregate Investment into Intensive and
Extensive Adjustment for U.S. and Chilean Manufacturing Plants.
US
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2

log(ADJ20)
log(IPA20)
log(I20/K)

-0.3
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Chile
0.6
0.4

log(ADJ20)
log(IPA20)
log(I20/K)

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998

Notes: ADJ20, IPA20 and I20/K are defined in the text. Each series shown in the figure
are residuals from a regression that removes a linear time trend.

37

Figure 6: Cumulative Distribution Function G of Fixed Costs used in Our Calibration.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

38

Figure 7: Cumulative Distribution Function G of Fixed Costs used as robustness checks.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

39

Figure 8: Impulse Response of Aggregate Investment to an Aggregate Productivity
Shock for our Preferred Calibration of the DSGE Model with Fixed Costs (Top Panel)
and for the Original Thomas Calibration (Bottom Panel).
5

% deviation from steady-state

4

3

2

1

0

-1

0

5

10

15
years after shock

20

25

30

Preferred DSGE Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs
5

% deviation from steady-state

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

5

10

15
years after shock

20

25

30

Thomas (2002) Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

40

Figure 9: Initial Cross-Sectional Distribution for the experiment of Section 4.3 in our
Preferred Calibration (Top Panel) and in the Thomas Calibration.
0.12
steady-state
distorted
0.1

frequency

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

vintage

0.4
steady-state
distorted

0.35
0.3

frequency

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5
vintage

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Notes: In both cases the first two vintages are up by 20% each and the other vintages are
reduced equally.

41

Figure 10: Dynamic Path for Aggregate Investment When the Initial Distribution of
Capital is Distorted in the Our Calibration of the DSGE Model with Fixed Costs (Top
Panel) and in the Thomas Calibration (Bottom Panel).
1

% deviation from steady-state

0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5
-3
-3.5

0

5

10

15
years after shock

20

25

30

Preferred DSGE Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs
0

% deviation from steady-state

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2

-2.5

-3

0

5

10

15
years after shock

20

25

30

Thomas (2002) Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

42

Figure A-1: Comparison of an ITC for our Preferred Calibration and the RBC model
Panel 1: Impulse Response to an unexpected 1% ITC lasting two years
8

% deviation from steady-state

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
0

5

10

15
years after shock

20

25

30

Preferred DSGE Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

Panel 2: Impulse Response to an unexpected 1% ITC lasting two years, period 3 onward
0.5

dynamics from XS distribution induced by an ITC

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2
0

5

10
15
20
Preferred DSGE Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

25

30

43

Panel 3: Panel 2 rescaled so that both models begin period 3 with identical levels of
capital

0.5

dynamics from XS distribution induced by an ITC

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2
0

5

10
15
20
Preferred DSGE Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

25

30

Panel 4: Difference between the responses in panel 3 for a 10 percent ITC
4

dynamics from XS distribution induced by an ITC: x10

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

44

Figure A-2 Comparison of an ITC for the Thomas (2002) model and the RBC model
Panel 1: Impulse Response to an unexpected 1% ITC lasting two years
8

% deviation from steady-state

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
0

5

10

15
years after shock

20

25

30

Thomas (2002) Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

Panel 2: Impulse Response to an unexpected 1% ITC lasting two years, period 3 onward
0

dynamics from XS distribution induced by an ITC

-0.5

-1

-1.5
0

5

10
15
20
Thomas (2002) Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

25

30

45

Panel 3: Panel 2 rescaled so that both models begin period 3 with identical levels of
capital
0

dynamics from XS distribution induced by an ITC

-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2
-1.4
0

5

10
15
20
Thomas (2002) Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

25

30

Panel 4: Difference between the responses in panel 3 for a 10 percent ITC
0.15

dynamics from XS distribution induced by an ITC: x10

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1
0

5

10
15
20
Thomas (2002) Calibration
RBC with no adjustment costs

25

30

46

