NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GROWTH EFFECT OF DEMOCRACY:
IS IT HETEROGENOUS AND HOW CAN IT BE ESTIMATED?
Torsten Persson
Guido Tabellini
Working Paper 13150
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13150

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We thank participants in a seminar at CIFAR, and especially Dan Trefler, for helpful comments. Financial
support from the Swedish Research Council, the Tore Browaldh Foundation, Bocconi University,
and CIFAR is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Growth Effect of Democracy: Is It Heterogenous and How Can It Be Estimated?
Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 13150
June 2007
JEL No. H11,O11
ABSTRACT
We estimate the effect of political regime transitions on growth with semi-parametric methods, combining
difference in differences with matching, that have not been used in macroeconomic settings. Our semi-parametric
estimates suggest that previous parametric estimates may have seriously underestimated the growth
effects of democracy. In particular, we find an average negative effect on growth of leaving democracy
on the order of -2 percentage points implying effects on income per capita as large as 45 percent over
the 1960-2000 panel. Heterogenous characteristics of reforming and non-reforming countries appear
to play an important role in driving these results.
Torsten Persson
Director
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
Torsten.Persson@iies.su.se
Guido Tabellini
IGIER - Universita Bocconi
Via Salasco 5
20136 Milano
ITALY
guido.tabellini@unibocconi.it

1

Introduction

Political regimes can change suddenly, because of coups, popular revolts, or
the death of leaders. Such changes provide an opportunity to assess whether
economic policies or performance are influenced by political institutions. A
number of recent papers have exploited this opportunity. Using more or
less the same difference-in-difference methodology, they have all estimated
the average effects of democratic transitions on economic growth, or some
other measures of economic performance, using a post-war panel data set
(see e.g., Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005), Papaioannou and Siourounis (2004),
Persson (2005), Persson and Tabellini (2006), Rodrik and Wacziarg (2004)).
While the difference-in-difference strategy yields interesting results, which
are considerably more credible than those from a standard cross-sectional
regression, it still rests on strong identifying assumptions.1
The goal of this paper is to reassess the relation between democracy and
growth, while relaxing some of these strong identifying assumptions. To reach
this goal, we re-estimate the average effect of political transitions on economic
growth by means of semi-parametric methods. Broadly speaking , we combine aspects of difference-in-difference methods with aspects of propensityscore methods, by giving more weight to the comparisons of reforming and
non-reforming countries that have similar probabilities of experiencing democratic reform. Specifically, we first estimate the probability of regime change
conditional on a number of observable variables. We then use this estimated
probability, the propensity score, to evaluate the difference in growth performance between the countries with and without a regime change. Under
the standard assumptions in the propensity-score literature (the selectionon-observables and common-support assumptions), this empirical strategy
yields consistent estimates of the average effect of political regime changes,
in cases when a standard difference in difference strategy would not. A theoretical paper by Abadie (2005) further discusses this approach to estimation.2
1

It is hard to find good instruments for regime changes. Jones and Olken (2005, 2006)
imaginatively use unexpected deaths of leaders, and the contrast between successful and
unsuccessful assassination attempts on leaders, respectively. The latter approach allows
them to estimate the likelihood of a democratic transition, but it is likely to generate
too weak an instrument (too few successful assassinations and too imprecise timing) for
democracy.
2
Athey and Imbens (2006) generalize the difference in difference methodology along
related but different lines. Their non-parametric approach also allows for hetereogeneous
treatment effects, but relies on estimating the entire distribution of counterfactual out-

2

Heckman et al. (1997) evaluate similar non-experimental estimators, using
data from a large-scale US social experiment with job training. Blundell
et al. (2004) apply a combination of matching and difference in differences
when estimating the effect of UK job training programs. To our knowledge,
the present paper is the first to apply matching cum difference-in-difference
methods in a macroeconomic context.3 The macro setting raises specific issues that are not present is standard microeconomic applications, such as a
relatively small sample and different treatment (reform) dates for different
observations.
Our empirical findings suggest that empirically relevant heterogeneities
are indeed present across countries, meaning that the flexibility allowed by
semi-paramatric methods is important. We show that transitions from autocracy to democracy are associated with an average growth acceleration of
about 1 percentage point, producing a gain in per capita income of about
13 percent by the end of the sample period. This 1 percent growth effect is
imprecisely estimated, but larger than most of the estimates in the literature
using straight difference-in-difference methods (see the references mentioned
above). The effect of transitions in the opposite direction is even larger: a
relapse from democracy to autocracy slows down growth by almost 2 percentage points on average, which implies an income fall of about 45 percent
at the end of the sample. These effects are much larger than those commonly
found in the literature.
The paper proceeds to discuss the main econometric issues (Section 2),
describe the data (Section 3), and provide a benchmark with the straight
difference-in-difference approach (Section 4). We then discuss some preliminaries in the matching procedure (Section 5), present the paper’s main results
on how democracy affects growth (Section 6), and conclude (Section 7).

2

Econometric Methods

This section introduces a number of econometric issues and methods to deal
with them. Most of it can probably be skimmed through by econometrically
proficient readers who are familiar with the methods used in the treatment
comes for the treatment group in the absence of treatment.
3
Persson and Tabellini (2003) apply propensity-score methods to evaluate the effect of
alternative constitutional features, but they compare a cross section of countries and do
not exploit temporal variation in the data

3

literature.
Our goal is to estimate the average causal effect of becoming a democracy
on economic growth. To simplify the argument, we assume throughout the
section that we have access to a sample consisting of data from only two
types of countries: “treated” countries that experience a single transition from
autocracy into democracy, and “control” countries that remain autocracies
throughout the sample period.4 For each country in this sample, we observe
economic growth in country i and year t, yi,t , a dummy variable equal to one
under democracy, Di,t , and a vector of covariates, xi,t .

2.1

Difference in difference estimates

Several recent papers (see the Introduction) have estimated the average effect
of democracy on growth from a panel regression like:
yi,t = φDi,t + ρxi,t + αi + θt + εi,t ,

(1)

where αi and θ t are country and year fixed effects. This specification seeks to
estimate the parameter φ by difference in differences, by comparing average
economic growth after the democratic transition minus growth before the
transition in the treated countries to the change in economic growth in the
control countries over the same period.
This estimation method allows for any correlation between the democracy
dummy Di,t and time-invariant country features — e.g., that fast-growing
countries are more likely to become democratic than slow-growing ones —
since the growth effects of these country features are all captured by the
country fixed effect, αi . Nevertheless, identification rests on an important
assumption: the selection of countries into democracy have to be uncorrelated
with the country-specific and time-varying shock to growth, εi,t .
This in turn corresponds to two restrictive assumptions. First, absent
any regime change, average growth in treated countries should (counterfactually) have been the same as in control countries (conditional on xi,t ). This
would fail, e.g., if democratic transitions are enacted by far-sighted leaders,
who have a lasting impact on growth irrespective of the regime change, or if
4

For the time being, we thus neglect transitions from democracy to autocracy, and
exclude from the sample countries that always remained democracies. We also neglect
multiple transitions, and only consider countries that had a single transition from autocracy into democracy. These complications are all dealt with in later sections.

4

political transitions coincide with other events — such as the economic transitions towards free markets in former socialist countries — that may have a
lasting impact on economic growth.
To make this assumption more credible, the existing literature typically
attempts to increase the similarity between treated and controls by including
in the vector xi,t several covariates, such as initial per capita income, indicators for war years or socialist transitions, indicator variables for continental
location (Africa, Asia and Latin America) interacted with year dummy variables, and so on.
The second restrictive assumption is that heterogeneity in the effects of
democracy should not be systematically related to the occurrence of democracy itself. Circumstances of regime changes differ widely across time and
space, as do the types of political institutions adopted or abandoned. Thus,
the effects of a crude democracy indicator are likely to differ across observations. If we neglect this heterogeneity and estimate the average effect of
democracy as in (1), the unexplained component of growth, εi,t , also includes
the term (φi,t − φ)Di,t , where φi,t is the country-specific effect of democracy
in country i and year t. Identification of φ now requires heterogeneity in the
effect of reforms to be uncorrelated with their occurrence. This assumption
fails, e.g., if countries self-select into democracy based on the growth effect
of regime changes (e.g., Di,t = 1 more likely when φi,t > φ).
To cope with this assumption, the dummy variable for democratic transitions is sometimes interacted with other observable features of democratic
transitions (such as the nature of democratic institutions that are acquired,
or the sequence of economic and political reforms). But this strategy quickly
runs into the curse of dimensionality problem. The possible interactions and
covariates are simply too many, relative to the limited number of democratic
transitions.

2.2

Matching estimates based on the propensity score

To circumvent the curse of dimensionality, the recent microeconometric literature has often come to rely on semi-parametric methods based on the
propensity score. Typically these applications concern a cross section of individuals. But a few recent papers have combined difference-in-difference
estimates with matching based on the propensity score, exploiting repeated
observations for the same individuals. Abadie (2005) discusses an estimation
strategy that uses the propensity score to carry out estimates in the spirit
5

of difference in differences, while Heckman et al. (1997) and Blundell et al.
(2004) provide theory as well as microeconometric applications.
The general idea is very intuitive. Performance — growth, in our case —
before and after the treatment date is observed for the treated group and
the control group. Conventional difference in differences compare the average change in performance for all the treated with the average change in
performance for all the controls, on the two sides of a common treatment
date. The matching approach instead compares each treated individual with
a set of “similar” controls, and a difference-in-difference estimate is computed with reference only to the matched controls. This way, controls similar to the treated are given large weight, and controls very dissimilar to any
treated observation may even be deemed entirely non-comparable, i.e., they
are left unmatched and given zero weight. Similarity is measured by the onedimensional metric of the propensity score, i.e., the probability of receiving
treatment conditional on a set of covariates. Basically, the effect of treatment
is estimated by comparing groups of individuals with similar distributions of
those covariates that enter the estimation of the propensity score.
The microeconometric papers mentioned above discuss the econometric
theory behind this methodology, and we refer the reader to these papers for
more details. In this section, we confine ourselves to stating and explaining
the main identifying assumptions. For this purpose, we need some notation
adapted from Persson and Tabellini (2003) and Abadie (2005).
2.2.1

The parameter of interest

As above, let D be an indicator for democracy (D = 1) or autocracy (D = 0).
Time is indexed by k, which corresponds to (an average over) years before
D
(k = 0) and after (k = 1) the year of democratic transition. Let Yi,k
denote
potential growth of country i in period k and democratic state D (we use the
symbol Y, in distinction from y in the previous subsection, since growth in
period k is now an average of yearly growth rates during k). The individual
1
0
treatment effect of democracy in country i and period k is then Yi,k
− Yi,k
,
the effect on growth in period 1 if this country switched from autocracy to
democracy.
Consider a subset of the treated countries (i.e., countries with Di,1 =
1) with similar (time-invariant) characteristics, Xi . The expected effect of
democracy on growth in each of these countries is:
1
0
α(Xi ) = E(Yi,1
− Yi,1
| Xi, Di,1 = 1) , .

6

where the expectations operator E refers to unobserved determinants of
growth in democracy. Our parameter of interest is the average effect of
treatment on the treated, namely :


1
0
α = Eα(Xi ) = E E(Yi,1
− Yi,1
| Xi, Di,1 = 1) ,
(2)
where the outer expectations operator E is taken over X in the part of
the sample treated with democracy. This parameter measures the effect
of democracy on growth in the countries that actually experienced the transition, relative to what would have happened had they remained autocracies.
In other words, the relevant counterfactual is remaining under autocracy.
Without additional assumptions, the parameter α does not say anything
about what growth would have been if the countries that remained autocracies had instead become democracy (this would be a statement about the
effect of treatment on the non-treated).
The fundamental problem of causal inference is that potential growth in
the counterfactual regime is not observed. We only observe actual growth in
one of the two possible political regimes. In particular, in period 1 we only
1
in the countries that actually became democratic (the treated)
observe Yi,1
0
and Yi,1 in the countries that actually had no transition (the controls). But
0
the term Yi,1
(counterfactual growth in a democracy if it had remained an
autocracy) on the right-hand side of (2) is not observed.
2.2.2

Selection on observables

0
To come up with an observable counterpart to Yi,1
, we can make the key
identifying assumption (cf. Abadie, 2005):
0
0
0
0
E(Yi,1
− Yi,0
| Xi , Di,1 = 1) = E(Yi,1
− Yi,0
| Xi , Di,1 = 0) .

(3)

The right- hand side of (3) is the (observed) average change in growth between periods 1 and 0 in countries that remained autocracies throughout
(the control group). The left-hand side is the (unobserved) average change
in growth that the countries which actually became democracies (the treated
group) would have experienced had they remained autocratic. Thus, the
critical assumption is that, conditional on X, without their democratic transition the treated countries would have followed a growth path parallel to that
of the control countries. This is the analog of the selection on observables

7

assumption in a simple cross-sectional context5 .
Decomposing the expectations operators on both sides of (3), all the
0
terms are observable except for one: E(Yi,1
| Xi, , Di,1 = 1). Thus, assumption (3) enables us to obtain an observable counterpart of this unobserved
counterfactual, that can be used to estimate the parameter of interest in (2).
Intuitively, by conditioning on a large enough set of covariates X, we can
replace unobserved period 1 growth under autocracy in the treated countries
0
| Xi, , Di,1 = 1)) with observed growth under autocracy over
(the term E(Yi,1
0
the same period (the term E(Yi,1
| Xi , Di,1 = 0)) in those control countries
that have similar covariates Xi .
Importantly, this argument does not impose any functional-form assumption on how democracy impacts on growth. Because the relevant conditional
expectations in (3) can all be computed non-parametrically, we can estimate our the parameter of interest, α, non-parametrically just by comparing
(weighted) mean outcomes. This is the central difference between matching
and linear regression. Matching allows us to draw inferences from local comparisons only: as we compare countries with similar values of X, we do not
rely on counterfactuals very different from the observed factuals. However,
this desirable property requires that any unobserved heterogeneity in the response of growth to democracy be non-systematic across the two groups of
countries.
2.2.3

Propensity score and common support

In practice, however, the dimension of X is too large for direct matching
to be viable. This is where the propensity score methodology is helpful. An
important result due to Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) implies that comparing
countries with the same probability of democratic transition (treatment) given
the controls X, is equivalent to comparing countries with similar values of
X.
Specifically, let
pi = p(Xi ) = Prob [Di,1 = 1|Xi ]
be the conditional probability that country i has a democratic transition
during our sample period, given the vector of controls, Xi . This conditional
5

As Abadie (2005) notes, equation (3) coincides with the so called selection on observables assumption used in cross sectional studies if in addition we also have E(Yi00 | Xi ,
Di1 = 1) = E(Yi10 | Xi , Di1 = 0).

8

probability is also called the propensity score. Assume that the propensity
score is bounded away from 0 and 1 for all countries, an assumption known
as the so-called common-support condition:
0 < p(Xi ) < 1, all Xi .

(4)

Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) show that, in a cross sectional setting, conditioning on the vector X is equivalent to conditioning on the scalar p. If (4)
is satisfied in our two-period context, (3) implies:
0
0
0
0
E(Yi,1
− Yi,0
| p(Xi ), Di,1 = 1) = E(Yi,1
− Yi,0
| p(Xi ), Di,1 = 0) ,

(5)

For countries with similar propensity scores, realized transitions to democracy are random and uncorrelated with growth. We can thus replace the
unobserved counterfactual on the left-hand side of (5) with the observed
factual on the right-hand side of (5).
2.2.4

What do we gain?

The main advantage of this semi-parametric (semi-parametric because we
have to estimate the propensity score) approach over the parametric differencein-difference approach is that it relaxes linearity. We can thus allow for any
heterogeneity in the effect of democracy, as long as it is related to the observable covariates X. Suppose e.g., that richer countries are more likely to
become democracies, and that democracy also works better in richer countries. Then the linear estimates corresponding to equation (1) would be
biased unless we also included an interaction term between income and the
democracy dummy. This bias is removed if income is included among the
covariates X used to estimate the propensity score. Of course, unobserved
heterogeneity remains a problem. Any omitted variable uncorrelated with X
that influences both the adoption and the effects of democracy would violate
selection on observables. But since — as a practical matter — economic, social and cultural characteristics tend to cluster a great deal across countries,
unobserved differences among countries may well correlate with observed differences.
A second advantage of this approach is that it allows a simple diagnostic
to check that the distribution of observed covariates is balanced between the
countries in the treated group and the control group. If the distribution of
a specific covariate is very unbalanced in the two samples of countries, it is
9

important to check if the results are robust to including this variable when
estimating the propensity score. Intuitively, if the treated and controls have
similar covariates the linearity assumption entailed in conventional difference
in difference is just a convenient local approximation. If they do not, the
dissimilarity may bias the results.
Of course, there is no free lunch. The main cost of a semi-parametric
approach is that the estimates are less efficient than parametric estimates
(under the null of the assumed functional form). Given the small samples in
macroeconomics relative to standard micro applications, the loss in precision
is non-neglible.
2.2.5

Implementation in practice

Our actual sample — unlike the stylized example and typical microeconomic
applications like training programs — has different transition dates Ti , for different observations i = 1, ..., I. Of course, our estimation procedure will have
to cope with this additional complication. Also different from the example
in this section, the actual sample includes transitions from democracy to autocracy. This presents no conceptual problems (see further below), however,
so we can continue to think about treatment as a transition into democracy.
In practice, we implement the estimation in five steps.
(i) We begin by defining a group of treated and a group of control countries and estimate the probability of treatment. This is done in a cross section
by means of a logit regression, where the dependent variable equals one for
all countries making a transition at some time within the sample and zero
for those that don’t, and where all the covariates are time invariant. The
estimated probability of a transition to democracy is our measure of the
propensity score.
(ii) Next, for each country treated with democracy, we compute average
growth before and after the date of transition, Ti . The difference between
these two averaged growth rates is denoted by gi . Thus, we measure
gi =

1 
1 
y
−
yi,t ,
i,t
Nia t>T
Nib t<T
i

(6)

i

where yi,t is the yearly growth in period t and Nib and Nia are the number
of years before and after and the transition date in country i. (The next
section describes how we deal with multiple transitions, so for now think
10

about the procedure as applying to a set up where each country has at most
one transition in the sample period.)
(iii) Subsequently, we match each treated country with some of the controls. For each of these controls, we compute the difference in average growth
over the periods before and after the transition date in the treated country
they are matched with: the expression is thus identical to (6), except that
yi,t is replaced with yj,t . We denote the resulting variable as gij where the j
superscript refers to a certain country j among the controls and i refers to
the treated country. In doing this, we make sure that the years over which
gi and gij are computed exactly coincide.
(iv) For each treated country, we then compute the weighted average of
the non-parametric difference-in-difference estimator α̂i :

α̂i = gi −
wi,j gij ,
(7)
j


where wi,j ≥ 0, j wi,j = 1, are weights based on the propensity score.
These weights differ depending on the detailed properties of the matching
estimators and some controls may receive zero weight if they are very different
from the treated country with which they are matched. The parameter α̂i
is our estimate of the effect of democratic transition on growth in country i.
Intuitively, it measures how growth in country i changed after the transition,
relative to a weighted average of the (similar) controls it is matched with.
(v) Finally, we compute the average estimated effect of transitions to
democracy in the group of treated countries, α̂, as a simple average of the
individual α̂i estimates, namely:
α̂ =

1
α̂i
I i

(8)

where I denotes the number of treated countries in our sample. This is our
estimator of the average effect of democracy on growth (the average effect of
treatment on the treated).
Clearly, this procedure may use each control country several times, as the
same controls may be matched with several treated countries and possibly
at different dates. This matters for the computation of the standard error
of our estimators, since it may introduce correlation between gij and gkj —
i.e., between growth in control country j when it is used as a control for
treated countries i and k. Of course, the correlation will be positive and
11

higher the closer are the transition dates of i and k, while the correlation
between gij and gkj might even be negative if the transition dates are far part.
The appendix provides analytic expressions for the standard error of α under
two alternative assumptions: (a) the variables gij and gkj are independent, (b)
the variables gij and gkj are perfectly correlated. While (b) certainly yields
an upper bound, the true standard errors might be lower than under (a) if
negative correlation between gij and gkj is prevalent. When computing the
standard errors, we assume that all treated countries have the same variance,
as do all control countries. We also neglect that the weights are estimated in
a first step (i.e., we treat the propensity score as known). Both assumptions
are standard in the applied literature (see, e.g., Lechner, 2000).6

3

Data and Sample Definitions

Our panel data set includes annual data on economic growth and political
regimes for as many countries as possible over the years 1960-2000. Economic
growth is measured as the yearly growth rate of per-capita income, and the
source is the Penn World Tables. We classify a country as democratic if the
polity2 variable in the Polity IV data set is strictly positive. The threshold
of 0 for polity2 corresponds to a generous definition of democracy, but has
the advantage that many large changes in the polity2 are clustered around
0. This is important, since we want to identify the causal effect of regime
transitions on growth exploiting the time variation in the data. A definition
of democracy based on a higher threshold for polity2 would classify as democratic transitions also very gradual changes in the underlying indicators of
polity2, that are unlikely to be associated with significant changes in political
regimes.7
We also include some other covariates, that will be introduced and defined in context. The resulting panel is unbalanced, partly because of data
availability and partly because countries do not enter the data set until their
year of independence.
6

An alternative — to be pursued in future work — would be to compute the standard
errors by bootstrapping. Doing so would take into account that the weights wi,j are
uncertain, since they are based on (logit) estimates of the propensity score.
7
An alternative would be to use a classification of political regimes, based on a finer
subdivision of the 21-step scale for the polity 2 score. This would turn the analysis into
the domain off multiple tretments (see e.g., Lechner, 2001)

12

From this panel data set we construct two partly overlapping samples,
which are used to study transitions to democracy and autocracy, respectively. When studying transitions into democracy, we include as control
countries those that remain autocracies throughout the sample period, while
the treated countries are those that experience at least one transition from
autocracy to democracy. We call this sample the “democratic transitions”
sample. When studying transitions into autocracy, the control countries remain democracies throughout, while the treated countries have at least one
transition from democracy to autocracy. This is called the “autocratic transitions” sample.
In selecting these two samples, we had to deal with a number of complications. A few countries experience transitions close to the beginning or the
end of the period for which growth data are available. Since we expect it
to take some time for transitions to influence growth, we discard the transitions that take place in the last three years of the available sample. We also
discard reforms in the first three years of the panel to avoid a poor estimate
of growth before the transition. Specifically, we set to missing the observations of growth after (or before) a transition, if the transition is not followed
(or preceded) by at least three years of growth data. The country is then
considered a control, as if the transition did not occur.
In a few countries, especially in Africa and Latin America, we observe
transitions that only last for a few years. We discard those lasting (strictly)
less than four years, to avoid hinging the estimation on very short growth
episodes. As in the beginning or end of sample transitions, we set growth to
missing during the years of these short transitions, and classify the country
as if the transition did not occur.
In another few countries, we observe more than one long spell of democracy or autocracy. Chile, for instance, starts out as a democracy in 1960,
it becomes an autocracy (the Pinochet regime) in 1973, and it returns to
democracy in 1989. This means that Chile is a treated country both when
treatment is defined as transition to democracy, and when treatment is defined as transition to autocracy. Therefore, Chile is included as treated in the
democratic transitions sample for the years from 1973 (when it first becomes
an autocracy) until the end of the sample. It is also included as treated in autocratic transitions sample from 1960 until 1988 (the last year of autocracy).
We apply similar sample selection rules to other countries that experience
more than one spell in the same regime lasting more than three years.
When transitions are defined in this way, most countries have no more
13

than a single transition in one or both directions. Guatemala, Uganda and
Nigeria, however, have two transitions in the same direction. We deal with
the transitions in these three countries in two different ways: they are either
excluded because the propensity score is outside of the common support range
(see below), or included with the transitions in the same direction assumed
independent (as if each transition applied to a different treated country).

4

Difference-in-Difference Estimates

To provide a benchmark, Table 1 presents results from traditional differencein-difference estimation with yearly data. These results correspond to estimates of equation (1) in various samples. Besides country and year fixed
effects, the covariates xi,t , include per-capita income lagged once, year fixed
effects interacted with indicators for Latin America and for Africa, indicators
for war years and lagged war years, and an indicator for formerly socialist
countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the Asian provinces of the
former Soviet Union after 1989. This specification is similar to those in the
existing literature (e.g., Giavazzi and Tabellini 2005, or Persson and Tabellini
2006).
Column 1 imposes the assumption that the effect on growth of a transition into democracy is the same as the negative of the effect on growth of
as transition into autocracy. The effect of democracy is thus estimated in
the full sample. As in the earlier papers above, we find that the effect of democratic transitions is positive, inducing a growth acceleration of about 0.5
percentage points. Although not statistically significant, the point estimate
is not a trivial effect from an economic point of view. The long-run effect is
dampened by the relatively high estimated convergence rate, however. With
a convergence rate of 5.5 percent per year, a growth acceleration of about
0.5 percentage points implies a long-run positive effect of democracy on the

14

level of per capita income of almost 10 percent.8
The remainder of Table 1 does not impose the symmetry constraint, but
estimates the effect of democracy separately from transitions to democracy
(columns 2 and 3) and transitions to autocracy (columns 4 and 5), allowing
these two effects to differ. Note that when estimating the effect of autocratic transitions in columns 4 and 5, we still display the effect of being a
democracy, computed as the negative growth effect of transitions away from
democracy. In column 2, we let the sample include only the countries that became democracies plus the countries that remained autocracies throughout.9
In column 3, we add to the sample those countries that remained democratic
throughout. Analogously, the sample behind column 4 includes the countries that became autocracies and the more restricted set of countries that
remained democratic throughout, while the sample behind column 5 includes
both permanent democracies and autocracies. All the estimates in Table 1
convey a similar message: democracy induces a positive, but small and generally insignificant, growth acceleration. The positive effect of transitions
to democracy appears larger in absolute value (and in one case statistically
significant) than the negative effect of transitions to autocracy.

5

Matching preliminaries

We now turn to the main contribution of the paper, namely the matching approach to estimating the growth effects of democracy. Before getting to the
actual estimates, however, we need to go through a number of preliminary
8
The coefficient φ on the democracy indicator D measures the impact effect on growth
yt − yt−1 . Because lagged (log) income yt−1 enter on the RHS of the estimated equation
with coefficient β, the long-run effect on income can be computed as

φ
dy
=− .
dD
β
 = 0.5 and β
 = −0.055, we obtain a long-run income gain of 0.09. i.e.,
With estimates φ
about 9 percent. Since the convergence rate β is likely overestimated in yearly data (due
to cyclical fluctuations in income), this is almost surely an underestimate of the long-run
income gain.
9
This is, of course, the "democratic transition" sample defned in Section 3. In this
section, we avoid the term control countries, however, since in a difference in difference
estimation with different treatment dates, all countries that do not have a reform in period
t effectively serve as controls for those countrie that do have a reform in t.

15

steps including some diagnostics. This section is devoted to these preliminaries.

5.1

Estimating the propensity score

As explained in Section 2, the first step to implement a matching cum
difference-in-difference estimator is to estimate the propensity score, the
probability of treatment, in a cross section of countries (i.e., ignoring the
time dimension). We do this separately for the events of becoming a democracy and becoming an autocracy, because we want to allow the effect of the
covariates on the probability of transition to be different for the two events.
In the democratic transitions sample, the dependent variable is thus zero
for the countries that remained autocracies, and one for the countries that
experienced at least one transition towards democracy. In the autocratic
transitions sample, the dependent variable is zero for the countries that remained democracies throughout, and one for the countries that experienced
at least one transition towards autocracy. Thus, the samples are partly overlapping (because some countries like Chile appear in both samples).
We estimate the propensity score with a logit regression. The selection
of the covariates to enter this regression is a crucial decision, that trades
off two opposite concerns. On the one hand, the selection on observables
assumption would suggest to include many covariates to ensure that the
propensity score is indeed a balancing function. On the other hand, we don’t
want to predict treatment too well, so as not to violate the common-support
assumption. Here is an instance, where the macroeconomic setting bites.
Most microeconomic application concentrate on the first concern, because
the sample is large enough that even rare events — like an actual transition for
an observation with a low propensity score — would still occur in large enough
numbers to allow meaningful comparisons (and small standard errors). But in
our context we also have to worry about not excluding too many countries
whose state is predicted too well. Thus, we include a limited number of
variables that are likely to influence both the occurrence of regime transitions
and its economic effects, and we check the robustness of the results to two
alternative specifications. The set of covariates is the same in the democratic
and autocratic transitions samples.
To capture differences in economic development, we include real per
capita income at the beginning of the sample. As explained above, different
countries enter our samples at different dates, depending on political history
16

or data availability. To increase comparability, we measure each country’s
per capita income in the first year it enters a given sample relative to US
per capita income in the same year. We call the resulting variable income
relative to the US.
The countries in these samples have very different political histories.
Some of them have a long history with entry into democracy in the distant
past, or a prolonged autocratic spell. Others became independent some time
during the sample period or few years before. To mitigate this important
source of heterogeneity, we condition on what Persson and Tabellini (2006b)
call domestic democratic capital, which measures the incidence of democracy
in each country since 1800 (or since the year of independence, if later). This
variable is assumed to accumulate in years of democracy, but to depreciate
under autocracy. The depreciation rate is estimated by Persson and Tabellini
(2006b) to fit the hazard rates in a time series regression where the dependent variable is exit from democracy and from autocracy. This variable is
re-scaled to lie between 0 and 1, where a 1 corresponds to the steady state
value of a country never exiting from democracy. In this paper, we measure domestic democratic capital in the first year when a country enters the
sample.
Transitions to democracy or autocracy often occur in waves that include
several neighboring countries. To capture this phenomenon, we include a
variable measuring the geography of democracy around 1993 (the first year in
our sample, when we have data for all formerly socialist countries in Central
and Eastern Europe). This variable, called foreign democratic capital, is a
slight variation on a similar measure used in Persson and Tabellini (2006b).
For each country, it is defined as the incidence of democracy in 1993 among
all other countries within a 1750 km radius (the radius refers to the distance
between the capitals). By the definition of a share, this variable too lies
between 0 and 1, where a 1 captures the case where all countries in the
neighborhood are democratic.
Since the sample period varies in length across countries, and since the
probability of a regime transition is higher the longer is the duration of the
relevant time period, we also control for the length of the period during which
we have available data for each country, a variable called length of sample.
This variable is introduced to eliminate the possibility that sample length
covaries systematically with growth performance.
Wars are often destabilizing for political regimes and, of course, they also
hurt economic activity. Thus, we include as a covariate the fraction of war
17

years (including both inter-state and civil wars) over the total period length
for which growth data are available, a variable called war years.
Finally, regime transitions are more likely for countries that start out with
a value of our democracy index, polity2 , closer to the threshold of zero. At the
same time, a high initial value of polity2 might have an independent effect on
the economic consequences of regime changes (for instance because a regime
change might correspond to a more gradual transition). For this reason, we
also consider including the value of polity2 in the first year a country enters
the sample. As we shall see, however, the inclusion of this variable increases
a great deal the predictive power of the logit regressions in the sample of
autocratic transitions. This, in turn, leads to a much smaller set of treated
countries that safely meet the common support condition. Hence, we discuss
results with and without the initial value of polity 2.
The results of the logit regressions are displayed in Table 2. Columns
1 and 2 refer to the democratic transitions sample, with and without the
inclusion of the initial value of polity2. Domestic democratic capital considerably raises the probability of a transition towards democracy, as expected.
Foreign democratic capital has a similar positive effect, but this effect is not
statistically significant. The frequency of wars discourages democratic transitions, an effect that is statistically significant. Income relative to the US
has no effect. Finally, the inclusion of the initial value of polity2 makes no
difference. Overall the pseudo R2 (the improvement in the likelihood associated with the inclusion of the covariates in addition to a constant) is 0.17,
suggesting that these covariates leave a lot of residual variation unexplained.
Columns 3 and 4 refer to the autocratic transitions sample, with and
without the initial value polity2. Here income relative to the US has strong
predictive power, with richer countries less likely to relapse into autocracy,
as expected.10 Foreign democratic capital also helps to predict transitions to
autocracy, although here the sign is opposite of what one would expect. As
anticipated, the inclusion of the initial value of polity2 makes a big difference: the variable is highly significant and with the expected sign, and when
it is included the Pseudo R2 jumps from 0.43 to 0.61. Overall, these covariates help to predict transitions from democracy to autocracy much better
than transitions in the opposite direction. As already discussed, this is a
10
The results on income are consistent with the results in the annual hazard rates estimated by Persson and Tabellini (2006b), who find that income does not explain transitions
out of autocracy, but does slow down transitions out of democracy.

18

mixed blessing, since it makes the selection on observables assumption more
credible, but at the same time strains the credibility of the common support
assumption.
Figure 1 depicts the density of the estimated propensity score from columns
1 and 3 respectively of Table 2 (i.e., the specification that does not include
the initial value of polity2 ), for both treated and control countries. Observations outside of the common support we impose are dropped and not
displayed in Figure 1 (see the discussion in the next subsection). As one
would expect from the estimation results, the distribution of the propensity
scores for the treated and the controls are more similar in the sample of
democratic transitions, where treatment is predicted less well, than in the
sample of autocratic transitions. Both samples display considerable overlap
between treated and control countries, however. Overall, the figure suggests
that matching should work well, at least if the local comparisons are made
within relatively broad regions of the propensity score (a coarse balancing
function), so as to guarantee overlap .

5.2

Countries inside the common support

The first column of Tables 3a and 3b report the full list of countries in each
of the two samples. These are sorted in ascending order of the estimated
propensity scores, which are displayed in the third column. To facilitate
reading the table, the name of treated countries are indicated by boldface
font, whereas the name of control countries are not. The same information is
given in column 2: the variable treated in the second column equals 0 for the
countries in the control group and 1 for the countries in the treated group.
The last two columns of each table report the change in polity2 in the year
of the regime transition, and the year of that (those) transition(s).
It is important to verify that the common-support assumption is not obviously violated, and possibly to drop observations for which the estimated
propensity score is too close to its bounds of 0 and 1. Consider the democratic transitions sample in Table 3a. At the lower bound (the top of the
table), we are comfortably away from 0. The first observation, Yemen, is a
control with an estimated propensity score of 0.17. The third observation,
Iran is the first treated country (according to our generous definition, Iran
became a democracy in 1997), with an estimated propensity score of 0.28.
At the upper end (the bottom of the table), instead, several treated countries
are predicted very well to switch into democracy. There is no firm rule for
19

how to deal with this situation. We choose to drop all treated observations
with a propensity score above 0.9. This has the advantage of not drawing
inferences from Guatemala (the unique country to experience two long spells
of democracy), and gives a fair margin away from unity. Adopting a higher
upper bound and including more countries would not affect the estimates.
But the results are sensitive to a more conservative, lower upper bound, essentially because Haiti (with an estimated propensity score of 0.887) is a
large outlying observation which makes some difference. We comment more
on this below.
Next, consider the autocratic transitions sample in Table 3b, where we
face the opposite problem. The controls (that remained democracies throughout) are predicted very well around 0 and there is little overlap with treated
countries, while at the upper end the lack of overlap is less serious. Here,
we choose to drop all observations with an estimated propensity score below 0.075 and above 0.93. At the upper end the choice is made so that the
Nigeria and Uganda (the only two treated countries with multiple spells of
autocracy) are dropped from the sample. But adopting a higher or lower
threshold would not change the results. At the lower end, one outlying observation matters quite a bit for the results: Belarus, which starts out as
a (weak) democracy, and drops into dictatorship after a few years. Since
the time period where we have data for Belarus is very short, and since the
next treated country is Greece with a much higher propensity score (0.19 vs.
0.07 for Belarus), we choose to be conservative and exclude Belarus from the
common support. At the low end, we thus start the sample with Austria, a
control with a propensity score slightly above 0.075. Adopting an even more
conservative, higher bound for the common support does not affect the final
results.

5.3

The balancing property

To what extent is the propensity score a balancing function, i.e., how well
does our matching on the propensity score balance the distribution of relevant
covariates across treated and control countries? The answer to this question
is important, because this is where the value added of this methodology lies.
Tables 4a and 4b provide the answer for our two samples of democratic and
autocratic transitions.
Each double row in the table refers to a specific covariate. We consider
all covariates included in the logit regressions of Table 2 (including the ini20

tial value of polity2 ), plus three dummy variables for continental location
(in Latin America, or Asia, or Africa). The upper single row (labeled unmatched) for each variable displays the simple average of that variable in
the treated groups and control group, respectively, plus the tstatistic and
the p-value for the null hypothesis that these averages are the same in the
treated and control group. This first set of statistics is calculated over the
full set of countries listed in Tables 3a and 3b, respectively, before imposing
the common support assumption. Clearly, the null of equal means is rejected
for many variables in either or both of the tables. Thus, treated and control
countries differ systematically with regard to economic development (relative
income), political history (domestic democratic capital ), and -political geography (foreign democratic capital). Initial democracy as measured by polity2
is also very different in the treated and control groups in the "autocratic
transitions" sample. Finally, the treated and control groups also seem to be
drawn from different continents (in particular with regard to Latin America
and Africa).
The lower single row for each variable (labeled matched) present a similar set of statistics calculated in a different way. First, we impose the common support assumption for both the treated and the control countries, as
discussed above. We then calculated the means for the treated countries.
Clearly, this changes their means for the treated group. Second, we display
the matched means for the control countries, namely a weighted average
where each control country receives a weight based on the propensity score,
corresponding to the matching procedure described in the next subsection
(see also equations (7) and (8) above).
Clearly, matching equalizes the means of all covariates used in the logit
regression. Interestingly, it also reduces the difference in means of some of
the other covariates, Africa and Latin America in Table 4b, Latin America
in Table 4a. This gives some credence to our earlier expectation that observed (included among the covariates) and unobserved (not included among
the covariates) country characteristics may be correlated. In the autocratic
transitions sample, however, the variable initial value of polity2 retains a very
different distribution in the treated and control groups, which suggests the
importance of also conditioning on the initial value of polity2 in this sample.
Overall, and with the caveat just mentioned on initial value of polity2,
matching seems indispensable to achieve a balanced distribution of covariates
between treated and control countries — the so-called balancing property.
Without matching based on the propensity scores, the two samples are quite
21

different. This means that the assumption of linearity can not be treated as
an innocuous linear approximation. Various interaction effects may thus bias
the inference drawn from traditional difference-in-difference regressions.

6

Matching Estimates

With the preliminaries of the previous section in hand, we are ready to
estimate the effect of political transitions on the treated countries. This
section is devoted to the estimation results.

6.1

Democratic transitions

We start with transitions towards democracy. To get a benchmark, we start
by reporting linear regression estimates obtained with a two-step procedure
suggested in a recent paper by Bertrand et al. (2004). The purpose of
that procedure is not to address heterogeneity giving bias in the coefficients,
but serial correlation yielding (upward) bias in the standard errors. The
procedure treats the data in a similar way, however, in its averaging the
outcome of interest before and after the treatment. Because they impose
the parametric assumptions of a linear regression, these estimates provide
a useful perspective on the final results from the non-parametric matching
procedure..
Specifically, the Bertrand et al estimates are obtained as follows. In a
first step, growth is regressed against country and year fixed effects in a
sample with yearly data from all countries, treated and controls. Then, the
estimated residuals of the treated countries only are retained and averaged
before and after each country’s transition date. This yields a panel of two
periods with only treated countries. Finally, the averaged residuals in this
panel are regressed against a constant and a dummy variable, which is equal
to 1 in the second period (after the transition) and 0 in the first (before the
transition). The estimated coefficient and standard errors thus correspond
to the difference in difference estimator of the average effect of transition in
the treated countries. As explained by Bertrand et al. (2004), this procedure
removes the serial correlation in the yearly residuals — a potential problem
in the yearly regressions of Table 1.
Column 1 of Table 5 implements this procedure for all countries in the
democratic transitions sample, where the control countries are those that re22

mained autocracies throughout and the treated are those that made a transition to democracies. The estimated coefficient, although not statistically
significant, implies an average growth acceleration of 0.6 percentage points
after transitions to democracy. Despite the different procedure and specification, this estimate is remarkably similar to that reported in Table 1, column 2
(contrary to Table 1, the first step does not include initial income, indicators
for wars, socialist transitions, and continents interacted with years). In the
democratic transitions sample, the average date of reform is in the late 1980s,
with about twelve years of post-transition growth. This implies an average
effect on per capita income at the end of the sample of about 7-8 percent.
This estimate is consistent with the long-run effects on income implied by
Table 1. In column 2 of Table 5, we drop control and treated countries outside of the common support defined in the Section 5 (cf. Table 3a). The
point estimate increases a bit, but remains statistically insignificant.
Columns 3 to 6 of Table 5 present the matching estimates. In columns
3 and 4, the underlying specification of the propensity score does not condition on the initial value of polity2, while in columns 5 and 6 it does. All
estimators are based on Kernel matching, i.e., the weight on specific controls
are declining in their distance in propensity score to the treated country
they are matched with. Columns 3 and 5 weigh control countries with the
Epanechnikov measure, which gives zero weight to all controls whose estimated propensity score differs by more than 0.25 to that of the treated
country. Columns 4 and 6 use a Gaussian kernel, which gives all control
countries weights that approach zero for the more distant controls — see Leuven and Sianesi (2003) for more detailed information. Note that each country
in the control group is used several times in the matching, particularly when
we use the Gaussian kernel. As explained in Section 2, we compute two
sets of standard errors: the lowermost parenthesis below each point estimate
corresponds to an upper bound.
All our estimates form a consistent picture despite the different covariates
and matching procedures. The point estimate of the effect of democratic
transitions ranges between 0.83 and 1.08, an economically relevant effect that
is considerably higher than the linear estimates. Recalling that the effect
refers to average growth during an average post-transition period, which
lasts about twelve years, a growth acceleration of 1 percent implies that
per capita income is 13 percent higher at the end of the sample. Despite
the magnitude of the point estimate, the standard errors are large enough
that the effect remains statistically insignificant. This is not unexpected,
23

given that matching estimators are not likely to be very precise in such a
small sample. To say it differently: we are trading off unbiasedness against
efficiency.
An important property of the matching estimation procedure is that it
directs our attention to heterogenous effects of democratic transitions in different countries, pointing to influential observations and to other relevant
features of the data. Figures 2 and 3 explore these issues.
Figure 2 displays histograms of the distribution of the variables gi (in the
left panel) and gij (in the right panel), defined in Section 2. Intuitively, Figure 2 shows the change in average growth after democratic transitions in the
groups of treated countries (the left panel), and control countries (the right
panel) at comparable dates. The treated countries have observations symmetrically distributed around 0, except for a large positive outlier, namely
Haiti where democracy was associated with a growth acceleration of about 19
percent. There are some outliers in the group of control countries as well, but
these are less influential because the control group is much larger than the
treated group. More importantly, the distribution of the change in growth in
the control countries is clearly tilted to the left and has its mass below zero.
Thus, the positive point estimate in Table 5 is not due to an improvement
in growth in the countries that became democratic (with the exception of
Haiti), but rather due to a deterioration of growth in the control countries
that remained autocracies. In other words, under a causal interpretation, by
becoming democracies the treated countries avoided the growth slump that
hit the permanent autocracies in the control group.
Figure 3 displays the contribution to the average growth effect of treated
countries by their propensity scores. Specifically, the vertical axis plots the
estimator α̂i defined above, namely the estimated effect in treated country i,
while the horizontal axis reports the estimated propensity score in country
i expressed as the average change in growth rate (in percentage points per
year) .11 This figure reveals that there is no systematic relationship between
the individual treatment effect and the estimated probability of treatment.
This is reassuring, because selection into treatment is not systematically
correlated with performance, in accordance with the identifying assumption.
The figure also shows that the growth effects of democratic transitions are
very heterogeneous across countries, with impact effects ranging from −5
to +5 percentage points. Together with the unbalanced distribution of
11

The growth estimates refer to column 3 in Table 5.

24

covariates across treated and control countries (cf. Table 4a and 4b), this
suggests that the linear estimates are quite fragile. As already noted, Haiti
remains an influential outlier even after matching (dropping Haiti from the
sample would reduce the estimated growth effect almost by a half). Finally,
note that much of the heterogeneity in the effect of treatment derives from
less developed countries with rather fragile democratic institutions, such as
Uganda, Guyana, Congo, Romania. This is not unexpected, because growth
is likely to be more volatile in such countries, and autocracies are likely
to be associated with highly corrupt and bad dictatorships. It is reassuring,
however, that we find no systematic relationship between these heterogeneous
effects and some of the observed covariates, such as per-capita income or
the intensity of the treatment (as measured by the change in the polity2
score associated with democratic transitions). This can be guessed already
by a cursory look at the symmetric distribution of countries in Figure 3,
and is confirmed by a more careful analysis where we regress the individual
treatment effect against the observed covariates.

6.2

Autocratic transitions

Finally, we turn to the autocratic transitions sample with countries treated
with a transition to autocracy and a control group of democracies which
are politically stable during the sample period. The estimates are displayed
in Table 6, with columns exactly analogous to those of Table 5. Here, the
estimates captures the effect of transition to autocracy, and thus we expect
them to have a negative sign.
Consider the two-step linear estimates in columns 1 and 2. In this case,
it makes a big difference whether or not we impose the common support.
When all observations are included (column 1), the effect of a relapse into
autocracy is essentially zero (a point estimate of 0.17, with a large standard
error). Dropping all observations outside of the common support (column
2), however, turns the estimate negative and almost statistically significant:
according to the point estimate, a transition to autocracy cuts average yearly
growth by 0.84 percent. As shown in Table 3b, the observations outside the
common support are made up by a large group of very solid democracies, unlikely treated Belarus, and a few African countries at the opposite extreme of
the propensity score. Belarus in particular is a very influential observation,
because its growth rate accelerates dramatically towards the end of the sample when it also turns to autocracy. These countries are indeed very different
25

from most of the other countries in the sample. Thus the estimates in column
2, which restrict attention to countries on the common support, may be the
most reliable.
The remaining columns of Table 6 report the matching estimates, which
all deliver a similar and robust message. A transition into autocracy cuts
average yearly growth by a statistically significant and large amount, which
ranges from −1.6 to −2.4 percentage points. The average year of autocratic
transition is about 1975. This makes the level effects at the end of the
sample very large: a reduction in the post-transition growth rate of, say,
−1.8 percentage points sustained for 25 years corresponds to a 45 percent
loss of per capita income.
The estimated treatment effect is not particularly sensitive to including
the initial value of polity2 among the covariates in the underlying propensity
score. This is reassuring, in light of the unbalanced distribution of this variable across the treated and control groups (cf. Table 4b). However, when
the initial value of polity2 enters the estimated propensity score, the number
of countries on the common support shrinks further, because treatment is
predicted quite well.12 As a result, the estimates become more sensitive to
the weighting procedure (cf. columns 5 and 6).
Figures 4 and 5 illustrate the contribution of individual countries to these
estimates, in the same way as Figures 2 and 3. Figure 4 contrasts with
the democratic transition case in Figure 2, in that the treated group has a
distribution with mass below a zero change in growth, while the distribution
for the group of control counties seems centered at, or slightly above, zero.
Thus, the estimated negative growth effect of autocracy is mainly due to
a growth deccelaration in countries that relapsed into autocracy. Once we
impose the common support, there appears to be no influential outliers in
the group of treated countries.
Figure 5 plots the estimates of the individual treatment effects against
the estimated propensity scores.13 As in Figure 3, there is considerable heterogeneity. But we detect no systematic relation to the estimated propensity
score (nor against other covariates). Moreover, no single treated country
12
When we condition also on the initial value of polity2 we change the range corresponding to the common support to those treated and control countries with an estimated
common support in the range (0.11-0.98). In Table 5, the definition of the common support remains instead the same irrespective of whether we condition or not the initial value
of polity2.
13
The estimates refer to column 3 in Table 6.

26

appears particularly influential. Instead, most countries have a large and
negative effect of treatment, suggesting that the large negative estimate of
the average effect in Table 6 is quite robust.

7

Concluding Remarks

We have estimated the effect of political regime transitions on growth in a
new way, paying close attention to heterogenous effects. Our non-parametric
matching estimates suggest that previous parametric estimates may have seriously underestimated the growth effects of democracy. In particular, we
find an average negative effect on per capita income of leaving democracy as
large as 45 percent over the sample. We also find clear indications that the
discrepancies relative to the parametric results are driven by large differences
in the composition of the treatment and control groups, making linearity a
doubtful assumption. While our matching estimates do allow for heterogeneity in a very general way, it is important to recall that they rest on the
specific assumption of selection on observables.
As far as we know, our paper is the first to combine matching and difference in differences in a macroeconomic context. This seems a promising
avenue for further work on the effects of reform. In the context of political
reforms and growth, it would be natural to investigate the effects of different
types of democracy (or different types of autocracy, as do Besley and Kudamatsu, 2007). But similar estimation techniques could be used to empirically analyze also other types of reform, where we might suspect the effects
to be quite heterogenous. Reforms introducing central bank independence
and/or inflation targeting may be a particular case in point.

8

Appendix

Here we compute the standard error of the estimator α̂ given in (8) — see also
Lechner (2000) for a similar derivation. Combining (8) and (7), we have:
α̂ =

1
1 
gi −
wi,j gij
I i
I i j

(9)

Suppose that all treated countries have the same variance σ 2T = V ar(gi |
i is treated), and that all control countries also have the same variance,
27

σ 2C = V ar(gij | i is treated, j is a control). Assume further that wi,j are
known scalars, and that all gi observations are mutually uncorrelated. If gij
and gkj are also mutually uncorrelated for i = k and all j, then
 
2
σ 2T
i
j (wi,j )
V ar(α̂) =
+ σ 2C
(10)
I
I2
This is our lower bound for the estimated variance of α.
Suppose instead that gij and gkj are perfectly correlated for i = k, but that
j
gi and gil are mutually uncorrelated for j = l (i.e. observations corresponding
to different control countries are mutually uncorrelated, while observations
drawn from the same control are perfectly correlated when that control is
used several times for different treated countries). Then:
 
2
σ 2T
j(
i wi,j )
2
V ar(α̂) =
+ σC
(11)
I
I2
This is our upper bound for the estimated variance of α̂.

28

References
[1] Abadie, A. (2005), “Semiparametric Difference-in-Difference Estimators”, Review of Economic Studies 72, 1-19.
[2] Athey, S. and Imbens, G. (2006), “Identification and Inference in Nonlinear Difference-in-Difference Models”, Econometrica 74, 431-497.
[3] Besley, T. and Kudamatsu, M. (2007), “Making Autocracy Work”,
Chapter in this volume.
[4] Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M, Meghir, C, and Van Reenen, J. (2004),
“Evaluating the Employment Impact of a Mandatory Job Search Assistance Program”, Journal of the European Economic Association 2,
596-606.
[5] Boix, C., and Rosato, S. (2001), “A Complete Data Set of Political
Regimes, 1800-1999”, Mimeo, University of Chicago.
[6] Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. and Mullainathan, S. (2004), “How Much
Should We Trust Difference-in-Differences Estimates?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-275.
[7] Giavazzi, F. and Tabellini, G. (2005), “Economic and Political Liberalizations”, Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 1297-1330.
[8] Glaeser, E., Ponzetto, G., and Shleifer, A. (2005), “Why Does Democracy Need Education?”, Mimeo, Harvard University.
[9] Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., Smith, J., and Todd, P. (1997), “Matching
as an Econometric Evaluation Estimator Evidence from a Job Training
Progam”, Review of Economic Studies 64, 605-654.
[10] Jones, B. and Olken, B. (2005), “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth since World War II”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
120, 835-864.
[11] Jones, B. and Olken, B. (2006), “Hit or Miss? The Effects of Assassinations on Institutions and Wars”, mimeo, Harvard University.

29

[12] Lechner, M. (2001), “ Identification and Estimation of Causal Effects of
Multiple Treatments under the Conditional Independence Assumption,”
in: Lechner, M., Pfeiffer, F. (eds) Econometric Evaluation of Labor Market Policies, Heidelberg: Springer.
[13] Leuven, E. and Sianesi, B. (2003), “PSMATCH”: Stata Module to Perform Full Mahlanobi and Propensity Score Matching,
Common Support Graphing and Covariate Imbalance Testing”,
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html.
[14] Papaioannou, E., and Siourounis, G. (2004), “Democratization and
Growth”, Mimeo, LBS.
[15] Persson, T. (2005), “Forms of Democracy, Policy and Economic Development”, NBER Working Paper, No. 11171.
[16] Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (2003), Economic Effects of Constitutions,
Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
[17] Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (2006a). “Democracy and Development:
The Devil in the Details”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96, 319-324.
[18] Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (2006b). “Democratic Capital: The Nexus
of Political and Economic Change”, NBER Working Paper, No. 12175.
[19] Rodrik, D. and Wacziarg, R. (2005), “Do Democratic Transitions Produce Bad Economic Outcomes?”, American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings 95, 50-56.
[20] Rosenbaum, P. and Rubin, D. (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects”, Biometrika 70,
41-55.

30

Figure 1 Estimated propensity scores

Treated with Democracy

.2

.4

.6
Propensity Score
Untreated

Treated with Autocracy

.8
Treated

Note: The estimates correspond to columns 1 and 3 respectively of Table 2

1

0

.2

.4
.6
Propensity Score
Untreated

.8
Treated

1

Figure 2 Change in growth after transition to democracy

Change in average growth in the Treated countries

0

0

.05

.05

Density

Density
.1

.1

.15

.2

.15

Change in average growth in the Control countries

-10

0

10
growth_diff

20

-20

-10

0

10
growth_diff

20

30

Note: The horizontal axis in each histogram plots the difference between growth after and before reform dates (expressed in percentage points per year)

Figure 3 Effect of democratic transitions in each treated country

20

Effect of Democracy on Growth

Effect of Democracy
0
5
10

15

Haiti

Ugand a

-5

Iran

Guyana

Mali Malawi
Mozambique
BeninPoland
El Salvador
Nepal
Ethiopia
Thailand
Niger
Madaga
Dominic
an Rep
Bangladesh
Nig
eria sc ar Le
sotho Philippines
Ghana
Guinea-Bissau
Zambia
Panama
Cyprus
Sou th Korea
Nicaragua
Mexic o
Taiwan
Pakistan
Hungary
lic
Com oros Central African Repub
Para guay
Portugal
Con go

.2

Romania

.4
.6
.8
Probability of Becom ing Dem ocracy

Note: The vertical axis measures the yearly growth effect of democracy in percentage points. Estimates refer to column 3 in Table 5.

1

Figure 4 Change in growth after becoming autocracy

Change in average growth in the Control countries

0

0

.05

.05

.1

Density
.1

Density
.15

.2

.15

.25

.2

Change in average growth in the Treated countries

-8

-6

-4
growth_diff

-2

0

-10

-5

0

5

growth_diff

Note: The horizontal axis in each histogram plots the difference between growth after and before reform dates (expressed in percentage points per year)

Figure 5 Effect of autocratic transitions in each treated country

E ffect of A utocracy on G rowth
2

U ruguay
P akistan
Chile

0

Gambia

Effect of Autocracy
-4
-2

Armenia

Peru
Zim babw
e

Gu
yana
K
enya

P an
am a
Z ambia
C on go

-6

Greece

Philippines
S outh K orea
Guatema la Br azil

-8

Sierra Leo ne

0

.2

.4
.6
P ro bab ility o f B ecom ing A utoc rac y

.8

Note: The vertical axis measures the yearly growth effect of democracy in percentage points. Estimates refer to column 3 in Table 6.

1

Table 1 Democracy and growth: difference in difference estimates on yearly data
(1)

(2)

(3)
Growth

(4)

(5)

Democracy

0.48
(0.34)

0.58
(0.54)

0.73
(0.42)*

0.26
(0.65)

0.35
(0.63)

Lagged income

- 5.45
(0.62)***

- 6.20
(0.81)***

- 5.38
(0.65)***

- 5.04
(0.97)***

- 6.06
(0.93)***

Treatment

Control group

Observations
N. countries
Adj. R-sq.

Transition to
democracy and
autocracy
Permanent
autocracy or
democracy

Transition to
democracy

Transition to
democracy

Transition to
autocracy

Transition to
autocracy

Permanent
autocracy

Permanent
autocracy or
democracy

Permanent
democracy

Permanent
autocracy or
democracy

4323
138
0.08

2554
76
0.08

4000
123
0.08

1985
70
0.13

2924
97
0.08

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Other Covariates: country and year fixed effects; year fixed effects interacted with indicators for Latin America and for Africa, indicators for war years and
lagged war years, and an indicator for formerly socialist countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the Asian provinces of the former Soviet Union after
1989.

Table 2 Estimates of the propensity score
(1)
(2)
Democratic transition

(3)

(4)
Autocratic transition

Length of sample

2.40
(1.97)

2.52
(1.95)

2.63
(1.50)*

4.08
(2.20)*

Income relative to the US

- 0.002
(0.005)

- 0.003
(0.005)

- 0.03
(0.01)***

- 0.02
(0.01)**

War years

- 8.35
(4.71)*

-8.14
(4.84)*

- 3.69
(5.58)

- 10.33
(7.13)

Domestic democratic capital

8.73
(4.25)**

8.82
(4.20)**

0.65
(2.29)

-0.35
(2.05)

Foreign democratic capital

1.73
(1.21)

1.90
(1.24)

3.26
(1.26)***

2.42
(1.31)*

Initial value of polity2

Observations
Pseudo R-sq

0.04
(0.06)
77
0.17

77
0.17

-0.89
(0.22)***
70
0.43

70
0.61

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Relative income, domestic democratic capital, initial value of polity2 are measured in first year of sample, foreign democratic capital is measured in 1993.

Table 3a Transitions from autocracy to democracy
Country

Yemen
Angola
Iran
Chad
Mozambique
Comoros
Vietnam
Uganda
El Salvador
Sierra Leone
Equatorial Guin.
Guinea-Bissau
Zaire
Tanzania
Morocco
Central African Republic
Rwanda
Mauritania
Algeria
Guinea
Nicaragua
Burundi
Thailand
Syria
Niger
Bangladesh
Senegal
Gabon
Ivory Coast
Togo
Benin
Congo
Mali
Cameroon
Ghana
Jordan
Nigeria
Madagascar
Burkina Faso
Poland

Treated

Propensity
score

Change in
polity2

0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1

.1712141
.1947455
.2785125
.3203447
.3398073
.354881
.3581062
.3897252
.4127302
.4226772
.424049
.4358898
.4407421
.4520402
.4527073
.4552693
.4708738
.4757592
.4805619
.4810042
.4910639
.4922749
.5017168
.5023594
.5082768
.5125053
.5249349
.537788
.5521293
.5554183
.555422
.5571044
.5590481
.5675696
.5689386
.5769697
.5864162
.594099
.5977144
.5982632

.
.
9
.
12
11
.
10
2
.
.
11
.
.
.
12
.
.
.
.
7
.
4
.
8
11
.
.
.
.
6
6
7
.
3
.
7
8
.
11

Date of
reform

1997
1994
1990
1980
1982

1994
2000
1993

1990
1978
1991
1991
2000
2000
1991
1992
1992
1996
1979
1991
1977
1989

Country
Hungary
Taiwan
Malawi
Cyprus
Zambia
Singapore
Indonesia
Portugal
Lesotho
Nepal
Dominican Republic
China
Tunisia
Romania
Mexico
Philippines
South Korea
Pakistan
Paraguay
Egypt
Cuba
Ethiopia
Haiti
Panama
Guyana

Treated
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1

Propensity
score
.6095265
.611932
.6158609
.638754
.653224
.6654041
.6893978
.69704
.7038091
.7060294
.7089661
.7145793
.7278883
.7553898
.7785828
.7795237
.799453
.8041176
.8284625
.8383721
.8655669
.8730649
.8866652
.8921999
.8947882

Change in
Polity2
6
8
15
7
15
.
.
6
15
7
9
.
.
7
4
7
6
12
10
.
.
1
14
16
13

Date of
Reform
1989
1992
1994
1968
1991

8
4
14
2
10
4
16
16
15
5
8
9

1966
1986
1979
1980
1985
1976
1983
1985
1982
1979
1974
1989

1999
1975
1993
1990
1978

1990
1994
1986
1987
1988
1989

1993
1994
1989
1992

Outside Common Support
Guatemala
Guatemala
Ecuador
Honduras
Brazil
Spain
Argentina
Uruguay
Bolivia
Peru
Greece
Chile

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

.9190304
.9190304
.9237149
.9413305
.9437772
.9685184
.979982
.9839289
.9866512
.9885088
.9948298
.9977797

Note: The propensity score is estimated as in column 1 of Table 2

Table 3b Transitions from democracy to autocracy
Country

Treated

Propensity
score

Change in
polity2

Date of
reform

Outside Common Support
New Zealand
Australia
Iceland
South Africa
Switzerland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
United States
Luxembourg
Israel
Denmark
Germany
Sweden
Papua New Guinea
France
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Fiji
Canada
Venezuela
Slovak Republic
Latvia
Ukraine
Italy
Belarus
Russia

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

.0014931
.0016789
.0040472
.0105352
.0115997
.0148975
.0238694
.0261698
.0281385
.0299115
.0345439
.0352485
.0398666
.0476861
.04837
.0497661
.0540976
.0557607
.0612058
.0615961
.063058
.063171
.0654528
.0667572
.0720809
.0729471

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
-7
.

Inside Common Support
Austria
Finland
Norway
Belgium
Japan
Bulgaria
Estonia
Namibia
Trinidad & Tobago

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

.0757894
.0819311
.0822244
.0840312
.0974352
.0998625
.1184082
.1368068
.180688

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

1987

1995

Country

Greece
Macedonia
Uruguay
Ireland
Sri Lanka
Malaysia
Zimbabwe
Turkey
Armenia
Peru
Chile
Costa Rica
Mauritius
Jamaica
Colombia
Guatemala
Sierra Leone
Panama
Zambia
Philippines
Congo
South Korea
Albania
Gambia
Brazil
India
Kenya
Guyana
Botswana
Pakistan

Treated

Propensity
score

Change in
Polity2

Date of
Reform

1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1

.1918558
.2195661
.2241872
.2807057
.2912095
.3415968
.4292819
.4345146
.4382235
.5047568
.5215374
.52407
.541923
.553453
.5750838
.6118631
.6188506
.6420545
.6628014
.6917624
.7105513
.717416
.7235891
.729219
.7480876
.8504922
.8767781
.878488
.9226773
.9228303

-11
.
-6
.
.
.
-7
.
-9
-12
-13
.
.
.
.
-4
-7
-11
-2
-11
-11
-12
.
-15
-6
.
-2
-1
.
-15

1967
1972

1987
1980
1996
1968
1973

1974
1971
1968
1968
1972
1997
1972
1996
1994
1964
1966
1978
1977

Outside Common Support
Nigeria
Nigeria
Lesotho
Uganda
Uganda

1
1
1
1
1

.9312006
.9312006
.9540992
.9912787
.9912787

Note: The propensity score is estimated as in column 3 of Table 2

-14
-14
-18
-7
-3

1966
1984
1970
1966
1985

Table 4a Treated vs Controls: countries that became democracies
Variable

Sample

Mean

t-test

Treated

Control

t

p > |t|

-201.16
-222.22

-228.1
-220.4

1.59
-0.12

0.116
0.91

Domestic democratic Unmatched
capital
Matched

0.12
0.05

0.02
0.03

3.01***
0.64

0.00
0.53

Foreign democratic
capital

Unmatched
Matched

0.60
0.51

0.43
0.48

2.55***
0.44

0.01
0.66

Length of sample

Unmatched
Matched

0.92
0.90

0.87
0.90

1.25
0.01

0.22
0.99

War years

Unmatched
Matched

0.04
0.04

0.05
0.04

-0.50
-0.08

0.62
0.94

Initial value of
polity2

Unmatched
Matched

-4.78
-5.03

-5.07
-5.43

0.29
0.39

0.77
0.70

Latin America

Unmatched
Matched

0.37
0.22

0.04
0.06

3.45***
1.99*

0.00
0.05

Asia

Unmatched
Matched

0.14
0.19

0.14
0.20

0.0
-0.08

1.00
0.93

Africa

Unmatched

0.33

0.71

-3.49***

0.00

Matched

0.43

0.67

-2.05**

0.04

Relative income

Unmatched
Matched

Note: polity2, relative income, democratic capital are measured in first year of sample, foreign democratic capital is
measured in 1993. Matching is based on the estimates reported in column 1 of Table 2.
When computing the unmatched means we do not impose the common support restriction, while we do
when computing the matched means.

Table 4b Treated vs. controls: countries that became autocracies
Variable

Sample

Mean

t-test

Treated

Control

t

p > |t|

-217.89
-194.20

-95.43
-185.44

- 6.50***
-0.41

0.00
0.69

Domestic democratic Unmatched
capital
Matched

.10
.137

.25
.16

-2.49**
-0.33

0.01
0.74

Foreign democratic
capital

Unmatched
Matched

.57
.61

.69
.71

-1.44
-0.97

0.15
0.34

Length of sample

Unmatched
Matched

.84
.88

.75
.80

1.13
0.99

0.26
0.33

War years

Unmatched
Matched

.05
.04

.03
.05

1.46
-0.09

0.15
0.93

Initial value of
polity2

Unmatched
Matched

4.12
3.39

8.68
8.13

Latin America

Unmatched
Matched

.28
.39

.11
.33

1.90*
0.37

0.06
0.71

Asia

Unmatched
Matched

.16
.17

.09
.19

0.96
-0.17

0.34
0.87

Africa

Unmatched
Matched

.44
.33

.09
.20

3.83**
0.88

0.00
0.39

Relative income

Unmatched
Matched

- 6.67***
- 4.41***

0.00
0.00

Note: Polity2, relative income, democratic capital are measured in first year of sample, foreign democratic capital is
measured in 1993. When computing the unmatched means we do not impose the common support, when
computing the matched means we do.

Table 5 Democracy and growth: OLS and Matching estimates of the growth effect of becoming a democracy
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Growth
Growth effect of democracy
in the group of treated countries

Estimation
Kernel
Propensity score conditional
on initial value of polity2
Inside common support
N. Treated countries
N. Control countries
N. Controls incl. repetitions

0.60
(0.54)

0.74
(0.68)

1.08
(0.78)
(1.24)

1.19
(0.77)
(1.25)

0.83
(0.79)
(1.25)

1.01
(0.77)
(1.26)

Diff in diff
2 steps

Diff in diff
2 steps

Matching

Matching

Matching

Matching

Epanechnikov

Normal

Epanechnikov

Normal

No
Yes
37
28
651

No
Yes
37
28
937

Yes
Yes
36
28
639

Yes
Yes
36
28
910

No
49

Yes
37

Note: Cols (1-2): Standard errors in parenthesis. Cols (3)-(6): First parenthesis: standard errors estimated assuming independent observations, second
parenthesis: standard errors estimated assuming perfect correlations of repeated observations in control countries.
Cols (1-2): Outcome variable: Averaged residual of a regression of growth on country and year fixed effects. First step of Diff in diff 2 steps: OLS of yearly
growth on country and year fixed effects, in a sample that also includes the control countries, second step: OLS of averaged residuals in the treated countries
only (averaged before and after treatment respectively), on dummy variable equal to 1 after treatment
Cols (3-6): Outcome variable: change in average growth (after – before reform year).
Common support imposed (according to Table 3a) as indicated in all columns.

Table 6 Democracy and growth: OLS and Matching estimates of the growth effect of becoming an autocracy
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Growth
Growth effect of autocracy
in the group of treated countries

Estimation
Kernel
Propensity score conditional
on initial value of polity2
Inside common support
N. Treated countries
N. Control countries
N. Controls incl. repetitions

0.17
(0.72)

-0.84
(0.42)*

Diff in diff
2 steps

Diff in diff
2 steps

No
20

Yes
18

- 1.97
(0.58)***
(1.00)**

- 1.85
(0.53)***
(0.92)**

- 2.38
(1.31)**
(3.59)

- 1.55
(0.75)**
(1.57)

Matching

Matching

Matching

Matching

Epanechnikov

Normal

Epanechnikov

Normal

No
Yes
18
18
107

No
Yes
18
18
289

Yes

Yes

14
15
34

14
15
176

Note: Cols (1-2): Standard errors in parenthesis. Cols (3)-(6): First parenthesis: standard errors estimated assuming independent observations, second
parenthesis: standard errors estimated assuming perfect correlations of repeated observations in control countries.
Cols (1-2): Outcome variable: Averaged residual of a regression of growth on country and year fixed effects. First step of Diff in diff 2 steps: OLS of yearly
growth on country and year fixed effects, in a sample that also includes the control countries, second step: OLS of averaged residuals in the treated countries only
(averaged before and after treatment respectively), on dummy variable equal to 1 after treatment
Cols (3-6): Outcome variable: change in average growth (after – before reform year).
Common support imposed (according to Table 3a) as indicated in all columns, except in cols (5-6), where it is [0.11, 0.98]

