                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT INVESTMENT OPTIONS AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE:
                 BEHAVIORAL LESSONS FROM 401(K) PLANS

                                          Jeffrey R. Brown
                                            Nellie Liang
                                          Scott Weisbenner

                                        Working Paper 13169
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13169


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the
opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We are grateful
to the Social Security Administration for this financial support. We thank Julie Agnew, Matias Eklof,
Wei Jiang, Brigitte Madrian, Clemens Sialm, and conference participants at the 2005 Retirement Research
Consortium, the 2006 American Economic Association meetings, the 2006 Trans-Atlantic Public Economics
Seminar, and the 2007 Wharton Household Portfolio Choice and Financial Decision-Making conference.
 Vivek Choudhary, Soonho Lee, and Yoon Sok Lee provided excellent research assistance.

© 2007 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Individual Account Investment Options and Portfolio Choice: Behavioral Lessons from 401(k)
Plans
Jeffrey R. Brown, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 13169
June 2007
JEL No. D1,D12,D14,G11,H55,J32

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines how the menu of investment options made available to workers in defined contribution
plans influences portfolio choice. Using unique panel data of 401(k) plans in the U.S., we present
three principle findings. First, we show that the share of investment options in a particular asset class
(i.e., company stock, equities, fixed income, and balanced funds) has a significant effect on aggregate
participant portfolio allocations across these asset classes. Second, we document that the vast majority
of the new funds added to 401(k) plans are high-cost actively managed equity funds, as opposed to
lower-cost equity index funds. Third, because the average share of assets invested in low-cost equity
index funds declines with an increase in the number of options, average portfolio expenses increase
and average portfolio performance is thus depressed. All of these findings are obtained from a panel
data set, enabling us to control for heterogeneity in the investment preferences of workers across firms
and across time.

Jeffrey R. Brown                                    Scott Weisbenner
Department of Finance                               Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign          University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706                            304C David Kinley Hall
1206 South Sixth Street                             1407 W. Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820-9080                            Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER                                            and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu                                    weisbenn@uiuc.edu

Nellie Liang
Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20551
nliang@frb.gov
1. Introduction

        Over two dozen countries around the world now include individual investment accounts

as part of their public pension systems. Other countries, notably including the U.S., are also

considering reforms that would allow individuals to directly invest part of their Social Security

contributions in individual accounts. A key issue in designing such a program is determining

what investment choices to offer individual participants. The simplest portfolio theory suggests

that it is sufficient to provide a choice consisting of one portfolio of risky assets – the market

portfolio – and one risk-free asset, and then to allow individuals to mix these two portfolios in

accordance with their individual risk preferences. Most public and private plans in the U.S. and

abroad, however, provide a large number and broad range of choices. For example, in the U.S.,

the vast majority of private sector defined contribution pension plans offer multiple investment

options, often allowing individuals to choose from among several equity, bond, market and

balanced fund options. Individuals also have thousands of mutual funds to choose from when

allocating their non-pension portfolios. In Sweden, the Social Security system provides

participants a menu of investment options that includes over 650 funds from which to choose.

        The central question of this paper is whether the mix of investment options available to

participants in an individual accounts program matters for portfolio allocation. In particular, we

are interested in the “behavioral” response to the selection of fund options, over and above any

“mechanical” link by which we mean changes that flow directly from adding or relaxing a

binding constraint. For example, suppose an individual is prohibited from owning a particular

asset class. It is clearly the case that this constraint will alter their portfolio choice if, in the

absence of the constraint, the individual would have invested in this asset class. Instead, our

focus is on the “behavioral” response, which might occur when a change in the menu of




                                                                                                        1
investment options leads to a large change in asset allocation, even though the investment

opportunity set has not significantly changed. For example, imagine that an investor, faced with

a choice between a diversified stock fund and a diversified bond fund, chose to allocate 50

percent of her portfolio to each fund. If this individual were provided a second diversified stock

fund as a third investment alternative, then the overall investment opportunity set of this

individual has not substantially changed because the additional stock fund is largely redundant of

the first. In this case, standard portfolio theory suggests that this individual’s optimal allocation

would still be close to 50 percent bonds and 50 percent stocks.

       A growing body of evidence suggests, however, that many individual portfolio decisions

may be influenced by plan design. For example, Benartzi and Thaler (2001) suggest that many

people follow a “naïve” diversification strategy, such as evenly dividing contributions across all

available assets (e.g., a “1/n” strategy). If this is the case, then simply changing the relative

number of stock and bond funds may alter the allocation of an investor’s portfolio between

stocks and bonds. If people behave in this way, then firm managers or policymakers who are

charged with determining the set of investment options to make available to participants in a

corporate or government individual accounts program should consider how the choice of fund

options will influence individual portfolio allocations.

       The private pension system in the U.S. – in particular, 401(k) plans, which are now the

single most common private pension in the U.S. – provides a useful research laboratory with

which to learn about these issues. Because plan sponsors have significant leeway in choosing

which investment options to make available, there is considerable time series and cross sectional

variation in the set of investment opportunities facing 401(k) participants. Using a rich panel

data set on fund options and fund contributions to 401(k) plans during the 1990s, we examine




                                                                                                        2
several issues in this paper related to how the structure of investment options within a plan

affects participant diversification. Unlike past work in this area that focuses on cross-sectional

analyses, we are able to exploit the panel nature of our data to control for differences in the

investment preferences of workers across firms and over time to better identify the effect of a

change in 401(k) plan characteristics on participant behavior.

       We focus primarily on how the set of investment alternatives effects portfolio

diversification. While some prior research has suggested that overall portfolio diversification is

affected by the menu of options (Benartzi and Thaler (2001)), Huberman and Jiang (2006)

highlight some of the difficulties in making inferences about individual behavior based on plan

level data. For example, even if there is evidence at the plan level that contributions are divided

roughly evenly across plan options, this could be because individuals are each following a 1/n

strategy because 1/n of the individuals are each concentrating their portfolio in one option, or

other intermediate combinations. Nonetheless, in considering the set of investment options to

make available to individuals through a large national pension system, the effect of the plan

choice set on aggregate portfolio allocations is of substantial interest.

       Our data allows us to do a more comprehensive examination of plan level portfolio

responses both within and across multiple asset classes over many years. We find evidence that

the allocation of contributions is significantly affected by the number and mix of investment

options available, even after accounting for plan-level fixed effects. For example, our estimates

suggest that by increasing the share of equity funds from 1/3 to 1/2 (such as by adding an

additional equity fund option to a plan that already offers company stock, one equity fund, and

one bond fund), overall participant allocations to equity funds increase by 7.5 percentage points.

We find similar strong effects for allocations to bond funds and balanced funds. Given that the




                                                                                                      3
fraction of equity options in the plan tends to increase substantially and the fraction of bond

options tends to decrease substantially as plans offer more options over time, this leads to 401(k)

participants taking on greater risk in their retirement portfolios with their higher equity

allocations.

       We also address how the composition of actively vs. passively managed fund options has

affected allocation decisions within 401(k) plans. From 1990 to 2003, the number of mutual

funds available to investors in the U.S. rose from 3,100 to 8,100, with the dramatic growth in

actively managed equity funds (which quadrupled over the period) accounting for nearly 70% of

the total increase (Investment Company Institute, 2005). Consistent with this, we find the vast

majority of the new funds added to 401(k) plans are also high-cost actively managed equity

funds as opposed to lower-cost equity index funds. For example, actively-managed equity funds

represent nearly 2/3 of the new funds added to 401(k) plans in our sample over the period 1998-

2002, while index funds represent only about 1 out of 12 of the new funds added. This result has

strong implications for the relation between the investment performance of these retirement plans

and the composition and number of fund options provided. For example, we estimate that a

move from a plan with only index funds to a plan with only actively-managed funds is associated

with a 35 basis point increase in the annual plan-wide expense ratio paid by participants (as

participants are investing more in higher-cost funds which are much more likely to be added on

the margin). Given historically that actively-managed funds do not outperform index funds

(even before expenses), these investment patterns (coupled with actively-managed funds being

much more likely to be the marginal fund added to the plan) could result in a nontrivial reduction

in resources available for retirement.




                                                                                                  4
        While not the main focus of our paper, we also address the importance of firm-level

heterogeneity and investment restrictions upon the investment behavior of 401(k) participants. A

concern with any of the past cross-sectional analyses that have documented a strong relation

between plan parameters and participant decisions is that an omitted factor such as differences in

either the firms or the workers across firms could explain both the design of the 401(k) plan as

well as the workers’ investment decisions (e.g., differences in the risk aversion or investment

philosophy of workers across firms). Ruling out such an alternative explanation is essential for

identifying what role the characteristics of the plan (as opposed to unobserved characteristics of

the participants of the plan) play in influencing investment decisions and is thus essential for

public policy purposes.

        We present evidence that both plan parameters and firm-level heterogeneity are important

determinants of how 401(k) assets are allocated across asset classes. For example, the number of

equity and bond options in the 401(k) plan is an important predictor of contributions to equity

and bond funds, respectively, even after accounting for firm-level fixed effects. On the other

hand, while both the relation between the number of options in the plan and allocations to

company stock and the “endorsement” effect found by Benartzi (2001) 1 are very strong in the

cross-section, they are substantially diminished once firm-specific effects are accounted for in

the regression. This suggests that investments in company stock in pension plans appear to be

driven in no small part by firm-level heterogeneity in the desirability of company stock

investments (which manifests itself both in employee contributions to company stock, how many

non-company stock options are present in the 401(k) plan, and employer match policy).



1
 Benartzi (2001) finds that workers in firms where the employer provides a match in company stock tend to invest
substantially more of their own contributions in company stock and attributes this to the workers viewing a firm
match in company stock as implicit investment advice.


                                                                                                                   5
       This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background information on the range

of investment options offered in selected pension systems around the world, as well as in some

U.S. reform proposals. We also review the relevant literature relating to the influence of

investment options on portfolio allocation. In Section 3, we describe our data on 401(k) plans

and provide some initial summary statistics about the range of investment options available. In

Section 4, we provide evidence on how the number and mix of investment options influences the

allocation of contributions in 401(k) plans. Section 5 demonstrates how trends in the mutual

fund industry over the past decade such as the explosion of high-cost, actively-managed equity

funds have affected 401(k) plans and participants. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of

policy implications.



2. Background

2.1 Brief Overview of Range of Investment Options in Public Pension Plans Around the World

    Over the past two decades, a large number of countries have incorporated individual

accounts into their public pension systems. These countries span the globe, and include highly

developed economies of Western Europe, transition economies from the former Soviet Union,

and developing countries. A notable exception to this trend is the United States, whose public

Social Security program is entirely a traditional pay-as-you-go, defined benefit system. Even in

the U.S., however, proposals to introduce personal accounts as part of, or in addition to, the

Social Security system have been forwarded by numerous commissions, think tanks, academics,

members of Congress, and even the President.

    The plans that have been implemented around the world, as well as those proposed in the

U.S., vary along many dimensions, including account size, the source of funding, and the degree




                                                                                                   6
of access to funds before and during retirement, just to name a few. One particularly important

difference is the degree of portfolio choice provided to individuals, particularly during the

account accumulation phase. In general, architects of alternative plans have made different

choices when faced with the trade-offs between allowing individual choice, ensuring some

minimum level of portfolio diversification, and keeping administrative costs low. As a result,

different plans provide very different degrees of choice.

     At one end of the spectrum are plans that provide very limited choice. As discussed in a

recent survey by the GAO, “initially, several countries offered individuals choice among a

limited number of investment options and often restricted the portion of assets that could be

invested in certain products, such as publicly traded equities, private equities and foreign

securities” (GAO, 2005). For example, in Australia as of the late 1990s, the employer was

generally given the authority to select the fund for the workers, and thus most workers had

minimal choice in how to invest their retirement savings (CBO 1999). Some U.S. reform

proposals, such as Rep. Shaw’s “Social Security Guarantee Plus Act of 2003,” severely restrict

choice. For example, Shaw’s plan would require individuals to hold all account assets in a single

fund that can be changed at most once per year. 2 The default option would be a portfolio

allocation of 60 percent stock index funds and 40 percent high-grade corporate bond index funds.

The only two alternative options simply allow slight deviations in the allocations (65 percent

stock / 35 percent bonds or 70 percent stock / 30 percent bonds). Another plan that starts out

with tight restrictions on choice is the Rep. DeMint’s “Social Security Savings Act of 2003,” in

which account balances would initially be maintained in a default portfolio with 65 percent in a



2
 Details on Rep. Shaw’s proposal are taken from the January 7, 2003 memorandum to Rep. Shaw from the Social
Security Office of the Chief Actuary “OASDI Financial Effects of the Social Security Guarantee Plus Act of 2003
(H.R. 75) – Information.”


                                                                                                                  7
specified broad index fund of equities of U.S. corporations and 35 percent in long-term bonds

issued by the Federal government. 3

     At the other end of the spectrum are plans that provide an extraordinarily wide range of

choice. In Sweden, for example, participants are able to choose from a menu of approximately

650 mutual funds (Palme, et al, 2004). However, participants are restricted to selecting at most

five funds from this extensive menu (GAO 2005). In the U.S. context, the Personal Security

Account option (commonly referred to as the Schieber/Weaver plan) from the 1994-96 Social

Security Advisory Council would have allowed virtually unfettered access to a broad universe of

private sector investments.

     In between these two extremes is a wide range of plans. For example, Mexico now has age-

based investment options available. Chile requires each pension administrator to offer four types

of funds with varying degrees of risk, including a higher risk fund and a fixed income fund

(GAO 2005). For younger workers, a fifth option (higher risk) is also available.

     How does the degree of investment choice affect portfolio behavior? In some cases, the

answer is obvious. For example, in the U.S. Shaw proposal mentioned above, individuals are

clearly forced into one of three pre-specified combinations of equities and bonds. In most other

cases, however, there are enough choices available that individual decisions about general asset

allocations are not restricted. Even in these cases, however, the potential exists for the menu of

investment options to influence participant decisions about how to invest their individual account

balances. For example, if, as the number of investment options rises, the fraction of investments




3
  Once the individual account balance reaches a specified level, two additional investments are available – a broad
index of small-cap equities and a broad index of mid-cap equities. Details on Rep. DeMint’s proposal are taken
from the September 26, 2003 memorandum to Rep. DeMint from the Social Security Office of the Chief Actuary
“Estimated Financial Effects of H.R. 3177, the Social Security Savings Act of 2003 – Information.”


                                                                                                                      8
that are in actively-managed equity funds also rises, might this influence overall portfolio

allocations?

    The objective of this study is to provide empirical evidence on how the menu of investment

options offered in an individual accounts system is likely to influence participant portfolio

choices. We will do this by using data on private-sector 401(k) plans, which like individual

account programs around the world, are defined contribution retirement plans that provide

participants with a specified set of investment options. We can use both the time-series and

cross-sectional variation in the number and type of investment options available to employees to

learn how portfolio allocation is influenced by plan parameters. Exploiting such data can help

address the concern that firm-level differences in worker investing preferences may explain any

cross-sectional correlations found. This is an area that has been receiving increased attention in

the economics literature, which we now briefly review.

2.2 Literature on Investment Options and Portfolio Choice

    Within a neoclassical economics framework, the number of investment options available to

an investor should matter only insofar as it alters one’s ability to diversify. For example, if

participants in a defined contribution account were provided with bond investment options only,

and no equity investment options, then their portfolio choices would be constrained in an

obvious way. In reality, however, most 401(k) plans do not restrict investments in such an overt

way. Rather, the typical 401(k) plan offers participants a range of funds that invest in equities

and bonds and allow participants to cover a wide range of the risk/return spectrum. As such, in a

world where all participants behave according to standard finance theory, the constraints

imposed by the firm’s choice of options are unlikely to have a first order effect on an

individual’s portfolio allocation across different asset classes.




                                                                                                     9
    Nonetheless, more recent “behavioral” research has shown that the composition of

investment options selected by an employer can have a significant influence on participant

portfolio allocation. For example, Benartzi (2001) and Brown, Liang and Weisbenner (2006)

examine the effect of employer 401(k) match policy, and find that when employers restrict

individuals to hold employer stock, employees tend to purchase more employer stock in their

own accounts, rather than less, as would be predicted by standard portfolio models. Also,

Benartzi and Thaler (2001) find evidence consistent with employees following “naïve

diversification strategies,” i.e., allocating e/n of their contributions to equities when there are n

investment choices available, e of which are equity funds, while Karlsson, Massa, and Simonov

(2006) suggest that investors choose assets as a function of the way they are represented in the

menu available to them.

    Plan design can influence numerous other behaviors as well. Huberman, Iyengar, and Jiang

(2007) show that the availability of an employer match increases participation and contributions,

especially among low-income employees. Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) and Ameriks and

Zeldes (2001) show that investors are slow to rebalance portfolios, which can lead to allocations

of total holdings that look very different than allocations of contributions. Madrian and Shea

(2001), Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003), and Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2004a)

document the importance of plan design and employee inertia as they show that many new plan

participants invest in the plan’s default investment option and are slow to move out of that option

for potentially higher-return assets. Agnew and Szykman (2005) also provide evidence that

individuals with below average financial knowledge become “overwhelmed” by making

investment decisions.




                                                                                                        10
3. Data

3.1 Data Source

         The primary source of data for this project is 401(k) plan level financial data from the

1990s. This rich source of data is compiled by hand from 11-k filings with the SEC, which a

company files when it provides an option to invest in company stock that is deemed an offering

of securities. From these filings, we collect information about the number and type of

investment options offered. We categorize each investment option into one of five categories –

company stock, equity funds (by which we precisely mean domestic equity funds excluding

employer stock), international equity funds, bond funds (which includes money market,

guaranteed investment contacts, government bonds, and corporate bond funds), and balanced

funds. For each investment option, we collect total participant contributions, total employer

contributions, and total assets. For the few firms with multiple plans, we collect data for the

largest plan.

         Starting with all U.S. firms listed in Compustat any year from 1993 to 1999, we identify

firms that filed an 11-k at least once during this period.4 We were able to hand-collect data for

891 companies for which we could accurately classify their investment option, yielding 2,790

firm-year observations. As reported in table 1, most of the data are in the period 1993 to 1998,

with the largest number of firms, 566, in 1998. On average, there are just over three

observations per firm, with 45 percent of the firms with two observations or less and 55 percent

of the firms with three or more observations. In 1999, there was a change in ERISA reporting

requirements that led to substantially fewer companies reporting contributions by asset category,

leaving us with contribution data for far fewer plans in 1999 and 2000 than in 1998. The 1999

4
 11-k filings are available on the SEC’s Edgar website starting in 1994. The 1994 filing reports plan activity during
1993. Some firms will report not only plan activity during the past year, but also plan activity over the past three
years. Thus, we have 128 observations in 1992 and 29 observations in 1991.


                                                                                                                  11
and later filings, while lacking good contribution data, still provide asset balances. We will

make use of this data (and describe it more fully) to augment our sample when we examine the

active vs. passive mutual fund choice below.

        To characterize our initial sample, we focus on firms in the sample in 1998, one of the

more recent years with the largest number of firms. As shown in table 2a, about one-half of the

sample was a member of the S&P 1500 during 1998. 5 Thus, the typical firm in our sample is

smaller, measured by both market value and employees, than the typical S&P 1500 firm, but is

larger than the average of all public companies as available from Compustat. The sample

represents a broad cross-section of industries. As noted in the table, 15 percent of the sample is

in the technology sector, somewhat less than the overall market.

        Companies that issue shares for their retirement plan, rather than purchase shares on the

open market, are required to file an 11-k. While this raises the possibility that the sample could

be biased toward firms that do not repurchase stock, in separate work (Brown, Liang &

Weisbenner 2006) we document that repurchase activity by firms in our sample does not differ

from that at other publicly-traded firms. 6

        We also compare our sample of plans to those at publicly-traded firms as reported on

Form 5500 filed with the DOL. 7 In the aggregate, for our sample of the largest plans at 566

companies in 1998, total plan assets were $249 billion, representing 36 percent of the $698

billion in plan assets at all publicly-traded companies (table 2b). Total contributions by

participant and company for our sample totaled $13.9 billion, 28 percent of the $49.2 billion for

5
  The S&P 1500 consists of the 1500 stocks that comprise the S&P 500 index, the S&P 400 MidCap index, and the
S&P 600 SmallCap index.
6
  In the uncommon event that the plan does not allow employees to purchase company stock but does provide the
employer match in company stock, it would generally not be deemed an offer of securities, and the plan would not
be required to file an 11-k. In our discussion with SEC staff, the onus is on the company to determine whether it
needs to file an 11-k.
7
  Publicly-traded companies in the DOL Form 5500 data set were identified by whether they had a CUSIP and
matching EINs with those in Compustat.


                                                                                                               12
publicly-traded firms. Estimates from the DOL for 1998 for all US companies, public and

private, are $1.54 trillion in assets and $135 billion in contributions.

       As highlighted earlier, a key advantage to this data over data used in prior studies on

portfolio options and investment allocations is that we have a panel comprised of companies with

multiple years of plan information. As such, we are able to trace how changes in investment

structure influence portfolio behavior over time, while controlling for cross-sectional differences

in firms.

3.2 Summary Statistics on Fund Options

    In Table 3, we report the composition of plan options and employee contributions in 401(k)

plans by the type of fund (i.e., company stock, domestic equity, international equity, bond, and

balanced) across our pooled data 1991-2000. The average firm (across plans and years) provides

7.8 investment options, and the median offering has 7 funds. Over 80 percent of the firm-year

observations offer between 4 and 12 options, inclusive.

    Table 3 also shows substantial heterogeneity in the type of funds offered and contributions

to the various asset classes. While domestic equity funds constitute only 29% or less of plan

options at one quarter of the firm-year observations, they constitute at least half of the options at

another quarter of the observations. The interquartile range for the share of bond funds in the

401(k) plan also spans 20 percentage points (the 25th percentile is 20% of fund options while the

75th percentile is 40% of fund options). International funds and balanced funds are a small share

of offerings for the majority of firms.

    There are also striking differences across firms in the investment decisions made by

participants in their 401(k) plans. While only 31% or less of employee contributions are

allocated to domestic equities at one quarter of the firm-year observations, they constitute at least




                                                                                                   13
58% of the allocations made at another quarter of the observations. There are also substantial

differences in the investments in company stock and bond funds across firms.

    Of course, if employees are not unduly influenced by the mix of options, for example by

following an optimal portfolio strategy or by allocating according to a fixed allocation rule (e.g.,

a 60/40 equity/bond mix), then increasing the proportion of equity fund options should not have

a large effect on the individual’s overall equity exposure. In contrast, if the mix of options does

influence behavior, as would be the case if participants follow a naïve 1/n diversification

heuristic (or alternatively “randomly” concentrate their contributions in a small group of funds),

then we would expect to see higher equity allocations when there are more equity funds

available.



4. How the Number and Mix of Investment Options Influence Portfolio Decisions

4.1 Composition of Investment Options and Investment Choices by Number of Funds

       Figure 1 enables us to examine, over the pooled sample 1991-2000, how the share of

options in a particular asset class changes as the total number of options in the plan increases.

We find that as firms increase the number of options available to employees, that the increase is

predominantly concentrated in equity funds. For example, an increase in total options in the

401(k) plan from 4 to 12 is associated with an increase in the share of domestic equity funds in

the plan from just over one quarter of options to almost half of options (at the same time, the

share of both the bond funds and the company stock fund in the plan fall by roughly 15

percentage points each).

       Figure 1 also reports how the share of funds matches up with the share of contributions to

those funds (numbers are reported in percentage points). Across all asset types, there is a




                                                                                                    14
striking relation between the share of fund options available in each asset class and the share of

contributions made to funds in that asset class. Mirroring the pattern with the share of options,

the share of contributions made to company stock and bond funds fall as the total number of

options in the 401(k) plan increase, while the share of contributions to domestic equity funds

rises dramatically as the number of options in the plan increases. For example, as we move from

a total of four fund options to a total of twelve, the fraction of contributions made to equity funds

rises from 30 percent to 56 percent (mirroring the increase in the fraction of equity funds from 28

to 47 percent). Though increasing, allocations to international funds seem to be lagging behind

their increased prominence in 401(k) plans as the number of options expands.

       Thus, Figure 1 provides initial evidence that employees may be influenced in their overall

portfolio allocation behavior by the mix of investment choices provided to them. Specifically, as

employers provide more options, they appear to be doing so primarily by adding additional

domestic equity funds (and to a lesser extent international funds). Correspondingly, participants

appear to be placing a higher fraction of their portfolio in equities as the fraction of equity

options rises. However, clearly other factors, such as asset returns, also affect allocation

decisions within the plan. Further, the correlation between the share of options and the share of

contributions need not be causal, as it could simply reflect firms with risk-averse workers do not

invest in equities and thus demand fewer equity funds in their 401(k) plans. To address these

concerns, we turn to a regression framework.

4.2 Regression Framework

       We begin by estimating pooled cross-sectional regressions in which the dependent

variable is the share of contributions allocated to each of our five investment categories. On the

right hand side, our primary variable of interest is the fraction of investment options that are in




                                                                                                      15
this category. Thus, when testing for employer stock, we regress the share of contributions to

company stock against 1/n, which represents the share of total investment options that are

comprised by the employer stock fund. For domestic equity funds, we regress the share of

contributions against e/n, where e is the number of domestic equity funds and n is the total

number of investment options. We follow a similar approach for international equity funds,

bond funds, and balanced funds.

       If the coefficient on the share of fund options is zero, it indicates that individual portfolio

allocations are not influenced by the mix of investment choices available. At the other extreme,

a coefficient of one suggests that individuals, on average, follow a “1/n” strategy, implying that

the mix of investment options translates nearly one-for-one into changes in portfolio allocations.

Significant intermediate results would indicate that the mix of investment choice clearly matters,

though not to the full extent predicted by a strict 1/n hypothesis.

       There are at least two possible explanations that are consistent with there being a positive

relation between contribution shares and the share of options. The first possibility is that all

workers naively diversify across multiple options and thus an increase in the number of options

would reduce all workers’ allocations to company stock. A second possibility is that workers

randomly put their entire 401(k) portfolio in one option, with different workers concentrating

their purchases in different options, in which case an increase in the number of options would

reduce the fraction of workers that concentrate all of their holdings in company stock. Benartzi

and Thaler (2001) provide evidence of the former and Huberman and Jiang (2006), Agnew

(2006), and Holden and VanDerhei (2001) provide evidence for the latter, suggesting that both

types of investors may exist. With plan-level rather than worker-level data, it is not possible for

us to distinguish which of these two stories is driving the result.




                                                                                                    16
       Besides the composition of options in the 401(k) plan, we also control for several other

firm/plan characteristics as well as year effects in our regressions. To do this, we merge our

sample of 11-k filings with Center of Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and Compustat data.

Motivated by Benartzi (2001), we include in our regressions a binary variable for whether the

firm restricts its employer match to company stock. We also control for past five-year returns on

the employer’s stock (taken from CRSP), the company’s stock price volatility (measured as the

standard deviation of total returns over the past 24 months), market-to-book ratio, log of plan

assets, whether the firm has a defined benefit plan, whether the firm’s bonds are investment

grade as a proxy for bankruptcy risk, and year effects.

       Including year effects are important for two reasons. First, given the unbalanced nature

of our panel, as discussed in Table 1, it is important to ensure that the “naïve diversification”

results are not being driven by differences in market returns. For example, if firms increase the

number of options over time, in our sample this corresponds with a period of rising equity

markets. Thus it is important to ensure that the results are not being driven by individuals

placing more money into equity funds in response to rising equity markets (this effect will be

absorbed in the year effects in our regression). Second, it is likely that the increase in the

number of investment alternatives over time was due in large part to the proliferation of different

types of mutual funds offered over the past decade. For example, the ICI reports that the total

number of mutual funds rose from 3,403 in 1991 to 8,155 in 2000 (Investment Company

Institute, 2005), with the vast majority of these funds being equity funds. Year effects will pick

up this potential “demand” for equities as manifested by greater fund offerings.

4.3 Cross-Sectional Regression Results

       Table 4 displays the results of the pooled cross-sectional regressions of the share of




                                                                                                    17
employee contributions in a particular asset class against the share of fund options in this same

class using our sample of 401(k) plans over the period 1991-2000. Regressions are estimated

separately for each assert class and are only estimated over firm-year observations that offered at

least one option of that particular type in their 401(k) plan. For all five asset classes, we find

positive and significant relations between the share of contributions and the share of options in

the plan, confirming that the patterns displayed in Figure 1 also hold in the presence of firm-

specific characteristics and year controls. For domestic equity funds, the coefficient on the share

of equity options in the plan is 0.70. To assist in the literal interpretation of this coefficient,

imagine a firm has five investment options available, three of which are equity funds and two of

which are fixed income funds. If the firm added another equity option, the share of equity

choices changes from 3/5 to 4/6, or an increase of 6.7 percentage points. Multiplying by the 0.70

coefficient implies that participants would be expected, on average, to increase their allocation to

equities by 4.7 percentage points. For company stock investments, we cannot reject the “1/n”

hypothesis (i.e., cannot reject a coefficient of one on the share of options). This would suggest,

at first glance, that the trend of adding more options to 401(k) plans has contributed considerably

to a reduction in contributions to company stock over the past decade. The coefficient on the

share of options in the plan is the smallest for bond funds, but still highly significant. The

smaller sensitivity for bond funds is not surprising given that fixed income funds are often

chosen as the “default” investment for participants who do not make an active alternative

selection.

        Our results on the other variables are generally consistent with previous findings.

Consistent with Benartzi (2001) and Brown, Liang, & Weisbenner (2006), we find that

employees at firms where the employer match is restricted to company stock direct, on average,




                                                                                                      18
7.0 percentage points more of their own contributions to company stock. Only about one-third

of this 7.0 percentage point increase comes out of allocations to other equity funds, while 44%

comes out of fixed income investments. Prior research (e.g., Benartzi 2001, Huberman &

Sengmueller 2004, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, & Metrick 2004b, and Agnew 2006) suggests that

individuals are more likely to invest in their employer’s stock if it has performed well in recent

years. We also find that holdings of own employer stock are positively related to past 5 year

returns on that stock, while the share of contributions directed toward other equity investments is

significantly negatively related to own company stock performance. The company stock

purchase rate is higher at less volatile firms, larger firms, and firms with higher market-to-book

ratios (a proxy for growth opportunities). The presence of a defined benefit plan or an

investment grade bond rating has little effect on participant investment decisions.

4.4 Panel Regression Results

       A potential concern with any cross-sectional regression is that there is tremendous

heterogeneity across firms (and the workers across firms), and thus one might be concerned

about spurious correlation, such as differences in risk tolerance across workers in different firms.

To address this, we add firm fixed effects to our regression specification. The inclusion of these

891 firm-specific fixed effects absorb all of the variation in the allocation of contributions that

can be attributed to time-invariant differences in the characteristics of firms and their employees.

In other words, with firm fixed effects in place, the coefficient on the share of options in an asset

class is identifying the relationship of interest from within-firm changes over time in the number

of investment options offered.

       The results of these fixed effects regressions are displayed in Table 5. By comparing the

results with those obtained in the cross-sectional regressions presented in Table 4, two




                                                                                                      19
conclusions emerge. First, in general, pension plan parameters remain important determinants of

investor behavior after controlling for firm-level fixed effects. Importantly, the influence of the

number and mix of investment options on portfolio choice is still quite strong for equity funds.

For example, controlling for firm-level fixed effects, the coefficient on the share of equity funds

is a highly significant 0.45 (compared to 0.70 in the cross-sectional regression). To put this

coefficient into perspective, imagine a firm that began with three equity funds and two bond

funds adds a fourth equity fund. Applying the 0.452 coefficient indicates that this change would

be expected to increase the allocation of contributions to equity by 3.0 percentage points, which

represents a nontrivial change in the risk/return profile of participant portfolios. The coefficients

on the share of options for international funds, bond funds, and balanced funds are of similar

magnitude.

       Second, firm-level heterogeneity is also an important determinant of how 401(k) assets

are allocated, particularly in the context of company stock. While one cannot reject that there is

a one-for-one relation between the fraction of contributions allocated to an employer’s company

stock and the fraction of options in the plan that are company stock (since company stock is one

option, this fraction is simply 1 / total plan options) in the cross section, the magnitude of this

relation drops by over two-thirds once firm-specific fixed effects are included in the regression.

This suggests that while in the cross section, firms with more options in their 401(k) plan

contributed less to company stock, this in large part likely represents firm-level heterogeneity in

the desirability of company stock investments (which manifests itself both in employee

contributions to company stock as well as how many non-company stock options are present in

the 401(k) plan) as opposed to a “1/n” behavioral response. This conclusion is supported by




                                                                                                      20
Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2006) who find that firms that provide employer-matching

contributions in company stock tend to offer fewer options in the 401(k) plan as well.

        Benartzi (2001) finds evidence of an “endorsement” effect, that is, workers in firms

where the employer provides a match in company stock tend to invest substantially more of their

own contributions in company stock (and attributes this to the workers viewing a firm match in

company stock as implicit investment advice). While we also found such a relation in the cross

section, the relation between match policy and employee contributions disappears once we

control for firm-level fixed effects (the coefficient falls over 2/3 in magnitude and is no longer

statistically significant). 8 Thus, investments in company stock in the pension plan appear to be

driven in no small part by firm or worker-specific characteristics outside of the pension plan.

        These results provide clear evidence that the number and mix of investment options

matter in determining the equity/bond mix in retirement plans. An important policy implication

of this finding is that the choice of investment options to make available in an individual

accounts program is likely to have a first-order effect on the portfolio allocations that individuals

make. This finding is not based on cross-sectional correlations, but rather is obtained from a

panel data set, enabling us to control for heterogeneity in the investment preferences of workers

across firms and across time.

4.5 Robustness Checks of Panel Regression Results

        The regression results in Table 5 were obtained in a firm-fixed effects framework. Thus,

the coefficient on the share of options in an asset class is identifying the relationship of interest

from within-firm changes over time in the number of investment options offered. We attribute

the resulting correlation between the share of contributions and the share of options to a


8
 Forty-two firms change match policy over the sample, enabling us to identify the match policy or “endorsement”
effect in a firm-fixed effects regression.


                                                                                                              21
behavioral motivation (i.e., the “1/n” hypothesis or more generally that the mix of options

“matters”). However, there are rational, alternative explanations for this result that we address in

Table 6.

         First, it may be the case that until the firm offers a broad-based equity index fund,

additional equity options may actually expand the return-risk frontier for the participants (thus

leading to greater contributions to equity funds). Once an index fund is in the plan, though,

additional equity options should not “matter” for the participant, thus weakening the relation

between the share of equity contributions and the share of equity options. Column (2) in Table 6

demonstrates that this is not the case, having an index option in the plan does not reduce the

sensitivity of contributions to equity funds to the number of equity options in the plan (the

interaction term with the share of equity options is insignificant). 9 Similarly, if the firm has only

one equity option, then adding a second equity option might provide some sort of diversification

that expands the return-risk frontier for the participants and thus leads to increased equity

allocations. However, the addition of a fourth of fifth equity option is likely to provide no

diversification benefit, and thus the relation between share of contributions and share of options

should weaken with the number of equity options in the plan. Again, column (3) demonstrates

that this is not the case, as the relation between the share of contributions and the share of

options does not change with the number of equity options in the plan.

         Another alternative explanation is that a change in equity options within a plan happens

as a result of increased demand for equity that is just starting to surface in employee

contributions within the plan. In other words, as demand for equities in the 401(k) plan grows,

this leads to increased contributions to equity funds in aggregate, as well as the firm adding some


9
 For ease of comparison, the first column of Table 6 replicates the fixed-effect coefficient on the share of equity
options from Table 5.


                                                                                                                      22
additional equity funds. Thus, there is an omitted variable, the change in past equity demand,

that really drives the (spurious) relation we observe between the share of equity options and the

share of equity contributions. To control for this “demand” story, we also include the past

change in the fraction of contributions to equity funds in the regression. Its inclusion has no

effect on the coefficient of interest, that on the share of equity options, while the coefficient on

the change in past contributions to equity funds is itself small in magnitude and insignificant (see

column (4)).

       Finally, up to this point, we have lumped both actively-managed funds and index funds

together. Columns (5) and (6) present regression results examining these types of equity funds

separately. We find that for both types of equity funds, the share of funds of their type in the

plan affects investment decisions. For example, suppose a firm has one equity index fund, one

bond fund, and company stock as investment options. If that firm adds four actively-managed

equity funds to the mix, allocations to the index fund will be predicted to fall by 7.9 percentage

points (coefficient of 0.416 multiplied by (0.33 – 0.14)).

       After having established a robust relation between the mix of options in 401(k) plans and

investment decisions we next consider how trends in the mutual fund industry have affected

pension plans. In particular, we consider whether the increased number of actively-managed

equity funds over the past 10 years has trickled down to 401(k) plans, and how it has affected the

expenses and performance of participants in their retirement plans.



5. Index versus Actively Managed Funds

       As referenced earlier, the number of mutual funds available to investors in the U.S. has

growth dramatically, driven by the surge in equity funds (particularly actively-managed) over the




                                                                                                       23
past decade. The mutual fund literature (e.g., Jensen (1968), Malkiel (1995), Gruber (1996),

Carhart (1997), and Daniel, et al (1997)) finds that actively managed funds charge substantially

higher annual fees than do index funds (such as S&P 500 funds), without earning higher after-

expense returns on average (and perhaps perform no better before expenses). Do trends in

401(k) plan fund offerings mirror the aggregate trends in the mutual fund industry? If so, this

raises the concern that change in the composition of investment options offered in 401(k) plans

could result in more money being allocated to high-cost funds that will on average result in lower

net returns.

        To address these questions, we augment our 11-k data set described in Section 3. In

particular, we follow the firms that had 11-k data during 1998 in the original sample over the

next four years (1999-2002). This enables us to better assess trends in 401(k) plans over a longer

time series. One disadvantage of the later data is that we are restricted to looking at the

allocation of asset balances rather than the flow of contributions, but this will not be an issue for

the analyses we conduct below. 10

        In Figure 2, we see that the average number of options in 401(k) plans has increased from

just below 6 options in 1993 to 14 options in 2002. Over that period, the average number of

actively-managed equity funds in the plan has dramatically increased from 1.6 in 1993 to 6.4 in

2002, while the number of index funds offered in 401(k) plans only increased slightly over the

period and still remains very small (averaging no more than one option in the plan over every

year in the sample).

        Figure 3 confirms that the vast majority of new funds (two-thirds) added to 401(k) plans

over 1998-2002 are actively-managed equity funds (mirroring the broader trends in the mutual


10
  The reason for the difference between the pre-1999 and the 1999 – 2002 data is that the SEC changes the
reporting requirements on the 11-k.


                                                                                                            24
fund industry), while a mere 8% of the new options represent an index fund (typically

introducing an S&P fund for the first time or adding a small-cap index fund to a S&P 500 fund

already in place). Coupled with our earlier findings in Section 4, this trend in new fund offerings

has strong implications for the relation between the investment performance of these retirement

plans and the number of fund options provided.

       Of course, investors interested in low cost index funds really only need one broad market

index, and thus it is possible that the majority of allocations flow to this low-cost option (as

opposed to the higher-cost actively managed alternatives). Our previous regression results in

Tables 4, 5, and 6 suggest this is unlikely to be the case, and Table 7 confirms this. In Table 7,

we demonstrate that the share of equity options in the plan comprised of actively-managed funds

increases with an increase in the total number of equity funds in the plan, as does the fraction of

equity assets held in actively-managed funds. Regression analysis (not reported) confirms that

the share of assets in actively-managed funds (index funds) increases (decreases) substantially

with the number of total equity funds in the plan. This result is consistent with the notion that

the burgeoning number of actively-managed funds makes it harder for investors to find the

lower-cost index fund in the plan (with less money flowing to this option as a result).

       Of interest is the “quality” of the actively-managed equity funds offered in the 401(k)

plans relative to the index funds offered. To provide an initial sense of the “quality” of the

actively-managed relative to the index funds (at least as measured by their past long-term

performance and annual costs) we present in Table 8 differences in the following variables: past

five-year returns before expenses, expenses, past five-year returns after expenses, and percentile

ranking of the fund based on its past five-year returns (after expenses) within its investment




                                                                                                     25
objective (such as small-cap growth) as determined by Morningstar. 11 Table 8 demonstrates that

while the actively managed and index equity funds offered in our sample of 401(k) plans have

similar performance before accounting for expenses (index funds actually slightly outperformed,

but the difference is not significant), they differ significantly in their reported annual expenses

(on the order of 50 basis points per year), which leads to worse performance after accounting for

expenses (both in terms of returns and percentile rankings within its investment objective).

        Table 9 conducts a similar analysis at the firm level. For each firm-year observation, we

calculate the average expenses across all the domestic equity options in the plan as well as the

average Morningstar percentile rankings for performance over the next year. We relate these

variables to the fraction of domestic equity funds in the 401(k) plan that is actively managed,

controlling for both firm-specific and year fixed effects. The results suggest that switching from

all index equity funds to all actively-managed equity funds increases the firm-level average

expenses for equity funds by 36 to 47 basis points per year, and thus reduces the firm-level

average performance ranking of its equity funds over the next year by 15 percentage points in the

Morningstar Percentile Rankings.

        Given historically that actively-managed funds do not outperform index funds (perhaps

even before expenses), these investment patterns (coupled with the composition of the new funds

offered) could result in a nontrivial reduction in resources available for retirement. For

example, consider a worker who starts at age 22 earning $30,000 per year and experiences 4%

nominal annual earnings growth until they retire at age 62. Suppose this worker saves 6% of

salary per year in a 401(k) and receives a matching contribution equal to 3% of salary. If this

individual earns an 8% nominal net return on their investments, she would have $1.142 million

11
  These variables are provided by merging our sample of 401(k) fund offerings with the CRSP and Morningstar
mutual fund databases. Morningstar percentile rankings are scaled from 0 to 100 where 0 is the worst performer and
100 is the best performer.


                                                                                                               26
at retirement. If, instead, this individual received nominal annual net returns that were 35 basis

points lower than this, or 7.65%, she would have only $1.065 million at retirement. In short, due

to the power of compounding, a 0.35% per year difference in annual returns accumulates to a

nontrivial 7.5% difference in terminal wealth at retirement. The fact that individual investors

may not be fully considering the important role that expenses play in reducing their retirement

wealth is consistent with the findings of Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2006) who show that

highly educated subjects (Harvard undergrads and Wharton MBAs) are surprisingly

unresponsive to differences in expense ratios when selecting a mutual fund, even when the

underlying investment is otherwise nearly identical.



6. Conclusions

       A key policy issue in the design and implementation of any defined contribution pension

system, whether publicly or privately provided, is how to structure the investment options that

will be made available to participants. While it is well understood that the structure of

investment options can have an important effect on the level of administrative expenses of an

individual accounts program, we show that the number and mix of investment options can also

have a first order effect on the risk and return profile of average portfolios. Even after

controlling for individual firm and year fixed effects, we find a strong positive relationship

between the share of investment options provided to employees in a particular asset class and the

share of their portfolios invested in that asset class. This strongly suggests that average

participants are not optimally allocating their portfolios according to standard finance theory

predictions, but instead are following naïve strategies that subject them to “manipulation” by

non-binding changes in the number and mix of investment options. A key policy implication is




                                                                                                  27
that the number and mix of investment options will have an important effect on overall asset

allocation in the individual accounts. In short, it appears to be possible to influence the portfolio

allocation of individual participants by altering the mix of equity and bond funds, even if the

overall investment opportunity set remains unchanged.

       By exploiting panel data on 401(k) plans, we find that both plan parameters and firm-

level heterogeneity are important in explaining investment decisions. Investments in company

stock, in particular, seem to be driven more by differences in workers across firms (or

unobserved differences in the firms themselves) than by cross-sectional differences in pension

plan characteristics (such as whether the match is in company stock or the number of non-

company stock options in the retirement plan). This highlights the importance of exploiting

panel data in identifying behavioral responses to pension plan characteristics.

       Finally, the proliferation of actively-managed equity funds in general (which has trickled

down to offerings in 401(k) plans as well), has resulted in the vast majority of money in

retirement plans flowing into higher-cost actively managed equity funds as opposed to lower-

cost equity index funds (such as S&P 500 funds). This results in plan participants paying higher

fees, which will depress overall portfolio performance, and thus, in the long-term, depress

retirement wealth.




                                                                                                   28
References

Agnew, Julie, 2006, Do behavioral biases vary across individuals: evidence from individual level
   data, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden, 2003, Portfolio choice and trading in a
   large 401(k) plan, American Economic Review 93-1, 193-215.

Agnew, Julie and Lisa R. Szykman, 2005, Asset allocation and information overload: The
   influence of information display, asset choice, and investor experience, Journal of Behavioral
   Finance, 6-2, 57-70.

Ameriks, John and Stephen Zeldes, 2001, How do household portfolio shares vary with age?
  Working paper, Columbia University, December.

Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to
   company stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747-64.

Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Naïve diversification strategies in retirement
   savings plans, American Economic Review 91-1, 79-98.

Brown, Jeffrey, Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner, 2006, 401(k) Matching Contributions in
      company stock: costs and benefits for firms and workers, Journal of Public Economics,
      90, 1315-1346.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance, 52, 57-
   82.

Choi, James, David Laibson and Brigitte Madrian, Why does the law of one price fail? An
       experiment on index mutual funds, working paper, March 30, 2006.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004a, For better or for
       worse: Default effects and 401(K) savings behavior, in David Wise, editor, Perspectives
       in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 81-121.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004b, Employee’s
       investment decisions about company stock, in Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus,
       editors, Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, Oxford:
       Oxford University Press, 121-136.

Congressional Budget Office, “Social Security Privatization: Experiences Abroad.” January
      1999.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
   fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance, 52, 1035-1058.




                                                                                               29
Government Accountability Office, “Social Security Reform: Other Countries’ Experiences
      Provide Lessons for the United States.” GAO-06-126, October 2005.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: the growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal
   of Finance, 51, 783-810.

Holden, Sarah and VanDerhei, Jack, 2001, The impact of employer-selected investment options
   on 401(k) plan participants’ asset allocations: Preliminary findings, Working Paper,
   Investment Company Institute and Temple University.

Huberman, Gur, Sheena Iyengar, and Wei Jiang, 2007, Defined contribution pension plans:
   determinants of participation and contribution rates, Journal of Financial Services Research,
   forthcoming.

Huberman, Gur and Wei Jiang, 2006, Offerings vs. choices in 401(k) plans: Equity exposure
   and number of funds, Journal of Finance, 61-2, 763-801.

Huberman, Gur and Paul Sengmueller, 2004, Performance and employer stock in 401(k) plans,
   Review of Finance, 8-3, 403-443.

Investment Company Institute, 2005, Mutual Fund Handbook, 45th edition, Washington, DC.

Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964, Journal of
   Finance, 23, 389-416.

Karlsson, Anders, Massimo Massa, and Andrei Simonov, Portfolio choice and menu exposure,
   Working Paper, August, 2006.

Madrian, Brigitte, and Dennis Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
  participation and savings behavior, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149-1525.

Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds from 1971 to 1991,
   Journal of Finance, 50, 549-572.

Palme, Marten, Annika Sunden, and Paul Soderlind, Investment choice in the swedish premium
   pension plan, Working Paper, December 21, 2004.

Samuelson, William and Richard Zeckhauser, 1988, Status quo bias in decision making, Journal
   of Risk and Uncertainty 1 (March), 7-59.




                                                                                               30
                                                Table 1: Sample Composition
Data collected for all U.S. companies listed in Compustat any year from 1993 to 1999 that filed an 11-k at least once during 1994-2001, and for
which complete fund classification was possible. See text for further details.


                                  Number of                 Number of years                     Number                     Number of
         Year
                                 observations                 in sample                         of firms                  observations
         1991                         29                           1                              211                         211
         1992                           128                            2                           194                           388
         1993                           240                            3                           166                           498
         1994                           314                            4                           107                           428
         1995                           398                            5                            86                           430
         1996                           487                            6                            72                           432
         1997                           537                            7                            40                           280
         1998                           566                            8                            13                           104
         1999                            65                            9                             1                             9
         2000                            26                           10                             1                            10
      TOTAL                           2,790                       TOTAL                            891                          2,790




                                                                                                                                             31
                                            Table 2a: Characteristics of 1998 Sample, S&P 1500, and Public Firms
Data for S&P 1500 and public firms are from Compustat. Public firms include 7,501 U.S. firms.


                                                                        1998 Sample                                         S&P 1500                                        Public Firms
Market Value ($ millions)
    Mean                                                                   6,029                                            7,283                                              2,438
    Median                                                                  799                                             1,329                                               192
    [ 10th % – 90th % ]                                               [ 67 – 10,240 ]                                  [ 238 – 14,211 ]                                    [ 26 – 3,260 ]
Employees (000s)
   Mean                                                                      13.9                                              19.9                                              5.4
   Median                                                                     4.5                                               6.6                                              0.5
   [ 10th % – 90th % ]                                                  [ 0.5 – 32.3 ]                                     [ 0.9 – 45 ]                                    [ 0.02 – 10.2 ]
Member of S&P 1500 (%)                                                          52                                               100                                                20
Technology Sector (%)                                                           15                                                19                                                24



                  Table 2b: Aggregate 401-k Plan Assets and Contributions for 1998 Sample, Public Firms, and All Firms
Data on 401-k assets for public firms are from 1998 5500 filings with the Department of Labor. Data for all firms (public and private) are estimated by the Department of Labor. Company stock for
public firms and all firms excludes stock indirectly held in trusts and pooled accounts. Employer contributions constitute 29 percent of total contributions for the 1998 sample and 31percent for all public
firms.


                                                                                              1998 Sample                              Public Firms                                All Firms
Total 401-k Assets ($ billions)                                                                   249                                      698                                      1,541
Employee and Employer Contributions ($ billions)                                                    13.9                                     49.2                                     134.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                         32
 Table 3. Composition of Plan Options and Employee Contributions in 401(k) Plans by Fund Type, Pooled Sample 1991-2000
Data from 11-k forms. See text for further information.


                                                          Mean   10th Percentile   25th Percentile   Median   75th Percentile   90th Percentile
Total Number of Options in Plan                           7.8         4.0               5.0           7.0          9.0               12.0
      Company Stock Fund                                  1.0         1.0               1.0           1.0          1.0               1.0
      Domestic Equity Funds                               3.1         1.0               2.0           3.0          4.0               6.0
      International Equity Funds                          0.7         0.0               0.0           1.0          1.0               1.0
      Bond Funds                                          2.3         1.0               2.0           2.0          3.0               4.0
      Balanced / Life Cycle Funds                         0.7         0.0               0.0           1.0          1.0               1.0
Share of Options in Plan (in percent)
      Company Stock Fund                                   15          8                 11            14           20                25
      Domestic Equity Funds                                38          20                29            38           50                56
      International Equity Funds                           8           0                 0             8            14                17
      Bond Funds                                           31          17                20            29           40                50
      Balanced / Life Cycle Funds                          9           0                 0             8            15                20
Share of Employee Contributions
Allocated to Fund Type (in percent)
      Company Stock Fund                                   19          3                 7             14           26                43
      Domestic Equity Funds                                44          20                31            45           58                68
      International Equity Funds                           4           0                 0             1            7                 13
      Bond Funds                                           26          8                 14            22           35                48
      Balanced / Life Cycle Funds                          7           0                 0             2            12                21




                                                                                                                                            33
     Table 4. Regression of Share of Contributions Against Share of Fund Options,
                           Pooled Cross-Sections 1991-2000
Each column of this table represents a separate regression. The dependent variable is the share of contributions allocated to a particular
asset class, and the regression is estimated for the sample of firms that offer at least one option in that asset class. The robust standard
errors, which are reported in parentheses, are clustered on each firm in order to account for correlation across time for a given firm. See
text for further information.


                                                                  Share of Contributions in:
                                       Company             Domestic     International      Bond                             Balanced
                                      Stock Fund          Equity Funds Equity Funds        Funds                             Funds
Share of Fund Options                   0.850***              0.703***             0.533***             0.265***             0.494***
in Asset Class                          (0.129)               (0.048)              (0.069)              (0.050)              (0.117)

Co Stock Match                          0.070***              -0.021*              -0.005              -0.032***            -0.029***
Required?                               (0.014)               (0.011)              (0.005)              (0.012)              (0.009)

Past 5 Year Return on                     0.005*             -0.003***              0.001*              -0.002                 -0.000
Company Stock                            (0.003)              (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)

                                        -0.467***              0.089                0.133*              0.328**                0.022
Std Dev of Co. Stock
                                         (0.156)              (0.140)              (0.073)              (0.155)               (0.130)

Market-to-Book Ratio                    0.013***              -0.003               -0.002              -0.009***            -0.007***
                                        (0.005)               (0.005)              (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.002)

Ln (Assets)                             0.030***             -0.020***            -0.007***              0.002              -0.010***
                                        (0.005)               (0.003)              (0.002)              (0.004)              (0.003)

DB Plan?                                 -0.018                0.016               -0.001                0.010                 -0.013
                                         (0.013)              (0.013)              (0.006)              (0.012)               (0.010)

                                         -0.017               -0.017                0.008                0.017                 -0.001
Inv. Grade Bonds?
                                         (0.018)              (0.011)              (0.006)              (0.014)               (0.011)
Year Fixed Effects?                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Firm Fixed Effects?                        No                   No                   No                    No                   No
Adjusted R2                               0.272                0.477                0.271                 0.321                0.244
# of Observations                         1,935                1,900                1,045                 1,911                1,065
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level respectively.




                                                                                                                                       34
     Table 5. Regression of Share of Contributions Against Share of Fund Options,
                             Firm Fixed Effects 1991-2000
Each column of this table represents a separate regression. The dependent variable is the share of contributions allocated to a particular
asset class, and the regression is estimated for the sample of firms that offer at least one option in that asset class. The robust standard
errors, which are reported in parentheses, are clustered on each firm in order to account for correlation across time for a given firm. See
text for further information.


                                                                  Share of Contributions in:
                                       Company             Domestic     International      Bond                             Balanced
                                      Stock Fund          Equity Funds Equity Funds        Funds                             Funds
Share of Fund Options                   0.269***              0.452***             0.317***             0.452***             0.443***
in Asset Class                          (0.093)               (0.053)              (0.109)              (0.060)              (0.121)

Co Stock Match                            0.023                0.024               -0.010               -0.037**               -0.003
Required?                                (0.019)              (0.016)              (0.008)              (0.017)               (0.020)

Past 5 Year Return on                   0.005***             -0.003***              0.001               -0.001                 -0.001
Company Stock                           (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.001)

                                         -0.144               -0.062                0.095                0.180                 -0.002
Std Dev of Co. Stock
                                         (0.228)              (0.246)              (0.173)              (0.264)               (0.230)

Market-to-Book (q)                      0.024***             -0.014***             -0.002               -0.008*                -0.003
                                        (0.007)               (0.005)              (0.004)              (0.005)               (0.003)

Ln (Assets)                             0.057***             -0.036***              0.003               -0.011                 -0.011
                                        (0.014)               (0.012)              (0.009)              (0.014)               (0.013)

DB Plan?                                  0.005                0.002               -0.001               -0.005                -0.013*
                                         (0.013)              (0.010)              (0.009)              (0.010)               (0.008)

                                          0.000                0.008               -0.005               -0.003                 0.008
Inv. Grade Bonds?
                                         (0.013)              (0.011)              (0.006)              (0.014)               (0.011)
Year Fixed Effects?                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Firm Fixed Effects?                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.875                0.868                0.808                 0.828                0.797
# of Observations                         1,935                1,900                1,045                 1,911                1,065
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level respectively.




                                                                                                                                       35
                  Table 6. Robustness of Relation Between Contributions to Equity Funds and Number of Equity Options
Each column of this table represents a separate regression. The dependent variable is the share of contributions allocated to a particular asset class, and the regression is estimated for the sample of firms
that offer at least one option in that asset class. All regressions also include all the other variables listed in Tables 4 and 5. The robust standard errors, which are reported in parentheses, are clustered on
each firm in order to account for correlation across time for a given firm. See text for further information.


                                                                                                                  Share of Contributions in:
                                                                                          All Domestic                                     Actively-Managed                                Equity Index
                                                                                          Equity Funds                                       Equity Funds                                     Funds
                                                               (1)                    (2)           (3)                       (4)                 (5)                                          (6)
Share of Fund Options in Asset                              0.452***              0.492***               0.441***                0.428***                     0.508***                        0.416***
Class                                                       (0.053)               (0.061)                (0.068)                 (0.069)                      (0.063)                         (0.133)

Share of Options that are Equity                                                    -0.041
Funds * (Have equity index fund)                                                   (0.030)

Share of Options that are Equity                                                                          0.041
Funds * (Have 3-4 equity options)                                                                        (0.029)

Share of Options that are Equity                                                                          -0.013
Funds * (Have 5+ equity options)                                                                         (0.036)

Change in Share of Contributions to
                                                                                                                                   0.006
Equity Funds During Prior Year
                                                                                                                                  (0.114)
(share in year t-1 less share in year t-2)
Year Fixed Effects?                                           Yes                    Yes                   Yes                      Yes                          Yes                             Yes
Firm Fixed Effects?                                           Yes                    Yes                   Yes                      Yes                          Yes                             Yes
Adjusted R2                                                  0.868                  0.869                 0.870                    0.892                        0.863                           0.875
# of Observations                                            1,900                  1,900                 1,900                     879                         1,797                            898
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                                              36
          Table 7. Composition of Domestic Equity Options and Contributions to Equity Funds in 401(k) Plans, 1991-2002
Data from 11-k forms. The number of domestic equity options in, share of domestic equity options in, and share of domestic equity assets in actively-managed funds and index funds represents the
average across firm-year observations. See text for further information.


                                                          Share of Domestic Equity Options in:                                        Share of Domestic Equity Assets in:
Total # of Domestic Equity Fund
    Options Offered by Plan                             Actively-Managed            Index                                         Actively-Managed              Index
                                                              Funds                 Funds                                               Funds                   Funds
                        1                                         0.77                                  0.23                                 0.77                                 0.23
                        2                                         0.80                                  0.20                                 0.79                                 0.21
                        3                                         0.81                                  0.19                                 0.80                                 0.20
                        4                                         0.83                                  0.17                                 0.80                                 0.20
                        5                                         0.84                                  0.16                                 0.80                                 0.20
                        6                                         0.85                                  0.15                                 0.81                                 0.19
                        7                                         0.86                                  0.14                                 0.81                                 0.19
                        8                                         0.88                                  0.12                                 0.83                                 0.17
                        9                                         0.89                                  0.11                                 0.85                                 0.15
                       10                                         0.88                                  0.12                                 0.82                                 0.18
                      11+                                         0.90                                  0.10                                 0.84                                 0.16




                                                                                                                                                                                                    37
Table 8. Difference in Performance and Costs of Actively-Managed Funds Relative to Index Funds in 401(k) Plans, 1991-2002
Regressions of performance and cost differences across domestic actively-managed and domestic index equity funds are estimated at the fund-year level (i.e., the unit of observation is a fund offering in
a given firm plan in a given year) for a sample of 401(k) plans from 1991-2002. The past five-year gross return regression is based on 15,067 fund-year observations, the expense regression is based on
17,599 fund-year observations, the past five-year net return regression is based on 15,161 fund-year observations, and the Morningstar percentile ranking regression is based on 15,153 fund-year
observations. Because of the difference in sample sizes, the difference in gross return minus the difference in expenses, need not equal the difference in net returns. The robust standard errors, which
are reported in parentheses, are clustered at the fund level. See text for further information.


                                                           Difference in Performance and Costs of Actively-Managed Funds Relative to Index Funds
                                                                             (returns and expenses are reported in percent on an annualized basis,
                                                    Morningstar percentile rankings are scaled from 0 to 100 where 0 is the worst performer and 100 is the best performer)

                                                                                                                                                                        Morningstar Percentile
                                                     Past Five-Year Gross
                                                                                                                                  Past Five-Year Net                        Ranking within
                                                        Return (before                              Expenses
                                                                                                                                 Return (after expenses)                 Objective (based on
                                                           expenses)
                                                                                                                                                                        past 5-year net returns)
Controls
                                                                -0.61                                  0.60***                               -1.37**                                -9.4***
None
                                                                (0.51)                                 (0.05)                                (0.54)                                  (2.7)
                                                                -0.08                                  0.53***                               -0.72**                                -8.3***
Year and Firm Fixed Effects
                                                                (0.30)                                 (0.03)                                (0.31)                                  (2.3)
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       38
                   Table 9. Regression of Expenses and Performance of Domestic Equity Allocations within 401(k) Plans
                              by Fraction of Domestic Equity Funds that are Actively-Managed, 1991-2002
Regressions of average expenses of domestic equity funds within a 401(k) plan and the average Morningstar percentile ranking of domestic equity funds within a 401(k) plan are presented. Morningstar
percentile rankings are scaled from 0 to 100 where 0 is the worst performer and 100 is the best performer and are based upon performance of the fund over the next year within its objective. The robust
standard errors, which are reported in parentheses, are clustered at the firm level. See text for further information.


                                                                                                                                   Firm-level average Morningstar Percentile
                                                                  Firm-level average expenses
                                                                                                                                  Rankings for performance over the next year
                                                                     for equity funds in plan
                                                                                                                                            for equity funds in plan
                                                                           (in percent)
                                                                                                                                             (in percentage points)
                                                                                                 Weighted by                                                   Weighted by
                                                           Unweighted                                                                Unweighted
                                                                                                 Fund Assets                                                   Fund Assets

Fraction of Equity Funds that                                  0.47***                               0.36***                               -15.2***                              -15.5***
are Actively Managed                                           (0.06)                                (0.06)                                 (3.5)                                 (3.7)

Year and Firm Fixed Effects?                                     Yes                                   Yes                                   Yes                                    Yes
Adjusted R2                                                     0.753                                 0.757                                 0.254                                  0.254
# of Observations                                               3,842                                 3,842                                 3,824                                  3,824
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 level respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     39
    Figure 1: Average Share of Fund Options and Share of Contributions by Asset Type and Total Number of Funds in Plan
                                               Employer Stock                                                                     Domestic Equity Funds
      Options/Contributions




                                                                                               Options/Contributions
                              30                                                                                       60
        Percent of Total




                                                                                                 Percent of Total
                              25                                                                                       50
                              20
                                                                                                                       40
                              15
                                                                                                                       30
                              10
                               5                                                                                       20
                                   4    5      6     7     8    9    10    11       12   >12                                4    5      6     7     8    9    10    11       12   >12

                                         Total Number of Funds Offered in Plan                                                       Total Number of Funds Offered in Plan

                                       Share of Fund Options        Share of Contributions                                      Share of Fund Options        Share of Contributions


                                             International Funds                                                                     Fixed Income Funds




                                                                                               Options/Contributions
      Options/Contributions




                              12                                                                                       40




                                                                                                 Percent of Total
        Percent of Total




                              10                                                                                       35
                               8
                                                                                                                       30
                               6
                                                                                                                       25
                               4
                               2                                                                                       20
                               0                                                                                       15
                                   4    5      6     7     8    9    10    11       12   >12                                4    5      6     7     8    9    10    11       12   >12
                                            Total Number of Funds Offered in Plan                                                    Total Number of Funds Offered in Plan

                                       Share of Fund Options        Share of Contributions                                      Share of Fund Options        Share of Contributions
Data from 11-k forms. See text for further information.




                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                        Figure 2: Average Number of Investment Options in Sample of 401(k) Plans, 1993-2002

    16



    14



    12



    10



     8



     6



     4



     2



     0
     1993                1994                1995         1996        1997           1998           1999            2000         2001       2002

                        Number of Domestic Equity Index Funds    Number of Domestic Actively-Managed Equity Funds   Number of Other Funds

Data from 11-k forms. See text for further information.




                                                                                                                                                   41
                                         Figure 3: Share of New Options Added to 401(k) Plans, 1998-2002




                                                                  Fixed Income
                                                                       7%
                                                           Balanced
                                                              6%



                                                  International
                                                      13%




                                         DOMESTIC INDEX
                                            EQUITY
                                                                                        DOMESTIC ACTIVE
                                              8%
                                                                                            EQUITY
                                                                                             66%




Data from 11-k forms. See text for further information.




                                                                                                           42
