                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PREDICTABLE RETURNS AND ASSET ALLOCATION:
                 SHOULD A SKEPTICAL INVESTOR TIME THE MARKET?

                                        Jessica A. Wachter
                                     Missaka Warusawitharana

                                        Working Paper 13165
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13165


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




We are grateful to John Campbell, John Cochrane, Joel Dickson, Itamar Drechsler, Bjorn Eraker, Martin
Lettau, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Lubos Pastor, Jay Shanken, Robert Stambaugh, Alexander Stremme,
Ivo Welch, Amir Yaron, Motohiro Yogo, and seminar participants at the 2005 CIRANO-CIREQ Financial
Econometrics Conference, the 2006 AFA meetings, the 2006 SED meetings, the 2007 D-CAF Conference
on Return Predictability, Harvard University, the Vanguard Group, and at the Wharton School for
helpful comments. We are grateful for financial support from the Aronson+Johnson+Ortiz fellowship
through the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research. This manuscript does not reflect the
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Jessica A. Wachter and Missaka Warusawitharana. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Predictable Returns and Asset Allocation: Should a Skeptical Investor Time the Market?
Jessica A. Wachter and Missaka Warusawitharana
NBER Working Paper No. 13165
June 2007
JEL No. C11,C32,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

Are excess returns predictable and if so, what does this mean for investors? Previous literature has
tended toward two polar viewpoints: that predictability is useful only if the statistical evidence for
it is incontrovertible, or that predictability should affect portfolio choice, even if the evidence is weak
according to conventional measures. This paper models an intermediate view: that both data and theory
are useful for decision-making. We investigate optimal portfolio choice for an investor who is skeptical
about the amount of predictability in the data. Skepticism is modeled as an informative prior over
the R^2 of the predictive regression. We find that the evidence is sufficient to convince even an investor
with a highly skeptical prior to vary his portfolio on the basis of the dividend-price ratio and the yield
spread. The resulting weights are less volatile and deliver superior out-of-sample performance as compared
to the weights implied by an entirely model-based or data-based view.

Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu

Missaka Warusawitharana
Department of Research and Statistics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
Mail Stop 97
20th and Constitution Ave
Washington D.C., 20551
Missaka.N.Warusawitharana@frb.gov
Introduction
Are excess returns predictable, and if so, what does this mean for investors? In classic studies
of rational valuation (e.g. Samuelson (1965, 1973), Shiller (1981)), risk premia are constant
over time and thus excess returns are unpredictable.1 However, an extensive empirical lit-
erature has found evidence for predictability in returns on stocks and bonds by scaled-price
ratios and interest rates.2
       Confronted with this theory and evidence, the literature has focused on two polar view-
points. On the one hand, if models such as Samuelson (1965) are correct, investors should
maintain constant weights rather than form portfolios based on possibly spurious evidence
of predictability. On the other hand, if the empirical estimates capture population values,
then investors should time their allocations to a large extent, even in the presence of transac-
tion costs and parameter uncertainty.3 Between these extremes, however, lies an interesting
intermediate view: that both data and theory can be helpful in forming portfolio allocations.
       This paper models this intermediate view in a Bayesian setting. We consider an investor
who has a prior belief about the R2 of the predictive regression. We implement this prior by
specifying a normal distribution for the regression coeﬃcient on the predictor variable. As
the variance of this normal distribution approaches zero, the prior belief becomes dogmatic
that there is no predictability. As the variance approaches inﬁnity, the prior is diﬀuse:
all levels of predictability are equally likely. In between, the distribution implies that the
   1
       Examples of general-equilibrium models that imply excess returns that are largely unpredictable include
Abel (1990, 1999), Backus, Gregory, and Zin (1989), Campbell (1986), Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (1993),
Kandel and Stambaugh (1991) and Mehra and Prescott (1985).
  2
    See, for example, Fama and Schwert (1977), Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988),
Fama and French (1989), Cochrane (1992), Goetzmann and Jorion (1993), Hodrick (1992), Kothari and
Shanken (1997), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Lewellen (2004), Ang and Bekaert (2006).
  3
    See, for example, Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1997) and Campbell and Viceira (1999) for stocks
and Sangvinatsos and Wachter (2005) for long-term bonds. Balduzzi and Lynch (1999) show that predictabil-
ity remains important even in the presence of transaction costs, while Barberis (2000) and Xia (2001) show,
respectively, that predictability remains important in the presence of estimation risk and learning. An
exception is the case of buy-and-hold portfolios with horizons of many years (Barberis (2000), Cochrane
(1999), Stambaugh (1999)). Brennan and Xia (2005) construct a long-run measure of expected returns and
derive implications for optimal portfolios. They show that this long-run measure often implies a less extreme
response to predictability than regression-based measures.




                                                       1
investor is skeptical about predictability: predictability is possible, but it is more likely that
predictability is “small” rather than “large”. By conditioning this normal distribution on
both the unexplained variance of returns and on the variance of the predictor variable, we
create a direct mapping from the investor’s prior beliefs on model parameters to a well-deﬁned
prior over the R2 .
       In our empirical implementation, we consider returns on a stock index and on a long-term
bond. The predictor variables are the dividend-price ratio and the yield spread between
Treasuries of diﬀerent maturities. We ﬁnd that the evidence is suﬃcient to convince an
investor who is quite skeptical about predictability to vary his portfolio on the basis of
these variables. The resulting weights, however, are much less volatile than for an investor
who allocates his portfolio purely based on data. To see whether the skeptical prior would
have been helpful in the observed time series, we implement an out-of-sample analysis. We
show that weights based on skeptical priors deliver superior out-of-sample performance when
compared to diﬀuse priors, dogmatic priors, and to a simple regression-based approach.
       Our study builds on previous work that has examined predictability from a Bayesian in-
vestment perspective. Kandel and Stambaugh (1996) show that predictive relations that are
weak in terms of standard statistical measures can nonetheless aﬀect portfolio choice.4 They
conduct a simulation experiment such that predictability is present with modest signiﬁcance,
and examine the portfolio choices of a Bayesian investor who views the simulated data. In
contrast, our study bases its inference on the historical time series of returns and predictor
variables. We ask whether an investor whose priors imply skepticism about the existence
of predictability would ﬁnd it optimal to vary their investments in risky assets over time.
Other studies on predictability include those of Avramov (2002) and Cremers (2002), who
show that Bayesian inference can lead to superior model selection. Our paper is also related
to recent work by Shanken and Tamayo (2005), who jointly model time variation in risk
and expected return in a Bayesian setting. Shanken and Tamayo incorporate model-based
   4
       Subsequently, a large literature has examined the portfolio consequences of return predictability in a
Bayesian framework. Barberis (2000) considers the optimization problem of a long-horizon investor when
returns are predictable. Xia (2001) considers the eﬀect of learning about the predictive relation in a dy-
namic setting with hedging demands. Brandt, Goyal, Santa-Clara, and Stroud (2005) and Skoulakis (2007)
extend this work to allow for uncertainty and learning about the other parameters in the predictive system.
Johannes, Polson, and Stroud (2002) model the mean and volatility of returns as latent factors. In contrast
to the present study, these papers assume diﬀuse priors.


                                                       2
intermediate views on the relation between expected return and risk. In what follows, we
compare the prior beliefs we assume to those in each of these related studies.
       Besides modeling priors over the R2 , our study also incorporates the ﬁndings of Stam-
baugh (1999). Stambaugh shows that incorporating the ﬁrst observation on the predictor
variable into the likelihood can make a substantial diﬀerence for portfolio choice; previous
studies had conditioned on this observation. Moreover, the choice among “uninformative”
priors can make a diﬀerence as well: a prior that is uninformative in the sense of Jeﬀreys
(1961) has diﬀerent properties than the uninformative priors that have been chosen previ-
ously in the portfolio choice literature. Building on the work of Stambaugh, this study also
incorporates information contained in the ﬁrst observation on the predictor variable, and
makes use of the limiting Jeﬀreys priors of Zellner (1996). We show that Jeﬀreys invariance
theory oﬀers an independent justiﬁcation for deﬁning the prior over the change in the R2 . As
the degree of skepticism goes to zero, the prior satisﬁes the Jeﬀreys condition for invariance.
       Our use of model-based informative priors has parallels in a literature that examines
the portfolio implications of the cross-section of stock returns. Motivated by the extreme
weights and poor out-of-sample performance of mean-variance eﬃcient portfolios (Best and
Grauer (1991), Green and Holliﬁeld (1992)), Black and Litterman (1992) propose using
market weights as a benchmark, in eﬀect using both data and the capital asset pricing
model to form portfolios. Recently, Bayesian studies such as Pastor (2000), Avramov (2004)
and Wang (2005) construct portfolios incorporating informative beliefs about cross-sectional
asset pricing models.5 Like the present study, these studies show that allowing models to
inﬂuence portfolio selection can be superior to using the data alone. While these studies
focus on the cross-section of returns, we apply these ideas to the time series.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the assumptions
on the likelihood and prior, the calculation of the posterior, and the optimization problem of
the investor. Section 2 applies these results to data on stock and bond returns, describes the
   5
       Related approaches to improving performance of eﬃcient portfolios include Bayesian shrinkage (Jobson
and Korkie (1980), Jorion (1985)) and portfolio constraints (Frost and Savarino (1988), Jagannathan and
Ma (2003)). Cvitanic, Lazrak, Martellini, and Zapatero (2006) incorporate analyst forecasts in a dynamic
setting with parameter uncertainty and learning. Garlappi, Uppal, and Wang (2007) take a multi-prior
approach to portfolio allocation that allows for ambiguity aversion. Tu and Zhou (2007) impose priors that
ensure that portfolio weights fall into a certain range. Unlike the present study, these papers assume that
the true distribution of returns is iid and focus on the cross-section.


                                                       3
posterior distributions, the portfolio weights, and the out-of-sample performance across dif-
ferent choices of priors. These sections assume, for simplicity, that there is a single predictor
variable. Section 3 extends the methods to allow for multiple predictor variables. Section 4
concludes.



1         Portfolio choice for a skeptical investor
Given observations on returns and a predictor variable, how should an investor allocate his
wealth? One approach would be to estimate the predictability relation, treat the point esti-
mates as known, and solve for the portfolio that maximizes utility. An alternative approach,
adopted in Bayesian studies, is to specify prior beliefs on the parameters. The prior repre-
sents the investor’s beliefs about the parameters before viewing data. After viewing data,
the prior is updated to form a posterior distribution; the parameters are then integrated
out to form a predictive distribution for returns, and utility is maximized with respect to
this distribution. This approach incorporates the uncertainty inherent in estimation into
the decision problem (see Klein and Bawa (1976), Bawa, Brown, and Klein (1979), Brown
(1979)).6 Rather than assuming that the investor knows the parameters, it assumes, realis-
tically, that the investor estimates the parameters from the data. Moreover, this approach
allows for prior information, perhaps motivated by economic models, to enter into the de-
cision process. This section describes the speciﬁcs of the likelihood function, the prior, and
the posterior used in this study.


1.1         Likelihood
This subsection constructs the likelihood function. Let rt+1 denote an N ×1 vector of returns
on risky assets in excess of a riskless asset from time t to t + 1, and xt a scalar predictor
variable at time t. The investor observes data on returns r1 , . . . , rT , and the predictor variable
x0 , . . . , xT . Let
                                       D ≡ {r1 , . . . , rT , x0 , x1 , . . . , xT }
    6
        Like these and the portfolio choice papers cited in the introduction, this paper studies an investor who
should not be viewed as representative. By deﬁnition, the representative investor must hold the market
portfolio.



                                                            4
represent the total data available to the investor. Our initial assumption is that there is
a single predictor variable that has the potential to predict returns on (possibly) multiple
assets. Allowing multiple predictor variables complicates the problem without contributing
to the intuition. For this reason, we postpone the discussion of multiple predictor variables
until Section 3.
   The data generating process is assumed to be

                                      rt+1 = α + βxt + ut+1                                   (1)
                                     xt+1 = θ0 + θ1 xt + vt+1 ,                               (2)

where                     ⎡          ⎤
                              ut+1
                          ⎣          ⎦ | rt , . . . , r1 , xt , . . . , x0 ∼ N (0, Σ) ,       (3)
                              vt+1
α and β are N × 1 vectors and Σ is an (N + 1) × (N + 1) symmetric and positive deﬁnite
matrix. It is useful to partition Σ so that
                                          ⎡                        ⎤
                                                     Σu     Σuv
                                          Σ=⎣                      ⎦,
                                                    Σvu      Σv

where Σu is the variance-covariance matrix of ut+1 , σv2 = Σv is the variance of vt+1 , Σuv is the
N × 1 vector of covariances of vt+1 with each element of ut+1 , and Σvu = Σ
                                                                           uv . This likelihood

is a multi-asset analogue of that assumed by Kandel and Stambaugh (1996), Campbell and
Viceira (1999), and many subsequent studies.
   It is helpful to group the regression parameters in (1) and (2) into a matrix:
                                           ⎡         ⎤
                                               
                                             α θ0
                                      B=⎣            ⎦,
                                             β  θ1

and to deﬁne matrices of the observations on the the left hand side and right hand side
variables:                       ⎡      ⎤                         ⎡    ⎤
                                r1 x1                         1 x0
                              ⎢ .    .. ⎥                    ⎢ .   .. ⎥
                           Y =⎢
                              ⎣
                                 ..   . ⎥
                                        ⎦,                 X=⎢
                                                             ⎣
                                                               ..   . ⎥⎦.
                                rT xT                         1 xT −1
As shown in Barberis (2000) and Kandel and Stambaugh (1996), the likelihood conditional
on the ﬁrst observation takes the same form as in a regression model with non-stochastic

                                                       5
regressors. Let p(D|B, Σ, x0 ) denote the likelihood function. From results in Zellner (1996),
it follows that
                                                         
                                               − T2        1
                p(D|B, Σ, x0 ) = |2πΣ|                exp − tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ−1         ,          (4)
                                                           2
where tr(·) denotes the sum of the diagonal elements of a matrix.7
       The likelihood function (4) conditions on the ﬁrst observation of the predictor variable,
x0 . Stambaugh (1999) argues for treating x0 and x1 , . . . , xT symmetrically: as random
draws from the data generating process. If the process for xt is stationary and has run for
a substantial period of time, then results in Hamilton (1994, p. 53) imply that x0 is a draw
from a normal distribution with mean
                                                                       θ0
                                              μx ≡ E [xt | B, Σ] =                                      (5)
                                                                     1 − θ1
and variance
                                                        σv2
                                        σx2
                             ≡ E (xt − μx ) | B, Σ =         2
                                                              .                      (6)
                                                      1 − θ12
Combining the likelihood of the ﬁrst observation with the likelihood of the remaining T
observations produces

   p(D|B, Σ) = p(D|x0 , B, Σ)p(x0 |B, Σ)
                                 − 12            T
                   =     2πσx2      |2πΣ|− 2
                                       
                                            1               1
                                  × exp − σx−2 (x0 − μx )2 − tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ−1                   .(7)
                                            2               2
Equation (7) is the likelihood function used in our analysis. Following Box, Jenkins, and
Reinsel (1970), we refer to (7) as the exact likelihood, and to (4) as the conditional likelihood.


1.2        Prior beliefs
This subsection describes the prior. We specify a class of prior distributions that range from
being “uninformative” in a sense we will make precise, to “dogmatic”. The uninformative
   7
       Maximizing the conditional likelihood function (4) is equivalent to running a vector auto-regression.
Resulting estimates for β are biased (see Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997), Nelson and Kim (1993)
and Stambaugh (1999)), and standard asymptotics provide a poor approximation to the distribution of test
statistics in small samples (Cavanagh, Elliott, and Stock (1995), Elliott and Stock (1994), Mankiw and
Shapiro (1986), Richardson and Stock (1989)). An active literature based in classical statistics focuses on
correcting for these problems (e.g. Amihud and Hurvich (2004), Campbell and Yogo (2006), Eliasz (2004),
Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin (2003), Lewellen (2004), Torous, Valkanov, and Yan (2004)).


                                                             6
priors imply that all amounts of predictability are equally likely, while the dogmatic priors
rule out predictability all together; the investor believes that returns are not predictable
regardless of what data are observed. Between these extremes lie priors that downweight
the return predictability. These informative priors imply that large values of the R2 from
predictive regressions are unlikely, but not impossible.
      The most obvious parameter that determines the degree of predictability is β. Set β to
zero, and there is no predictability in the model. However, it is diﬃcult to think of prior
beliefs about β in isolation from beliefs about other parameters. For example, a high variance
of xt might lower one’s prior on β, while a large residual variance of rt might raise it. Rather
than placing a prior on β directly, we instead place a prior on “normalized” β, that is β
adjusted for the variance of x and the variance of u. Let Cu be the Cholesky decomposition
of Σu , i.e. Cu Cu = Σu . Then
                                                   η = Cu−1 σx β

is normalized β. We assume that prior beliefs on η are given by

                                                 η ∼ N (0, ση2 IN ),                                             (8)

where IN is the N × N identity matrix.8 We implement these prior beliefs by specifying a
hierarchical prior. The prior for β is conditional on the remaining parameters:

                                  p(B, Σ) = p(β|α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ)p(α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ).

Then (8) implies
                                       β|α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ ∼ N (0, ση2 σx−2 Σu ).                                   (9)

Because σx is a function of θ1 and σv , the prior on β is also implicitly a function of these
parameters. The parameter ση indexes the degree to which the prior is informative. We
show that as ση → ∞, the prior over β becomes uninformative; all values of β are viewed as
equally likely. As ση → 0, the prior converges to a point mass at zero and the prior beliefs
assign a probability of 1 to no predictability.
      Finite positive values of ση involve some skepticism about the amount of predictability
in the data. The dependence between β, σx , and Σu allow this skepticism to be expressed in
  8
      Formally, we can consider a prior on the parameters p(α, η, θ0 , θ1 , Σ) = p(η)p(α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ), where p(η) is
deﬁned by (8).


                                                          7
terms of the R2 from the regressions (1). This is easiest to see in the case of a single risky
asset. When there is a single risky asset, the population R2 is equal to
                                                                −1         η2
                                    R2 = β 2 σx2 β 2 σx2 + Σu        =                                    (10)
                                                                         η2 + 1
where Σu is now a scalar. Therefore a prior over η translates into a prior over the R2 . When
there are N risky assets, the distribution on η implies a distribution for the R2 of each asset.
Moreover, it implies a distribution for the maximum R2 achievable on a portfolio of assets.
Let w be an N × 1 vector of asset weights. Then
                                                        w ββ  σx2
                                 max R2 = max
                                   w           w w  ββ  wσ 2 + w  Σu w
                                                            x
                                                ηη
                                            =       ,                                                    (11)
                                              η η+1
where the second line is shown in Appendix A.9
       By formulating the prior for β in terms of σx and Σu , we put a prior on the R2 of the
predictability equation. For this to work, it is necessary to condition on both σx and Σu .
Consider, for example, two diﬀerent state variables, one with a lower unconditional volatility
(σx ) than the other. Our prior implies that the state variable with the lower unconditional
volatility puts more weight on large values of β, all else equal.10 The reason is that a lower σx
implies a lower R2 for any given level of β: an investor who is skeptical about predictability
would therefore be willing to consider larger values of β in the case of lower σx because these
would still be consistent with a low R2 . In the limit as σx approaches zero, the prior on β
ﬂattens because even an arbitrarily large β implies that returns are almost unpredictable.
       Conditioning on Σu is also important. Consider for simplicity the case of a single risky
asset. If Σu is large, then even large values of β relative to σx translate into low amounts
of predictability because the “signal” βxt is overwhelmed by the noise ut+1 . Large values of
   9
       This prior distribution could easily be modiﬁed to impose other restrictions on the coeﬃcients β. In the
context of predicting equity returns, Campbell and Thompson (2007) suggest disregarding estimates of β
if the expected excess return is negative, or if β has an opposite sign to that suggested by theory. In our
model, these restrictions could be imposed by assigning zero prior weight to the appropriate regions of the
parameter space. One could also consider a non-zero mean for β, corresponding to a prior belief that favors
predictability of a particular sign. For simplicity, we focus on priors that apply to any predictor variable on
possibly multiple assets, and leave these extensions to future work.
  10
     By “large” values of β, in this and the next paragraph we mean vectors β whose elements are large in
absolute value.


                                                        8
β are still consistent with low values of the R2 when ut+1 is large. In the case of multiple
risky assets, conditioning on Σu plays an additional role: it implies that the investor does
not downweight predictability on speciﬁc assets per se, but on predictability on the system
of assets. It is not possible to obtain a high R2 by cleverly combining assets into a portfolio.
       For the remaining parameters, we choose a prior that is uninformative in the sense of
Jeﬀreys (1961). Jeﬀreys argues that a reasonable property of a “no-information” prior is
that inference be invariant to one-to-one transformations of the parameter space. Given a
set of parameters μ, data D, and a log-likelihood l(μ; D), Jeﬀreys shows that invariance is
equivalent to specifying a prior as
                                                  2 1/2
                                                   ∂ l   
                                              
                                       p(μ) ∝ −E          .                                            (12)
                                                   ∂μ∂μ 
                                                        


Besides invariance, this formulation of the prior has other advantages such as minimizing
asymptotic bias and generating conﬁdence sets that are similar to their classical counterparts
(see Phillips (1991)).11
       We follow the approach of Stambaugh (1999) and Zellner (1996), and derive a limit-
ing Jeﬀreys prior as explained in Appendix C. This limiting prior is given by taking an
unconditional expectation in (12) and takes the form
                                                                          N +4
                                   p(α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ) ∝ σx |Σu |1/2 |Σ|−    2     ,                       (13)

for θ1 ∈ (−1, 1), and zero otherwise. Therefore the joint prior is given by

                       p(B, Σ) = p(β|α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ)p(α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ)
                                                      
                                  N +1   − N2+4           1                          −1
                               ∝ σx |Σ|           exp − β  ση2 σx−2 Σu                   β              (14)
                                                          2
  11
       The notion of an uninformative prior in a time-series setting is a matter of debate. One approach is
to ignore the time-series aspect of (1) and (2), treating the right hand side variable as exogenous. This
implies a ﬂat prior for α, β, θ0 , and θ1 . When applied in a setting with exogenous regressors, this approach
leads to Bayesian inference which is quite similar to classical inference (Zellner (1996)). However, Sims and
Uhlig (1991) show that applying the resulting priors in a time series setting leads to diﬀerent inference than
classical procedures when xt is highly persistent. Phillips (1991) derives an exact Jeﬀreys (1961) prior and
shows that the inference with this prior leads to diﬀerent conclusions than inference with a prior that is ﬂat
for the regression coeﬃcients. As a full investigation of these issues is outside the scope of this study, we
focus on the Jeﬀreys prior. Replacing the prior in (13) with one that is implied by exogenous regressors gives
results that are similar to our current ones; these are available from the authors.


                                                      9
(note that ση is a constant). Because Jeﬀreys priors involve the likelihood function, typically
they require “prior” knowledge of the data. An advantage of the limiting Jeﬀreys prior
is that it does not require this knowledge. We emphasize that, in (13) and (14), σx is
a nonlinear function of the autoregressive coeﬃcient θ1 and volatility of the shock to the
predictor variable σv .
   Jeﬀreys invariance theory provides an independent justiﬁcation for modeling priors on β
as in (9). Appendix B shows that the limiting Jeﬀreys prior for B and Σ equals
                                                           N +4
                                   p(B, Σ) ∝ σxN +1 |Σ|−    2     .                         (15)

This prior corresponds to (14) as ση approaches inﬁnity. Modeling the prior for β as depend-
ing on σx not only has an interpretation in terms of the R2 , but also implies that an inﬁnite
prior variance represents ignorance as deﬁned by Jeﬀreys (1961). Note that a prior on β
that is independent of σx would not have this property. Because the priors in (14) combine
an informative (“skeptical”) prior on β with a Jeﬀreys prior on the remaining parameters,
we refer to these as skeptical Jeﬀreys priors.
   Figure 1 depicts the distribution of the R2 implicit in our prior beliefs. The ﬁgure shows
the probability that the R2 exceeds some value k, P (R2 > k), as a function of k; it is
therefore one minus the cumulative distribution function for the R2 . We construct this
ﬁgure by simulating draws of η from (8) and, for each draw, constructing a draw from the
R2 distribution using (10). Note that for ση = 0, the investor assigns zero probability to a
positive R2 ; for this reason P (R2 > k) is equal to one at zero and is zero elsewhere. As ση
increases, the investor assigns non-zero probability to positive values of the R2 . For ση = .04,
the probability that the R2 exceeds .02 is .0005. For ση = .08, the probability that the R2
exceeds .02 is .075. Finally when ση is large, approximately equal probabilities are assigned
to all values of the R2 . This is the diﬀuse prior that assigns no skepticism to the data.
In what follows, we will consider the implications of these four priors for the individual’s
investment decisions. We will refer to them by using the corresponding probabilities that
the R2 exceeds .02. We note, however, that we focus on .02 for convenience; any number
between 0 and 1 could be substituted.




                                                 10
Comparison with related studies

In this section we have described one way of modeling prior information. We now compare
this approach to that used in other return predictability studies that make use of informative
priors. These include Kandel and Stambaugh (1996), Avramov (2002, 2004), Cremers (2002)
and Shanken and Tamayo (2005).12 With the exception of Shanken and Tamayo (2005),
these studies do not focus on informative priors over return predictability. Nonetheless, they
do make use of informative priors, so it is instructive to compare their approaches to the
approach that we take here.
       Kandel and Stambaugh (1996) derive posteriors assuming the investor has seen, in ad-
dition to the actual data, a “prior” sample of the data that has moments equal to those of
the actual sample except but without predictability.13 Avramov (2002, 2004) also takes this
approach. As this approach serves to reduce posterior estimates relative to sample estimates,
it has similar eﬀects to introducing an informative prior as we do here. We do not to take this
approach because constructing this prior sample requires knowledge of moments of the data
for the actual sample. It is therefore diﬃcult to justify this procedure in decision-theoretic
terms, as it assumes that the investor knows moments of the future time series of the data.
       Cremers (2002) speciﬁes informative prior beliefs about the time series that highlight
the importance of the expected R2 in the predictability equation. Cremers’s priors assume
knowledge of sample moments of the predictor variable. In a setting where regressors were
exogenous this might not present a problem. However, when the regressor is stochastic
and correlated with returns, it is necessary to assume that the investor knows the sample
moments without having seen the predictor variable. This also is diﬃcult to justify in
decision-theoretic terms.14 An advantage of our approach over these previous studies is that
  12
       Goyal and Welch (2004) present an “encompassing forecast”, which, while not Bayesian, has similar
implications in that it downweights the predictability coeﬃcient estimated from the data. Bayesian methods
can be seen as formalizing this approach.
  13
     Kandel and Stambaugh discuss the appeal of holding the distribution of the R2 constant, and for this
reason, set the length of the prior sample to increase in the number of predictor variables.
  14
     Data-based procedures for forming priors are often referred to as “empirical Bayes”. However, at least in
its classic applications, empirical Bayes implies either the the use of data that is known prior to the decision
problem at hand or data from the population from which the parameter of interest can be drawn (Robbins
(1964), Berger (1985)). For example, if one is forming a prior on a expected return for a particular security,
one might use the average expected return of securities for that industry (Pastor and Stambaugh (1999)).



                                                      11
our priors are parsimonious but do not require knowledge of future data.15
       Another approach is adopted by Shanken and Tamayo (2005). Shanken and Tamayo
model time-variation in risk as well as in expected returns. Like our priors, the priors in
Shanken and Tamayo represent a model-based view that is intermediate between complete
faith in a model and complete faith in the data. However, their formulation of priors is less
parsimonious, requiring ten parameters in the case of a single asset (a broad stock market
portfolio) and predictor variable (the dividend-yield). The prior values are speciﬁc to these
variables and do not transfer easily to other assets or new predictor variables. The advantage
of our method is that it expresses the informativeness of the agent’s prior beliefs as a single
number which can be mapped into beliefs about the maximum R2 . This is the case regardless
of the number of risky assets or the number and characteristics of the predictor variables.
       Our priors are in fact reminiscent of the choice of prior on the intercepts in cross-sectional
studies. Pastor and Stambaugh (1999) and Pastor (2000) place an informative prior on the
vector of intercepts from regressions of returns on factors in the cross-section. Building on
ideas of MacKinlay (1995), these studies argue that failure to condition the intercepts on
the residual variance could lead to very high Sharpe ratios, because there would be nothing
to prevent a low residual variance draw from occurring simultaneously with a high intercept
draw. Bayesian portfolio choice studies (Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2001), Jones and
Shanken (2005), Pastor and Stambaugh (2002)) place an informative prior on estimates of
mutual fund skill (intercepts from regressions of returns on factors), and argue based on
related ideas that this informative prior should be conditioned on the residual variance of
the fund. In the present study, β plays a role that is roughly analogous to the intercept
in these previous studies. β = 0 implies no predictability, and hence no “mispricing”. As
in these previous studies, conditioning β on volatility measures ensures that a high draw of
β could not coincide with a low draw of Σu . However, in the time-series setting, it is not
suﬃcient to condition β on Σu ; β must also be conditioned on σx in order to produce a
well-deﬁned distribution for quantities of interest.
  15
       Generally Jeﬀreys priors do require knowledge of future data, because they involve taking derivatives of
the likelihood function. Our limiting Jeﬀreys priors, however, integrate out over the data and are therefore
not subject to this critique.




                                                       12
1.3    Posterior
This section shows how the likelihood of Section 1.1 and the prior of Section 1.2 combine to
form the posterior distribution. From Bayes’ rule, it follows that the joint posterior for B, Σ
is given by
                                     p(B, Σ|D) ∝ p(D|B, Σ)p(B, Σ),

where p(D|B, Σ) is the likelihood and p(B, Σ) is the prior. Substituting in the prior (14)
and the likelihood (7) produces
                                                            
                          T +N +4        1  2 −2    −2        1
  p(B, Σ|D) ∝     σxN |Σ|− 2        exp − β ση σx Σu    β exp − σx−2 (x0 − μx )2
                                         2                     2
                                                  
                                                     1
                                               exp − tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ−1              (16)
                                                     2

as a posterior.
   This posterior does not take the form of a standard density function because of the
presence of σx2 in the prior and in the term in the likelihood involving x0 (note that σx2 is
a nonlinear function of θ1 and σv ). However, we can sample from the posterior using the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (see Chib and Greenberg (1995)). Deﬁne column vectors

                           b = vec(B) = [α1 , β1 , · · · αN , βN , θ0 , θ1 ]
                         b1 = [α1 , β1 , · · · αN , βN ]
                         b2 = [θ0 , θ1 ] .

The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is implemented “block-at-a-time”, by ﬁrst sampling from
p(Σ|b, D), then p(b1 |b2 , Σ, D), and ﬁnally p(b2 |b1 , Σ, D). The proposal density for the con-
ditional probability of Σ is the inverted Wishart with T + 2 degrees of freedom and scale
factor of (Y − XB) (Y − XB). The accept-reject algorithm of Chib and Greenberg (1995,
Section 5) is used to sample from the target density, which takes the same form as (16). The
proposal densities for b1 and b2 are multivariate normal. For b1 , the proposal and the target
are equivalent, while for b2 , the accept-reject algorithm is used to sample from the target
density. Details are given in Appendix D. As described in Chib and Greenberg, drawing suc-
cessively from the conditional posteriors for Σ, b1 , and b2 produces a density that converges
to the full posterior.



                                                  13
1.4    Predictive distribution and portfolio choice
This section describes how we determine optimal portfolio choice based on the posterior
distribution. Consider an investor who maximizes expected utility at time T + 1 conditional
on information available at time T . The investor solves

                                     max ET [U (WT +1 )|D]                                   (17)

where WT +1 = WT [wT rT +1 + rf,T ], wT are the weights in the N risky assets, and rf,T is the
total return on the riskless asset from time T to T + 1 (recall that rT +1 is a vector of excess
returns). The expectation in (17) is taken with respect to the predictive distribution
                                  
                    p(rT +1 |D) = p(rT +1 |xT , B, Σ)p(B, Σ|D) dB dΣ.                        (18)

   Following previous single-period portfolio choice studies (see, e.g. Baks, Metrick, and
Wachter (2001) and Pastor (2000)), we assume that the investor has quadratic utility. The
advantage of quadratic utility is that it implies a straightforward mapping between the
moments of the predictive distribution of returns and portfolio choice. However, because
our method produces an entire distribution function for returns, it can be applied to other
utility functions, and to buy-and-hold investors with horizons longer than one quarter.
   Let Ẽ denote the expectation and Ṽ the variance-covariance matrix of the N assets
corresponding to the predictive distribution (18). For a quadratic-utility investor, optimal
weights w∗ in the N assets are given by

                                                 1 −1
                                         w∗ =      Ṽ Ẽ,                                    (19)
                                                 A

where A is a parameter determining the investor’s risk aversion. The weight in the riskless
                    
bond is equal to 1 − N     ∗
                      i=1 wi . Note that our method makes no assumptions on the riskfree

rate as the level of the riskfree rate is not relevant for portfolio choice under our assumptions.
   Given draws from the posterior distribution of the parameters αj , β j , Σju , and a value of
xt , a draw from the predictive distribution of asset returns is given by

                                      r j = α j + β j x t + uj ,

where uj ∼ N (0, Σju ). The optimal portfolio is then the solution to (19), with the mean and
variance computed by simulating draws rj .

                                                 14
2     Results
We consider the problem of a quadratic utility investor who allocates wealth between a
riskless asset, a long-term bond, and a stock index. We estimate two versions of the system
given in (1)–(3), one with the dividend-price ratio as the predictor variable and one with the
yield spread. An appeal of these variables is that they are related to excess returns through
present value identities for bonds and stocks (see Campbell and Shiller (1988, 1991)).


2.1    Data
All data are obtained from the Center for Research on Security Prices (CRSP). Excess stock
and bond returns are formed by subtracting the quarterly return on the three-month Treasury
bond from the quarterly return on the value-weighted NYSE-AMEX-NASDAQ index and the
ten-year Treasury bond (from the CRSP indices ﬁle) respectively. The dividend-price ratio
is constructed from monthly return data on the stock index as the sum of the previous twelve
months of dividends divided by the current price. The natural logarithm of the dividend-
price ratio is used as the predictor variable. The yield spread is equal to the continuously
compounded yield on the zero-coupon ﬁve year bond (from the Fama-Bliss data set) less the
continuously compounded yield on the three-month bond. Data on bond yields are available
from the second quarter of 1952. We therefore consider quarterly observations from the
second quarter of 1952 until the last quarter of 2004.


2.2    Posterior means, expected returns and portfolios conditional
       on the full sample
This section quantitatively describes the posterior beliefs of an investor who views the entire
data set. For both predictor variables, one million draws from the posterior distribution are
simulated as described in Section 1.3. An initial 100,000 “burn-in” draws are discarded.
    We ﬁrst examine the posterior distribution over the maximum R2 . Because our empirical
implementation assumes two assets, we compute the prior distribution of (11) assuming
N = 2. The left panel of Figure 2 reports the probability that the maximum R2 exceeds k,
as a function of k for both the prior with ση = .08 and for the posterior distribution implied
by this prior when the dividend-price ratio is the predictor variable. Below k = .02, the


                                              15
posterior probability that the R2 exceeds k is above the prior probability. Above .02, the
posterior probability that the R2 exceeds k is lower for the posterior than for the prior. The
right panel of Figure 2 shows the probability density function of the posterior and of the
prior. While the prior density is decreasing in the R2 over this range, the posterior density
is hump-shaped with a maximum at about 0.02.
      Figure 3 shows analogous results for the yield spread. In this case, the agent places more
weight on relatively high values of the R2 as compared with results for the dividend yield.
The probability that the R2 exceeds k is larger for the posterior than the prior across the
entire range that we consider. The posterior distribution for the R2 still peaks at about 0.02,
but falls oﬀ less quickly than in the case of the dividend yield.
      Table 1 reports posterior means for values of ση equal to 0, .04, .08, and ∞. To emphasize
the economic signiﬁcance of these priors, we report the corresponding probabilities that the
R2 exceeds .02: 0, .0005, .075, and .999.16 The predictor variable is the dividend-price ratio.
Posterior standard deviations are reported in parentheses. The table also shows results from
estimation by ordinary least squares (OLS). For the OLS values, standard errors are reported
in parentheses.
      As Table 1 shows, the dividend-price ratio predicts stock returns but not bond returns.
The posterior mean for the β for bond returns is negative and small in magnitude. The
posterior mean for the β for stock returns is positive for all of the priors we consider and for
the OLS estimate. For the diﬀuse prior, the posterior mean of β equals to 1.46, below the OLS
estimate of 2.72. As the prior becomes more informative, the posterior mean for β becomes
smaller: for P (R2 > .02) = .075, the estimate is 1.41, while for P (R2 > .02) = .0005, it is
0.69.
      Even though all of the priors are uninformative with respect to the autoregressive coeﬃ-
cient θ1 , the posterior mean of θ1 nonetheless increases as the priors become more informative
over β. The reason is the negative correlation between draws for θ1 and draws for β. As
Stambaugh (1999) shows, the negative correlation between shocks to returns and shocks to
the predictor variable implies that when β is below its OLS value, θ1 tends to be above its
OLS value. The reason is that if β is below its OLS value, it must be that the lagged predic-
tor variable and returns have an unusually high covariance in the sample (because the OLS
 16
      These values are the marginal probability that the R2 for a single equation exceeds 0.02.




                                                      16
value is “too high”). When this occurs, the predictor variable tends to have an unusually
low autocorrelation; thus the OLS estimate for θ1 is too low and the posterior mean will be
above the OLS value. Therefore, placing a prior that weights the posterior mean of β toward
zero raises the posterior mean of θ1 .17
       Table 1 also reports posterior means and standard deviations for the means of the predic-
tor variable and of stock returns. For example, for returns the table reports E [E[rt+1 |B, Σ]|D] =
                                          1/2
           θ0                          θ0
E α + β 1−θ   1
                |D   and  Var   α + β 1−θ1
                                           |D       . The OLS mean is set equal to α̂ + β̂ 1−θ̂0θ̂ ,
                                                                                                             1

where ˆ denotes the OLS estimate of a parameter. The unconditional means are of interest
because they help determine the average level of the portfolio allocation. The Bayesian ap-
proach implies about the same unconditional mean for the dividend-price ratio, regardless of
the prior. This is close to -3.50, the mean in the data. However, the mean implied by OLS
is -3.72. The reason that the Bayesian approach is able to identify this mean is the presence
of the unconditional distribution term in the likelihood.
       These diﬀerences in the mean of x translate into diﬀerences in the unconditional means
for returns. Table 1 shows that for the stock index, the posterior mean equals 1.17%, while
the OLS value is 1.09% per quarter. The sample mean for stocks in this time period was
1.67%. The diﬀerence between the OLS and the sample mean arises mechanically from the
                           θ̂0
diﬀerence between         1−θ̂1
                                  (equal to -3.72), and the sample mean of the dividend-price ratio
(equal to -3.50). The diﬀerence between the sample and the Bayesian posterior mean occurs
for a more subtle reason. Because the dividend-price ratio in 1952 is above its conditional
maximum likelihood estimate (-3.72), it follows that shocks to the dividend-price ratio were
negative on average during the time period. Because of the negative correlation between
the stock return and the dividend-price ratio, shocks to stock returns must be positive on
average. The exact likelihood function therefore implies a posterior mean that is below the
sample mean. Similar reasoning holds for bond returns, though here, the eﬀect is much
smaller because of the low correlation between the dividend-price ratio and bond returns.
This eﬀect is not connected with the ability of the dividend-price ratio to predict returns, as
it operates equally for all values of the prior.
       Table 2 repeats this analysis when the yield spread is the predictor variable. The yield
spread predicts both bond and stock returns with a positive sign. As the prior becomes more
  17
       The value for β under the diﬀuse prior is also substantially below the OLS value, and the value for θ1 is
higher. The reason is that, relative to the ﬂat prior, the Jeﬀreys prior favors higher values of θ1 .


                                                        17
diﬀuse, the posterior mean of the β coeﬃcients go from from 0 to the OLS estimate. As in
the case of the dividend-price ratio, both the posterior mean of long-run expected returns
and the long-run mean of xt are nearly the same across the range of prior distributions.
   We now examine the consequences of these posterior means for the predictive distribution
of returns and for portfolio choice. Figure 4 plots expected excess returns (top two plots) and
optimal portfolio holdings (bottom two plots) as functions of the log dividend-price ratio.
Graphs are centered at the sample mean. Diamonds denote plus and minus one and two
sample standard deviations of the dividend-price ratio. We report results for the four prior
beliefs discussed above; to save notation we let P.02 = P (R2 > .02).
   The linear form of (1) implies that expected returns are linear in the predictor variables,
conditional on the past data. The slope of the relation between the conditional return and
xt equals the posterior mean of β. Figure 4 shows large deviations in the expected return
on the stock on the basis of the dividend-price ratio. As the dividend-price ratio varies from
-2 standard deviations to +2 standard deviations, the expected return varies from 0% per
quarter to 2% per quarter. On the other hand, the dividend-price ratio has virtually no
predictive power for returns on the long-term bond.
   The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows that the weight on the stock index also increases
in the dividend-price ratio. Bond weights decrease in the dividend-price ratio because bond
and stock returns are positively correlated, so an increase in the mean of the stock return,
without a corresponding increase in the bond return, results in an optimal portfolio that
puts less weight on the bond.
   For the diﬀuse prior, weights on the stock index vary substantially, from -30% when the
dividend-price ratio is two standard deviations below its mean to 100% when the dividend-
price ratio is two standard deviations above its mean. As the prior becomes more informative,
expected returns and weights both vary less. However, this change happens quite slowly.
Conditional expected returns under a prior that assigns only a .075 chance of an R2 greater
than 2% are nearly identical to conditional expected returns with a diﬀuse prior. There is
suﬃcient evidence to convince even this skeptical investor to vary her portfolio to nearly
the same degree as an investor with no skepticism at all. For a more skeptical prior with
P.02 = .0005, diﬀerences emerge: the slope of the relation between expected returns and the
dividend-price ratio is about half of what it was with a diﬀuse prior.
   Figure 5 displays analogous plots for the yield spread. Both the conditional expected

                                              18
bond return and the stock return increase substantially in the yield spread. For bonds, these
expected returns vary between -2% and 2% per quarter as the yield spread varies between
-2 and +2 standard deviations. For stocks, expected returns vary between 0% and 3%,
similar to the variation with respect to the dividend-price ratio. These large variations in
expected returns lead to similarly large variation in weights for the diﬀuse prior: for bonds,
the weights vary between -200% and 200% as the yield spread varies between -2 and +2
standard deviations from the mean. For the stock, the weights vary between 0 and 75%.
The variation in the weights on the stock appears less than the variation in expected returns
on the stock; this is due to the positive correlation in return innovations between stocks and
bonds.
       Figure 5 also shows that the more informative the prior, the less variable the weights.
However, when the predictor variable is the yield spread, inference based on a skeptical prior
with P.02 = .075% diﬀers noticeably from inference based on a diﬀuse prior. Nonetheless,
even the investors with skeptical priors choose portfolios that vary with the yield spread.
       This section has shown that an investor who is skeptical about predictability, when
confronted with historical data, does indeed choose to time the market. The next two
sections show the consequences of this for the time series of portfolio weights and for out-of-
sample performance.


2.3        Posterior means and asset allocation over the post-war period
We next describe the implications of various prior beliefs for optimal weights over the post-
war period. Starting in 1972, we compute the posterior distribution conditional on having
observed data up to and including that year. We start in 1972 because this allows for twenty
years of data for the ﬁrst observation; this seems reasonable given the persistence in the
data and the fact that there are 12 parameters to be estimated. Starting the analysis in
1982 with thirty years of data leads to very similar results.18 The posterior is computed by
simulating 200,000 draws and dropping the ﬁrst 50,000. Each quarter, the investor updates
the portfolio weights using that quarter’s observation of the predictor variable. The assets
  18
       We update the posterior distribution yearly rather than quarterly to save on computation time, which
is a particular concern when we assess the signiﬁcance of our results using a Monte Carlo procedure. The
results from updating quarterly are very close to those from updating yearly and are available from the
authors upon request.


                                                     19
are the stock, the long-term bond, and a riskless asset.
       Figure 6 displays the de-meaned dividend-price ratio and the weights in the long-term
bond and the stock for the most diﬀuse prior. For most of the sample, the weights in
the stock are highly positively correlated with the dividend-price ratio. Less correlation is
apparent for bond returns. From the mid-90’s, on, this correlation is reduced for both assets:
despite the continued decline in the dividend-price ratio, the allocation to stocks levels oﬀ
and the allocation to bonds rises. As Figure 6 shows, under diﬀuse priors, portfolio weights
are highly variable and often extreme.
       Figure 7 oﬀers another perspective on the relation between the predictor variable and the
allocation. The top panel of the ﬁgure shows the posterior mean of β for the stock index.
The posterior means are shown for priors ranging from dogmatic to diﬀuse (P.02 ranging
from 0 to 1) and for the point estimates of β from OLS. The top panel shows that the OLS
beta lies above the posterior mean for the entire sample. The OLS estimates, the posterior
mean when P.02 = .999, and the posterior mean when P.02 = 0.075 decline around 1995, and
then rise again around 2000.19
       The posterior mean for P.02 = 0.075 lies above the posterior mean for the diﬀuse prior
after 2000. This may seem surprising, as the role of the prior is to shrink the βs toward zero.
However, the prior shrinks the total amount of predictability as measured by the R2 . This
can be accomplished not only by shrinking β, but also by shrinking the persistence relative
to the diﬀuse prior. In contrast to the posterior means for the less informative priors, the
posterior mean for P.02 = .0005 remains steady throughout the sample and actually increases
after 2000.
       The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows holdings in the stock for a range of beliefs about
predictability. Also displayed are holdings resulting from OLS estimation. Volatility in
holdings for the stock decline substantially as the prior becomes more dogmatic. For the
fully dogmatic prior, the weight on the stock index displays some initial volatility, and then
stays at about 40% after about 1976. The prior that is close to dogmatic, P.02 = .0005,
implies some market timing for the stock portfolio based on the dividend-price ratio. In the
early part of the sample the weight in the stock index implied by this prior is about 50%,
declining to zero at the end of the sample. Of course, P.02 = .075 and the diﬀuse prior imply
  19
       This plot is suggestive of parameter instability in the postwar sample; indeed evidence of such instability
is found by Lettau and VanNieuwerburgh (2006), Paye and Timmermann (2005), and Viceira (1996).


                                                        20
greater amounts of market timing. These priors imply time-varying weights that ﬂuctuate
both at a very slow frequency, and at a higher frequency. However, the weights that display
the most volatility are those arising from ordinary least squares regression.
       Figure 8 shows corresponding results for the bond. The top panel shows that for most
of the sample, the dividend yield predicts bond returns with a positive sign, just as it does
with stock returns. Starting in the late-90s, this predictability begins to decline. Volatility in
bond holdings also decline substantially as the prior becomes more dogmatic. Corresponding
ﬁgures for the yield spread (Figures 9–11) share these features.
       Figure 7 demonstrates that using predictive variables in portfolio allocations need not
lead to extreme weights. Combining the sample evidence with priors that are skeptical
about return predictability leads to a moderate amount of market timing. We now turn to
the out-of-sample performance of these strategies.


2.4        Out-of-sample performance
The previous sections show how skeptical priors can inform portfolio selection. The re-
sults indicate that investors who are highly skeptical about return predictability nonetheless
choose time-varying weights, but that these weights are less variable and extreme than the
weights for investors with diﬀuse priors. In this section, we assess out-of-sample performance
of these priors.20 The goal is not to ﬁnd out which prior is “best”; indeed this analysis should
not be interpreted as suggesting that one prior is superior to another. Rather, the purpose
of this section is to relate our ﬁndings to those in papers that critique the evidence for
predictability based on out-of-sample performance (Bossaerts and Hillion (1999), Goyal and
Welch (2004)).
       To assess out-of-sample performance in a way that controls for risk, we adopt a cer-
  20
       Avramov (2004) and Handa and Tiwari (2006) also highlight how informative non-dogmatic priors can
improve ex post performance of portfolios. Unlike the present study, these studies use informative priors for
the cross-section (in the style of Pastor and Stambaugh (1999)), and show that shrinking a broad cross-section
of returns toward what would be implied by asset pricing models can lead to better ex post performance in
settings that include return predictability. As discussed in Section 1.2, Avramov also examines the eﬀects of
introducing a “prior” sample with no predictability and no mispricing relative to the 3-factor model. When
there is such a sample, performance is often better than when there is no such prior sample. However, it is
not clear whether these results are due to the prior over predictability or mispricing.



                                                     21
tainty equivalent approach. The certainty equivalent return (CER) answers the question:
“what riskless rate would the investor be willing to accept in exchange for not following this
strategy?” That is
                                                      1
                                      CER = E[rp ] − A Var[rp ],                                        (20)
                                                      2
where A is the appropriate risk-aversion parameter (see, e.g., Brennan and Xia (2001)).
In this analysis, the mean and variance in (20) are computed using the sample mean and
variance that result from following strategies associated with a given prior belief. That is,
for each quarter, we apply the weights described in the previous section to the actual returns
realized over the next quarter. This gives us a time series of 120 quarterly returns to use
in computing the means and variances. In reporting the certainty equivalent returns, we
multiply by 400 to express the return as an annual percentage. Results are reported for
values of A equal to 2 and 5. As an additional metric, we also report out-of-sample Sharpe
ratios. These are equal to the sample mean of excess returns, divided by the sample standard
deviation. Excess returns are quarterly and constructed as described above. In reporting
Sharpe ratios, we multiply by 2 to annualize.
      Table 3 reports CERs and Sharpe ratios when the dividend-price ratio is the predic-
tor variable. For both metrics, the weights implied by ordinary least squares deliver worse
performance than the weights implied by the dogmatic prior, which implies no market tim-
ing. A similar result is found by Goyal and Welch (2004), who argue against the use of
predictability in portfolio allocation. We ﬁnd, however, that market timing can increase
out-of-sample performance, if the investor treats the evidence with some skepticism. The
intermediate prior with P.02 = .0005 has the best out-of-sample performance regardless of
the level of risk aversion and whether the CER or Sharpe ratio metric is used. While ignoring
the predictability evidence results in better performance than applying a diﬀuse prior, simply
looking at these two extreme positions hides the better performance that can be achieved
by taking the intermediate view.
      Table 4 reports analogous results for the yield spread as the predictor variable. For the
certainty equivalent return metric, OLS again performs the worst, while the diﬀuse and
dogmatic priors perform somewhat better. However, skeptical priors perform better still.21
The diﬀerences can be large. When the risk aversion parameter equals 2, for example, a
 21
      For the Sharpe ratio metric, OLS and the diﬀuse priors also outperform the most dogmatic prior.



                                                    22
diﬀuse prior results in a CER of 5.47% per annum, while a dogmatic prior results in a CER
of 5.61%. However, for the intermediate prior of P.02 = .0005, the CER is 7.58% per annum;
for the prior with P.02 = .075, the CER is 9.19% per annum. These results show that
priors indicating skepticism about the degree of predictability lead to superior out-of-sample
performance over the postwar period, as well as to less extreme portfolio allocations, and to
more stable parameter estimates.
       We next evaluate the classical statistical signiﬁcance and robustness of our out-of-sample
results. The analysis in the previous sections indicates that a Bayesian investor, even one
who is skeptical about return predictability, would time the market. There is suﬃcient
evidence to convince this investor that market timing is worthwhile. Here however we ask
a diﬀerent question. Suppose that returns are in fact unpredictable. In repeated samples,
what is the probability that our strategies would have led to (presumably spurious) superior
performance?
       To answer this question, we use a Monte Carlo procedure to correctly capture the depen-
dencies inherent in our out-of-sample return observations (even though the shocks to returns
and the predictor variable may be independent across time, portfolio returns depend on the
investor’s posterior, and therefore in principle on all previous observations). We simulate
100 samples of data designed so that means, variances, and covariances of returns and of
the state variable, and the autocorrelation of the state variable are the same as in the data.
However, in simulated data, returns are unpredictable. We then calculate out-of-sample
performance, exactly repeating the procedure we used to calculate performance in actual
data.22
       Table 5 shows the results of this exercise for the dividend-price ratio. The ﬁrst row of
Panel A reports the diﬀerence between the CER of each skeptical prior (and the regression
estimate) and that of the dogmatic prior seen in the data for a risk aversion of 2. These
diﬀerences are a measure of the ex-post gains from market timing. The next two rows report
  22
       We consider only 100 draws because of the heavy computational requirements. While sampling from
the posterior distribution for a given dataset takes under an hour, obtaining out-of-sample statistics requires
that this procedure be repeated 32 times (once for every sample year since 1972). The whole procedure then
needs to be repeated 100 times for the Monte Carlo. The entire set of Monte Carlo results (for two predictor
variables and four priors) requires about a month of computation time on a 10-node Beowulf cluster. This
prevents us from embarking on more detailed statistical analyses, e.g. correcting for the impact of searching
over the two skeptical priors.


                                                      23
the 5th and the 95th percentile of the Monte-Carlo-generated statistic. The results show
that the outperformance of the prior P.02 = .0005 could have occurred by chance with at
most a 10% probability using a two-tailed test (because computation costs force us to limit
the Monte Carlo to 100 draws, critical values corresponding to higher levels of signiﬁcance
would be unreliable). In the data, outperformance is 69 basis points per year while the 95th
percentile is 61 basis points. Panel B reports the results of a similar exercise for the Sharpe
ratio. The diﬀerence in the data between the skeptical and the dogmatic prior is 0.025; the
95th percentile is only 0.007.
   Table 6 reports analogous results for the yield spread. Both skeptical priors (P.02 = .0005
and P.02 = .075) outperform the dogmatic prior. This outperformance is far above the 95th
percentile for the Monte Carlo draws for both the CER and the Sharpe ratio measure. For
example, when risk aversion is 2, P.02 = .075 implies a performance diﬀerential of 3.58%.
The 95th percentile is 1.57%. When risk aversion is 5, this prior implies a performance
diﬀerential of 1.46%; the 95th percentile is 0.63%. Taken together, our Monte Carlo results
suggest that it is quite unlikely that the superior performance of the skeptical priors could
have occurred by chance.
   Finally, we examine the performance of our strategies over subperiods of the data. The
results above use data from 1952 to 2004. Here, we repeat the analysis with data ending
in 1984 and 1994. The results for the dividend-price ratio are shown in Table 7. For
each subsample, OLS continues to give the worst performance as measured by certainty
equivalent returns. However, skeptical priors deliver superior performance relative to the
dogmatic prior. Similar results hold when the yield spread is the predictor variable, as
shown in Table 8. In both subsamples, and across all measures of performance, the skeptical
priors outperform the dogmatic prior.
   To conclude, we ﬁnd that market timing strategies implied by OLS underperform strate-
gies implied by a no-predictability view, conﬁrming results in other recent papers. However,
we also ﬁnd that taking an intermediate view, that some predictability might exist, leads to
better performance relative to either extreme.




                                              24
3     Extensions to multiple predictor variables
This section extends the results in Section 1 to the case of multiple predictor variables. We
continue to assume (1) and (2), except that xt is now allowed to be K × 1, β is N × K, θ0
is K × 1, and θ1 is K × K. Deﬁne
                                             ⎡                 ⎤
                                                     
                                                 α       θ0
                                       B=⎣                     ⎦
                                                     
                                                 β       θ1

The multivariate analogues of (5) and (6) are

                              μx = E [xt | B, Σ] = (IK − θ1 )−1 θ0 ,                     (21)

and
                           vec(Σx ) = (IK 2 − (θ1 ⊗ θ1 ))−1 vec(Σv ),                    (22)

where Σx = E (xt − x0 )(xt − x0 ) (see Hamilton (1994, p. 265)).
    As in Section 1, we specify a prior over normalized β. Let Cx be a lower triangular matrix
such that Cx Cx = Σx , and
                                           η = Cu−1 βCx                                  (23)

(recall that Cu is such that Cu Cu = Σu ). Assume prior beliefs on η are given by

                                    vec(η) ∼ N (0, ση2 IN K ).

Then (23) implies
                                 vec(η) = Cx ⊗ Cu−1 vec(β)

and therefore,
                         vec(β) | α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ ∼ N 0, ση2 Σ−1
                                                             x ⊗ Σu                .     (24)

    Appendix C shows that the Jeﬀreys prior on (α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ) takes the form
                                                   N +2K+2
                          p(α, θ0 , θ1 Σ) ∝ |Σ|−       2     |Σu |K/2 |Σx |K/2 .         (25)

Because

                                     −1
                 vec(β) Σu ⊗ Σ−1
                               x          vec(β) = vec(β) Σ−1
                                                            u ⊗ Σx vec(β)

                                                     = tr β  Σx βΣ−1
                                                                   u  ,

                                                 25
the joint prior is given by
                                                               
                                   N +K         − N +2K+2        1
                 p(B, Σ) ∝ |Σx |     2    |Σ|         2     exp − ση−2 tr β  Σx βΣ−1
                                                                                   u    .     (26)
                                                                 2
As ση approaches zero, p(B, Σ) approaches a dogmatic, no-predictability prior. Appendix B
shows that p(B, Σ) approaches a Jeﬀreys prior as ση approaches inﬁnity. Intermediate levels
of ση allow for skepticism about the level of predictability by placing an informative prior on
the maximum R2 implied by the equations (1) and (2). The generalization of the equation
for the maximum R2 is
                                                     w βΣx β 
                              max R2 = max
                               w             w w  βΣx β  w + w  Σu w

                                              ηη
                                          =                                                  (27)
                                            η η+1
as shown in Appendix A.
   The computations for the likelihood and the posterior closely follow those in Section 1.
Deﬁne                              ⎡       ⎤                     ⎡      ⎤
                                   r1 x1                      1 x 0
                                 ⎢ .    .. ⎥                  ⎢ .   .. ⎥
                                 ⎢
                              Y =⎣ ..    . ⎥                  ⎢ .    . ⎥
                                           ⎦,               X=⎣ .       ⎦.
                                   rT xT                      1 x
                                                                   T −1

The exact likelihood is given by
                         1          T
  p(D|B, Σ) = |2πΣx |− 2 |2πΣ|− 2
                 
                     1                          1
             exp − (x0 − μx ) Σ−1                          
                                  x (x0 − μx ) − tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ
                                                                      −1
                                                                                            . (28)
                     2                          2
Applying Bayes rule to (26) and (28) leads to the posterior
                                           
                  N +K−1
                           − T +N +2K+2        1
 p(B, Σ|D) ∝ |Σx | 2 |Σ|          2     exp − (x0 − μx ) Σ−1
                                                            x (x0 − μx )
                                               2
                       
                           1                       1
                   exp − ση−2 tr β  Σx βΣ−1 u   − tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ−1                 . (29)
                           2                       2
The procedure for sampling from this posterior is very similar to that described in Section 1.3.
The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is used to draw blocks of parameters at a time. First,
Σ is drawn from p(Σ|B, D) using the inverted Wishart distribution with T + K + 1 degrees
of freedom. Second, α and β are drawn from p(α, β|θ0 , θ1 , D), and ﬁnally θ0 and θ1 are
drawn from p(θ0 , θ1 |α, β, Σ, D). The computation of the conditional posteriors for (α, β),
and (θ0 , θ1 ) is exactly as in Section 1.3.

                                                        26
4     Conclusions
How much evidence on predictability is enough to inﬂuence portfolio choice? One view
is that predictability should be taken into account only if the statistical evidence for it is
incontrovertible. An opposite view is that investors should time their allocations to a large
extent, even if the evidence for predictability is weak according to conventional measures.
The ﬁrst view states that investors should be extremely skeptical when viewing data showing
evidence of predictability, while the second view states that no skepticism is necessary at all.
    In this paper, we modeled the portfolio choice problem of an investor who has prior
beliefs on the amount of predictability in the data. These prior beliefs put “skepticism”
about predictability on a sound decision-theoretic basis. The skeptical investor believes
that, while predictability is possible, large values of the R2 are unlikely.
    We applied our method to post-war data on bond and stock returns, with the yield
spread and the dividend-price ratio as predictor variables. We found that even investors
with a high degree of prior skepticism still vary their allocations to long-term bonds and
stocks based on both of these variables. Thus the amount of predictability in the data is
suﬃcient to inﬂuence investment, even if the investor is skeptical about the strength of this
predictability.
    To see the implications of various prior beliefs for portfolio allocations over the postwar
period, we implemented an out-of-sample analysis. For each quarter starting in 1972, the
posterior and optimal portfolio weights were determined based on previous data. Parameter
estimates implied by skeptical priors were more stable than those implied by the diﬀuse prior
and by ordinary least squares regression. Moreover, the resulting weights are less volatile
and deliver superior out-of-sample performance as compared to the weights implied by an
entirely model-based or data-based view.
    This study provides a method for rigorously implementing an intermediate view on pre-
dictability. The resulting portfolio weights are more reasonable, and in fact perform better
out of sample than either extreme view. The question remains as to why the skeptical prior
outperforms. Skepticism can be motivated by a theory of rational markets (see Samuelson
(1965)). Our results suggest that there may be value to this theory even if it does not
hold exactly. More broadly, this study supports the idea that using models to downweight
unreasonable regions of the parameter space may improve decision making.


                                               27
Appendix

A    Derivation of the maximum R2
This section derives equation (11) and (27). Because (11) is a special case of (27), we derive
this latter equation. The maximum R2 satisﬁes

                                                    w βΣx β  w
                           max R2 = max                                ,                 (30)
                                           w    w βΣx β  w + w Σu w

where w is an N × 1 nonzero vector (it is not necessary that the elements of w sum to 1).
Deﬁne
                                               w̄ = Cu w

where Cu Cu = Σu . Rewrite (30) as
                                                                       
                                                w̄ Cu−1 βΣx β  (Cu−1 ) w̄
                     max R2 = max
                                     w̄ Cu−1 βΣx β  (Cu−1 ) w̄ + w̄ w̄
                                      w̄

                                         w̄ ηη  w̄
                               = max  
                                  w̄ w̄ ηη w̄ + w̄  w̄

                                         w ηη  w
                               = max                  ,
                                  w w ηη w + w  w


where the last line follows from a change of notation for the maximizing variable. Finally,
we note that
                                                        w ηη  w
                      w ηη  w                 w w             w ηη  w
            argmaxw                = argmaxw          = argmaxw           .
                    wηη  w + w w           wηη w
                                                   +1            w w
                                                       w w

because the argument in the former two expressions is an increasing function of the last
expression. By the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality,

                                           w ηη  w
                                                     ≤ ηη
                                            w w

for all nonzero vectors w, and therefore

                                                    w ηη  w
                                η = argmaxw                      .
                                                  wηη  w + w w

This proves (27).




                                                  28
B    Jeﬀreys prior on B, Σ
Our derivation for the limiting Jeﬀreys prior on B, Σ follows Stambaugh (1999). Zellner
(1996, pp. 216-220) derives a limiting Jeﬀreys prior by applying (12) to the likelihood (7)
and retaining terms of the highest order in T . Stambaugh shows that Zellner’s approach is
equivalent to applying (12) to the conditional likelihood (4), and taking the expectation in
(12) assuming that x0 is multivariate normal with mean (21) and variance (22) (or mean (5)
and variance (6) in the K = 1 case). We adopt this approach.
    We derive the prior density for p(B, Σ−1 ) and then transform this into the density for
p(B, Σ) using the Jacobian. Let b = vec(B), and

               ζ = (σ 11 , σ 12 , . . . , σ 1,N +K , σ 22 , σ 23 , . . . , σ 2,N +K , . . . , σ N +K,N +K ),

where σ ij denotes element (i, j) of Σ−1 . Let l(B, Σ; D) = log p(D|B, Σ, x0 ) denote the natural
log of the conditional likelihood. The deﬁnition of the Jeﬀreys prior requires
                                         ⎛⎡                  ⎤⎞1/2
                                                ∂2l    ∂2l     
                                                               
                                −1    
                          p(B, Σ ) ∝ −E  ⎝  ⎣  ∂b∂b  ∂b∂ζ  ⎦⎠
                                                                                                               (31)
                                                 ∂2l    ∂2l     
                                               ∂ζ∂b  ∂ζ∂ζ    
Computing the expectation on the right hand side of (31) yields
                                                           1/2
                                       −1                  
                                       Σ ⊗Ψ         0      
                         p(B, Σ ) ∝ 
                               −1                            ,
                                                  ∂ log |Σ| 
                                                   2                                                           (32)
                                          0       ∂ζ∂ζ  

where                                            ⎡                            ⎤
                                                      1            μ
                                          Ψ=⎣                                 ⎦.
                                                                    x

                                                     μx μx μ
                                                            x + Σx

Note that Ψ is (K + 1) × (K + 1). From the formula for the determinant of a partitioned
matrix (Green (1997, p. 33)), it follows that |Ψ| = Σx .
    Box and Tiao (1973, pp. 474–475) show that
                                 2         
                                 ∂ log |Σ| 1/2
                                               N +K+1

                                 ∂ζ∂ζ   = |Σ|                                                               (33)
                                                    2



(recall that Σ is (N + K) × (N + K)). It then follows from (32) that
                                                                            N +K+1
                          p(B, Σ−1 ) ∝ |Σ−1 ⊗ Ψ|1/2 |Σ|                        2

                                                                               1/2         N +K+1
                                            =      |Σ|−(K+1) |Ψ|N +K                 |Σ|      2

                                                      N +K
                                            = |Ψ|       2    |Σ|N/2
                                                          N +K
                                            = |Σx |         2    |Σ|N/2 .

                                                            29
From results in Zellner (1996, p. 226), it follows that Jacobian of the transformation from
Σ−1 to Σ is |Σ|−(N +K+1) . Therefore
                                                    N +1          N +2K+2
                                  p(B, Σ) ∝ |Σx |    2     |Σ|−       2     .                 (34)


C    Jeﬀreys prior on α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ
We calculate the prior for (α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ−1 ), and use the determinant of the Jacobian to trans-
form this into a prior for (α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ). Deﬁne blocks of Σ−1 as
                                            ⎡                   ⎤
                                                −1       −1
                                              (Σ )11 (Σ )12
                                  Σ−1 = ⎣                       ⎦.
                                              (Σ−1 )21 (Σ−1 )22
                                                                            
Here, (Σ−1 )11 is N × N , (Σ−1 )12 is N × K, (Σ−1 )21 = (Σ−1 )12 , and (Σ−1 )22 is K × K.
    The starting point for the calculation is the information matrix (12) for B, Σ−1 given
in Appendix B. The information matrix for α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ−1 can be obtained by removing the
rows and columns corresponding to derivatives with respect to βij from (32). Without loss
of generality, the rows and columns of (32) can be re-ordered so that
                                                               1/2
                                                               
                                         Ψ⊗Σ   −1
                                                         0      
                                  −1
                            p(B, Σ ) ∝                         .
                                                    ∂ 2 log |Σ| 
                                             0      ∂ζ∂ζ  

This corresponds to taking second derivatives of l with respect to vec(B  ) rather than
vec(B). Because vec(B  ) = (α , θ0 , vec(β) , vec(θ1 ) ) , removing the rows and columns
corresponding to vec(β) leads to
                                                                         1/2
                                                                         
                                                     Φ           0       
                              p(α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ ) ∝ 
                                              −1
                                                             ∂2log |Σ|
                                                                           ,
                                                                                             (35)
                                                     0       ∂ζ∂ζ       

where                 ⎡                                               ⎡              ⎤   ⎤
                                                                                −1
                   ⎢                                                      (Σ )12         ⎥
                                     Σ−1                    μ
                                                             x ⊗
                                                                 ⎣                   ⎦
                   ⎢                                                            −1       ⎥
                 Φ=⎢                                                      (Σ )22         ⎥.
                   ⎣                                                                     ⎦
                          μx ⊗ [(Σ−1 )21 , (Σ−1 )22 ]      Σx + μx μ     −1
                                                                    x ⊗ (Σ )22

From the formula for the determinant of a partitioned matrix, it follows that
                                                                     ⎛       ⎡        ⎤⎞
                                                                                         
        −1                                                                     −1
                                                                                (Σ )12    
                            −1                 −1
|Φ| = Σ  Σx + μx μx ⊗ Σ 22 − μx ⊗ Σ 21 , Σ 22 Σ μx ⊗      −1         ⎝      ⎣        ⎦⎠ .
                                                                                  −1      
                                                                               (Σ )22    

                                                  30
Because                            ⎡              ⎤        ⎡              ⎤
                                         −1
                                       (Σ )12                  0N ×K
                                 Σ⎣               ⎦=⎣                     ⎦,
                                       (Σ−1 )22                 IK
it follows that
                                                                                        
                  |Φ| = Σ−1   Σx + μx μ
                                          x ⊗ Σ
                                               −1
                                                                 22
                                                                    − μx μ
                                                                          x ⊗ Σ
                                                                               −1
                                                                                      22
                                                                                           
                                         
                      = Σ−1  Σx ⊗ Σ−1 22 
                      = |Σ|−1 |Σx |K | Σ−1     22
                                                    |K .

Applying the formula for the determinant of a partitioned matrix to Σ produces
                                                            
                                 |Σ| = |Σu | Σv − Σvu Σ−1   
                                                        u Σuv .


By the formula for the inverse of a partitioned matrix (Green (1997, p. 33)),
                                                               −1
                               | Σ−1      | = Σv − Σvu Σ−1
                                                         u  Σuv
                                                                 .
                                       22


Therefore,

                          |Φ| = |Σ|−(K+1) |Σ|K | Σ−1                 22
                                                                          |K |Σx |K
                                = |Σ|−(K+1) |Σu |K |Σx |K .

Finally, from (33) and (35),
                                                                  N +K+1
                         p(α, θ0 , θ1 , Σ−1 ) ∝ |Φ|1/2 |Σ|           2



                                              = |Σ|N/2 |Σu |K/2 |Σx |K/2 .

which, by the Jacobian of the transformation from Σ−1 to Σ (see Appendix B) completes
the proof of (25).


D    Sampling from the posterior
The conditional density p(Σ|B, D) has an expression identical to (16). The proposal density
is the inverted Wishart with T + 2 degrees of freedom (Zellner (1996, p. 395)):
                                           
                              − T +N +2      1
              f (Σ|B, D) ∝ |Σ|     2    exp − tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ−1 .
                                             2

                                                    31
Because the target density takes the form

                                        p(Σ|B, D) ∝ ψ(Σ) × proposal,

we can use the results in Chib and Greenberg (1995, Section 5) to sample from the posterior.
   The density for p(B|Σ, D) is sampled from in two steps: ﬁrst we sample from p(b1 |b2 , Σ, D),
and next we sample from p(b2 |b1 , Σ, D). For the ﬁrst of these steps, we can sample directly
from the true density, without using the accept-reject algorithm. Note that

tr (Y − XB) (Y − XB)Σ−1                    = (b − b̂) (Σ−1 ⊗ X  X)(b − b̂) + terms independent of B
                                                                                                    −1
where b̂ = vec(B̂), and B̂ = (X  X)−1 X  Y . Let V = Σ−1 ⊗ X  X                                       , and partition V so
that                                                    ⎡                ⎤
                                                            V11 V12
                                                  V =⎣                   ⎦,
                                                            V21 V22
where V11 is 2N × 2N , V12 is 2N × 2, and V22 is 2 × 2. Then

  (b − b̂) (Σ−1 ⊗ X  X)(b − b̂) =
                                                                          −1
                                                                                                                          
                       −1
         b1 − b̂1 − V21 V22 (b2 − b̂2 )   V11 − V21 V22−1 V21                        b1 − b̂1 −   V21 V22−1 (b2   − b̂2 )

                                                                                          + terms independent of b1 .

(see Green (1997, Chapter 3.1)). Then under the prior (14),
                         
                           1                −1
  p(b1 | b2 , Σ, D) ∝ exp − β  ση2 σx−2 Σu    β
                           2
     
          1                                                  −1
                                                                                                     
exp − b1 − b̂1 − V21 V22−1 (b2 − b̂2 )    V11 − V21 V22−1 V21      b1 − b̂1 − V21 V22−1 (b2 − b̂2 )  .
          2
We now complete the square to derive the distribution for b1 . Let
                                        ⎡                 ⎤
                                          0       0
                            Ω = Σ−1
                                  u ⊗
                                        ⎣                 ⎦.                                                                   (36)
                                                      −1
                                          0 ση2 σx−2

The posterior distribution for b1 conditional on b2 and Σ is normal with variance
                                                                                        −1
                                     V11∗ = Ω + (V11 − V12 V22−1 V12 )−1

and mean
                                                                                                    
                      b∗1   =   V11∗ (V11   −   V12 V22−1 V12 )−1    b̂1 +   V21 V22−1 (b2   − b̂2 ) .

                                                             32
       Similar reasoning can be used to draw from the posterior for b2 = [θ0 , θ1 ] conditional on
the other parameters, Applying the results of Green (1997, Chapter 3.1),

  (b − b̂) (Σ−1 ⊗ X  X)(b − b̂) =
                                                                    −1
                                                                                                                
         b2 − b̂2 − V12 V11−1 (b1 − b̂1 )   V22 − V12 V11−1 V12               b2 − b̂2 − V12 V11−1 (b1 − b̂1 )

                                                                                     + terms independent of b2 .

The density is sampled from using an accept-reject algorithm. The proposal density is normal
with mean b̂2 + V12 V11−1 (b1 − b̂1 ) and variance V22 − V12 V11−1 V12 . The target density is
                                   
                                        1              −1       1
      p(b2 |b1 , Σ, D) ∝ σx exp − β  ση2 σx−2 Σu
                            N
                                                          β − σx−2 (x0 − μx )2 × proposal.
                                        2                       2

for θ1 ∈ (0, 1) and zero otherwise.23




  23
       For the case of multiple predictor variables, the procedure for simulating from the posterior is very
similar. In this case, V11 is N K × N K and
                                                     ⎡                 ⎤
                                                         0     0
                                         Ω = Σ−1
                                              u ⊗
                                                  ⎣                    ⎦.
                                                         0   ση−2 Σx

The proposal density for Σ is an inverted Wishart with T + K + 1 degrees of freedom.


                                                      33
References
Abel, Andrew, 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses,
  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 38–42.

Abel, Andrew, 1999, Risk premia and term premia in general equilibrium, Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics 43, 3–33.

Amihud, Yakov, and Cliﬀord Hurvich, 2004, Predictive regressions: a reduced-bias estima-
  tion method, forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2006, Stock return predictability: Is it there?, forthcoming,
  Review of Financial Studies.

Avramov, Doron, 2002, Stock return predictability and model uncertainty, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 64, 423–458.

Avramov, Doron, 2004, Stock return predictability and asset pricing models, Review of
  Financial Studies 17, 699–738.

Backus, David, A. Gregory, and Stanley Zin, 1989, Risk premiums in the term structure:
  Evidence from artiﬁcial economies, Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 371–399.

Baks, Klaas P., Andrew Metrick, and Jessica Wachter, 2001, Should investors avoid all
  actively managed mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation, The Journal
  of Finance 56, 45–86.

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, and Anthony W. Lynch, 1999, Transaction costs and predictability: some
  utility cost calculations, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 47–78.

Barberis, Nicholas, 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal of
  Finance 55, 225–264.

Bawa, Vijay S., Stephen J. Brown, and Roger W. Klein, 1979, Estimation risk and optimal
  portfolio choice. (North-Holland Amsterdam).

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall, 1997, On biases in tests of
  the expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Financial
  Economics 44, 309–348.

                                             34
Berger, James O., 1985, Statistical decision theory and Bayesian analysis. (Springer New
  York).

Best, Michael J., and Robert R. Grauer, 1991, On the sensitivity of mean-variance-eﬃcient
  portfolios to changes in asset means: Some analytical and computational results, Review
  of Financial Studies 4, 315–342.

Black, Fischer, and Robert Litterman, 1992, Global portfolio optimization, Financial Ana-
  lysts Journal pp. 28–43.

Bossaerts, Peter, and Pierre Hillion, 1999, Implementing statistical criteria to select return
  forecasting models: What do we learn?, Review of Financial Studies 12, 405–428.

Box, George, Gwilym M. Jenkins, and Gregory Reinsel, 1970, Time Series Analysis: Fore-
  casting and Control. (Holden-Day Inc. S. Francisco, CA).

Box, George E.P., and George C. Tiao, 1973, Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis.
  (Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. Reading, MA).

Brandt, Michael W., Amit Goyal, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Jonathan R. Stroud, 2005, A
  simulation approach to dynamics portfolio choice with an application to learning about
  return predictability, Review of Financial Studies 18, 831–873.

Brennan, Michael J., Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Ronald Lagnado, 1997, Strategic asset allo-
  cation, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1377–1403.

Brennan, Michael J., and Yihong Xia, 2001, Assessing asset pricing anomalies, Review of
  Financial Studies 14, 905–942.

Brennan, Michael J., and Yihong Xia, 2005, Persistence, predictability, and portfolio plan-
  ning, Working paper, University of California at Los Angeles.

Brown, Stephen J., 1979, Optimal portfolio choice under uncertainty: A Bayesian approach,
  in Vijay S. Bawa, Stephen J. Brown, and Roger W. Klein, eds.: Estimation Risk and
  Optimal Portfolio Choice (North-Holland, Amsterdam ).

Campbell, John Y., 1986, Bond and stock returns in a simple exchange model, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 101, 785–803.

                                             35
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations
  of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–228.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1991, Yield spreads and interest rate movements:
  A bird’s eye view, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495–514.

Campbell, John Y., and Samuel Thompson, 2007, Predicting excess stock returns out of
  sample: Can anything beat the historical average?, forthcoming, Review of Financial
  Studies.

Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 1999, Consumption and portfolio decisions when
  expected returns are time-varying, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433–495.

Campbell, John Y., and Motohiro Yogo, 2006, Eﬃcient tests of stock return predictability,
  Journal of Financial Economics 81, 27–60.

Cavanagh, Christopher L., Graham Elliott, and James H. Stock, 1995, Inference in models
  with nearly integrated regressors, Econometric Theory 11, 1131–1147.

Cecchetti, S.G., P.S. Lam, and N.C. Mark, 1993, The equity premium and the risk-free rate:
  Matching the moments, Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 21–46.

Chib, Siddhartha, and Edward Greenberg, 1995, Understanding the Metropolis-Hastings
  algorithm, American Statistician 49, 327–335.

Cochrane, John H., 1992, Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios, Review of Finan-
  cial Studies 5, 243–280.

Cochrane, John H., 1999, Portfolio advice for a multifactor world, Economic Perspectives
  Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 23, 59–78.

Cremers, K.J. Martjin, 2002, Stock return predictability: A Bayesian model selection per-
  spective, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1223–1249.

Cvitanic, Jaksa, Ali Lazrak, Lionel Martellini, and Fernando Zapatero, 2006, Dy-
  namic portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty and the economic value of ana-
  lysts’recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 19, 1113–1156.


                                            36
Eliasz, Piotr, 2004, Optimal median unbiased estimation of coeﬃcients on highly persistent
  regressors, Working paper, Princeton University.

Elliott, Graham, and James H Stock, 1994, Inference in Time Series Regression When the
  Order of Integration of a Regressor Is Unknown, Econometric Theory 10, 672–700.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns
  on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.

Fama, Eugene F., and William G. Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inﬂation, Journal of
  Financial Economics 5, 115–146.

Ferson, Wayne E., Sergei Sarkissian, and Timothy T. Simin, 2003, Spurious regressions in
  ﬁnancial economics?, Journal of Finance 58, 1393–1413.

Frost, Peter A., and James Savarino, 1988, For better performance constrain portfolio
  weights, Journal of Portfolio Management 15, 29–34.

Garlappi, Lorenzo, Raman Uppal, and Tan Wang, 2007, Portfolio selection with parameter
  and model uncertainty: A multi-prior approach, Review of Financial Studies 20, 41–81.

Goetzmann, William N., and Philippe Jorion, 1993, Testing the predictive power of dividend
  yields, Journal of Finance 48, 663–679.

Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2004, A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of
  equity premium prediction, Working paper, Brown University and Emory University.

Green, Richard C., and Burton Holliﬁeld, 1992, When will mean-variance eﬃcient portfolios
  be well diversiﬁed?, Journal of Finance 47, 1785–1809.

Green, William H., 1997, Econometric Analysis. (Prentice-Hall, Inc. Upper Saddle River,
  NJ).

Hamilton, J. D., 1994, Time Series Analysis. (Oxford University Press Princeton, NJ).

Handa, Puneet, and Ashish Tiwari, 2006, Does stock market predictability imply improved
  asset allocation and performance? Evidence from the U.S. stock market (1954-2002),
  Journal of Business 79, 2423–2468.

                                            37
Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock rturns: Alternative procedures
  for inference and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357–386.

Jagannathan, Ravi, and Tongshu Ma, 2003, Risk reduction in large portfolios: Why imposing
  the wrong constraint helps, Journal of Finance 58, 1651–1683.

Jeﬀreys, Harold, 1961, Theory of Probability. (Oxford University Press Clarenden).

Jobson, J. D., and Bob Korkie, 1980, Estimation of Markowitz eﬃcient portfolios, Journal
  of the American Statistical Association 75, 544–554.

Johannes, Michael, Nicholas Polson, and Jonathan R. Stroud, 2002, Sequential optimal
  portfolio performance: Market and volatility timing, Working paper, Columbia University,
  University of Chicago, and University of Pennsylvania.

Jones, Christopher S., and Jay Shanken, 2005, Mutual fund performance with learning across
  funds, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 507–552.

Jorion, Philippe, 1985, International portfolio diversiﬁcation with estimation risk, Journal
  of Business 58, 259–278.

Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1991, Asset returns and intertemporal prefer-
  ences, Journal of Monetary Economics 27, 39–71.

Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1996, On the predictability of stock returns:
  An asset allocation perspective, Journal of Finance 51, 385–424.

Keim, Donald B., and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and bond
  markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357–390.

Klein, Roger W., and Vijay S. Bawa, 1976, The eﬀect of estimation risk on optimal portfolio
  choice, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 215–231.

Kothari, S. P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yield, and expected market
  returns: A time-series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169–203.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth and ex-
  pected stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.

                                            38
Lettau, Martin, and Stijn VanNieuwerburgh, 2006, Reconciling the return predictability
  evidence, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Lewellen, Jonathan, 2004, Predicting returns with ﬁnancial ratios, Journal of Financial
  Economics 74, 209–235.

MacKinlay, Craig A., 1995, Multifactor models do not explain the CAPM, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 38, 3–28.

Mankiw, N.Gregory, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1986, Do we reject too often? : Small sample
  properties of tests of rational expectations models, Economics Letters 20, 139–145.

Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward Prescott, 1985, The equity premium puzzle, Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics 15, 145–161.

Nelson, C. R., and M. J. Kim, 1993, Predictable stock returns: The role of small sample
  bias, Journal of Finance 48, 641–661.

Pastor, Lubos, 2000, Portfolio selection and asset pricing models, The Journal of Finance
  55, 179–223.

Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1999, Costs of equity capital and model mispricing,
  Journal of Finance 54, 67–121.

Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002, Investing in equity mutual funds, Journal
  of Financial Economics 63, 351–380.

Paye, Bradley S., and Allan Timmermann, 2005, Instability of return prediction models,
  forthcoming, Journal of Empirical Finance.

Phillips, Peter C.B., 1991, To criticize the critics: An objective Bayesian analysis of stochastic
  trends, Journal of Applied Econometrics 6, 333–364.

Richardson, Matthew, and James H. Stock, 1989, Drawing inferences from statistics based
  on multiyear asset returns, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 323–348.

Robbins, Herbert, 1964, The empirical Bayes approach to statistical decision problems, The
  Annals of Mathematical Statistics 35, 1–20.

                                               39
Samuelson, Paul, 1965, Proof that properly anticipated prices ﬂuctuate randomly, Industrial
  Management Review 6, 41–49.

Samuelson, Paul, 1973, Proof that properly discounted present values of assets vibrate ran-
  domly, Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 4, 369–374.

Sangvinatsos, Antonios, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2005, Does the failure of the expectations
  hypothesis matter for long-term investors?, Journal of Finance 60, 179–230.

Shanken, Jay A., and Ane Tamayo, 2005, Dividend yield, risk, and mispricing: A Bayesian
  analysis, Working paper, Emory University and London Business School.

Shiller, Robert J., 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent changes
  in dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421–436.

Sims, Christopher A., and Harald Uhlig, 1991, Understanding unit rooters: A helicopter
  tour, Econometrica 59, 1591–1599.

Skoulakis, Georgios, 2007, Dynamic portfolio choice with Bayesian learning, Working paper,
  University of Maryland.

Stambaugh, Robert, 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375–
  421.

Torous, Walter, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan, 2004, On predicting stock returns with
  nearly integrated explanatory variables, Journal of Business 77, 937–966.

Tu, Jun, and Guofu Zhou, 2007, Incorporating economic objectives into Bayesian priors:
  Portfolio choice under parameter uncertainty, Working paper, Singapore Management
  University and Washington University in St. Louis.

Viceira, Luis, 1996, Testing for structural change in the predictability of asset returns, Work-
  ing paper, Harvard University.

Wang, Zhenyu, 2005, A shrinkage approach to model uncertainty and asset allocation, Review
  of Financial Studies 18, 673–705.




                                              40
Xia, Yihong, 2001, Learning about predictability: The eﬀects of parameter uncertainty on
  dynamic asset allocation, Journal of Finance 56, 205–246.

Zellner, Arnold, 1996, An introduction to Bayesian inference in econometrics. (John Wiley
  and Sons, Inc. New York, NY).




                                           41
                       Table 1: Posterior Means: Dividend-Price Ratio


                                             P (R2 > 2%)
          Parameter             0        0.0005       0.075        0.999        Reg.
            βbond             0.00         0.02        -0.00       -0.18       -0.10
                              (0.00)      (0.22)      (0.43)       (0.72)      (0.73)
            βstock            0.00         0.69        1.41        1.46         2.72
                              (0.00)      (0.62)      (0.97)       (1.09)      (1.52)
               θ1             0.997       0.993       0.988        0.989       0.976
                             (0.002)     (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.015)
        E rbond |B, Σ         0.18         0.18        0.18        0.17         0.23
                              (0.27)      (0.30)      (0.34)       (1.07)
       E rstock |B, Σ         1.16         1.17        1.17        1.17         1.09
                              (0.29)      (0.24)      (0.28)       (0.72)
           E[x|B, Σ]          -3.49       -3.50        -3.50       -3.50       -3.72
                              (1.48)      (0.99)      (0.76)       (1.35)

Notes: Posterior means for the predictive coeﬃcients β, the autoregressive coeﬃcient on
the predictor variable θ1 , and unconditional posterior means for returns and the predictor
variable. Posterior standard deviations are in parentheses. The assets are the ten-year bond
and the stock index; the log dividend-price ratio is the predictor variable. Prior beliefs are
indexed by P (R2 > 2%), the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds
2%. P (R2 > 2%) = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999 corre-
sponds to the diﬀuse prior. The last column gives results implied by parameters estimated
by ordinary least squares regression. For regression estimates, standard errors are in paren-
                              θ0
theses. E [r|B, Σ] = α + β 1−θ   1
                                   and denotes the frequentist expectation of excess returns.
               θ0
E [x|B, Σ] = 1−θ1 and denotes the frequentist expectation of the predictor variable. Data
are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
                           Table 2: Posterior Means: Yield spread



                                              P (R2 > 2%)
             Parameter            0        0.0005      0.075       0.999      Reg.
               βbond             0.00       0.20        0.46       0.81        0.80
                                (0.00)     (0.14)      (0.20)     (0.26)      (0.26)
               βstock            0.00       0.22        0.51       0.89        0.89
                                (0.00)     (0.28)      (0.42)     (0.55)      (0.56)
                 θ1              0.74       0.73        0.74       0.75        0.74
                                (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)
          E rbond |B, Σ          0.21       0.21        0.21       0.21        0.23
                                (0.28)     (0.28)      (0.29)     (0.33)
          E rstock |B, Σ         1.67       1.67        1.67       1.67        1.69
                                (0.58)     (0.59)      (0.60)     (0.63)
             E[x|B, Σ]           0.97       0.97        0.97       0.97        0.99
                                (0.19)     (0.19)      (0.19)     (0.21)

Notes: Posterior means for the predictive coeﬃcients β, the autoregressive coeﬃcient on
the predictor variable θ1 , and unconditional posterior means for returns and the predictor
variable. Posterior standard deviations are in parentheses. The assets are the ten-year bond
and the stock index; the yield spread is the predictor variable. Prior beliefs are indexed
by P (R2 > 2%), the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%.
P (R2 > 2%) = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999 corresponds to the
diﬀuse prior. The last column gives results implied by parameters estimated by ordinary least
squares regression. For regression estimates, standard errors are in parentheses. E [r|B, Σ] =
       θ0                                                                              θ0
α + β 1−θ 1
            and denotes the frequentist expectation of excess returns. E [x|B, Σ] = 1−θ   1
                                                                                            and
denotes the frequentist expectation of the predictor variable. Data are quarterly from 1952
to 2004.
                   Table 3: Out-of-Sample Results: Dividend-Price Ratio



                                       P (R2 > 2%)
                  A      0         0.0005     0.075        0.999       Reg.
                         Panel A: Certainty Equivalent Returns
                  2      6.98       7.66       6.76        5.25        -2.63
                  5      6.78       7.05       6.66        6.03        2.86
                                 Panel B: Sharpe Ratios
                         0.19       0.22       0.19        0.15        0.16

Notes: Certainty equivalent returns (Panel A) and Sharpe ratios (Panel B) when the
dividend-price ratio is the predictor variable and the assets are the stock index and the
ten-year bond. For each year beginning in 1972, the predictive distribution for returns is
computed using all data up to that year. Optimal portfolios are then computed quarterly to
maximize a mean-variance utility function with risk aversion parameter A = 2, 5; these are
combined with actual returns over the following quarter to create out-of-sample returns on
the investment strategy. Certainty equivalent returns (CERs) are deﬁned as E[rp ]− A2 Var[rp ],
where rp is the return on the investment strategy and the mean and variance are computed
using the sample. Sharpe ratios are the average excess returns on the investment strat-
egy divided by the standard deviation and do not depend on A. Prior beliefs are indexed
by P (R2 > 2%), the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%.
P (R2 > 2%) = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999 corresponds to
the diﬀuse prior. Reg. denotes results obtained from ordinary least squares regression. Data
are from 1952 to 2004. CERs are in annualized percentages (×400), and Sharpe ratios are
annualized (×2).
                       Table 4: Out-of-Sample Results: Yield Spread



                                       P (R2 > 2%)
                  A      0        0.0005      0.075       0.999       Reg.
                         Panel A: Certainty Equivalent Returns
                  2      5.61       7.58       9.19        5.47        0.65
                  5      6.26       7.06       7.72        6.25        4.35
                                 Panel B: Sharpe Ratios
                         0.19       0.28       0.37        0.43        0.39

Notes: Certainty equivalent returns (Panel A) and Sharpe ratios (Panel B) when the yield
spread is the predictor variable and the assets are the stock index and the ten-year bond.
For each year beginning in 1972, the predictive distribution for returns is computed using all
data up to that year. Optimal portfolios are then computed quarterly to maximize a mean-
variance utility function with risk aversion parameter A = 2, 5; these are combined with
actual returns over the following quarter to create out-of-sample returns on the investment
strategy. Certainty equivalent returns (CERs) are deﬁned as E[rp ] − A2 Var[rp ], where rp is
the return on the investment strategy and the mean and variance are computed using the
sample. Sharpe ratios are the average excess returns on the investment strategy divided by
the standard deviation and do not depend on A. Prior beliefs are indexed by P (R2 > 2%),
the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%. P (R2 > 2%) = 0
corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999 corresponds to the diﬀuse prior.
Reg. denotes results obtained from ordinary least squares regression. Data are from 1952 to
2004. CERs are in annualized percentages (×400), and Sharpe ratios are annualized (×2).
                      Table 5: Monte Carlo Results: Dividend-Price Ratio


                                                    P (R2 > 2%)
                 A      Statistic          0.0005      0.075      0.999    Reg.
                          Panel A: Certainty Equivalent Returns
                  2     Data                 0.69      -0.21      -1.72    -9.61
                        5th percentile      -0.61      -1.84      -5.49    -9.30
                        95th percentile     0.61       1.45       1.67     1.21
                  5     Data                 0.26      -0.13      -0.75    -3.92
                        5th percentile      -0.24      -0.73      -2.20    -3.72
                        95th percentile     0.25       0.58       0.67     0.48
                                    Panel B: Sharpe Ratios
                        Data                0.025      -0.009     -0.046   -0.029
                        5th percentile      -0.002     -0.009     -0.040   -0.046
                        95th percentile     0.007      0.021      0.014    0.022

Notes: Diﬀerences between the out-of-sample performance of skeptical priors (and of the
regression estimates) and that of the dogmatic prior. See Table 3 for the description of the
performance measures. “Data” denotes the performance diﬀerence in the data. The analysis
is repeated in samples of simulated data with no predictability. The table displays the 5th
and 95th percentiles of the performance diﬀerence. Prior beliefs are indexed by P (R2 > 2%),
the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%. P (R2 > 2%) = 0
corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999 corresponds to the diﬀuse prior.
Reg. denotes results from ordinary least squares regression. A is the risk-aversion parameter.
                        Table 6: Monte Carlo Results: Yield Spread



                                                  P (R2 > 2%)
                 A    Statistic          0.0005      0.075      0.999    Reg.
                        Panel A: Certainty Equivalent Returns
                  2   Data                 1.97      3.58       -0.15    -4.97
                      5th percentile      -0.64      -2.02      -6.67    -7.28
                      95th percentile     0.74       1.57       1.93     1.79
                  5   Data                 0.80      1.46       -0.01    -1.90
                      5th percentile      -0.25      -0.81      -2.67    -2.91
                      95th percentile     0.30       0.63       0.77     0.72
                                  Panel B: Sharpe Ratios
                      Data                0.089      0.182      0.242    0.200
                      5th percentile      -0.005     -0.031     -0.117   -0.119
                      95th percentile     0.001      -0.009     -0.055   -0.055

Notes: Diﬀerences between the out-of-sample performance of skeptical priors (and of the
regression estimates) and that of the dogmatic prior. See Table 4 for the description of the
performance measures. “Data” denotes the performance diﬀerence in the data. The analysis
is repeated in samples of simulated data with no predictability. The table displays the 5th
and 95th percentiles of the performance diﬀerence. Prior beliefs are indexed by P (R2 > 2%),
the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%. P (R2 > 2%) = 0
corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999 corresponds to the diﬀuse prior.
Reg. denotes results from ordinary least squares regression. A is the risk-aversion parameter.
             Table 7: Subperiod Out-of-Sample Results: Dividend-Price Ratio



                                              P (R2 > 2%)
          End Date       A        0       0.0005      0.075       0.999       Reg.
                                Panel A: Certainty Equivalent Returns
             1984        2      6.64       7.99       11.05       11.42       -3.14
                         5      8.08       8.62       9.86        9.97        4.23
             1994        2      6.35       7.27       9.34        9.03        2.60
                         5      7.21       7.58       8.40        8.24        5.69
                              Panel B: Sharpe Ratios
             1984               0.08       0.16       0.33        0.37        0.38
             1994               0.10       0.15       0.28        0.29        0.34

Notes: Certainty equivalent returns (CERs) and Sharpe ratios are computed as in Table 3
with 1984 and 1994 as end dates rather than 2004. A is the risk aversion parameter. Prior
beliefs are indexed by P (R2 > 2%), the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression
exceeds 2%. P (R2 > 2%) = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999
corresponds to the diﬀuse prior. Reg. denotes out-of-sample results obtained from ordinary
least squares regression. CERs are in annualized percentages (×400), and Sharpe ratios are
annualized (×2).
                   Table 8: Subperiod Out-of-Sample Results: Yield Spread



                                              P (R2 > 2%)
          End Date        A      0       0.0005      0.075       0.999        Reg.
                                Panel A: Certainty Equivalent Returns
            1984          2     3.11      4.74        4.83       -9.24       -21.91
                          5     6.67      7.36        7.44        1.92        -3.07
            1994          2     4.55      6.44        7.63        0.79        -6.26
                          5     6.50      7.28        7.78        5.09        2.31
                              Panel B: Sharpe Ratios
            1984                0.01      0.09        0.20        0.32        0.27
            1994                0.08      0.18        0.29        0.38        0.34

Notes: Certainty equivalent returns (CERs) and Sharpe ratios are computed as in Table 4
with 1984 and 1994 as end dates rather than 2004. A is the risk aversion parameter. Prior
beliefs are indexed by P (R2 > 2%), the probability that the R2 from the predictive regression
exceeds 2%. P (R2 > 2%) = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P (R2 > 2%) = 0.999
corresponds to the diﬀuse prior. Reg. denotes results from ordinary least squares regression.
CERs are in annualized percentages (×400), and Sharpe ratios are annualized (×2).
                           Figure 1: Prior on the R2 of the Predictive Regression
                  1                     σ =100.00
                                         η
                 0.9

                 0.8

                 0.7

                 0.6
       P(R2>k)




                 0.5
                                        ση =0.08
                 0.4

                 0.3

                 0.2
                                        σ =0.04
                                         η
                 0.1
                           ση =0.00
                  0
                       0              0.005         0.01       0.015      0.02      0.025
                                                           k


Notes: The prior probability that the R2 exceeds a value k, for k ranging from 0 to 0.025
implied by skeptical Jeﬀreys priors. Prior beliefs are indexed by ση , the prior standard
deviation of the normalized coeﬃcient on the predictor variable. The dogmatic prior is given
by ση = 0; the diﬀuse prior by ση = ∞. Intermediate priors express some skepticism over
return predictability.
Figure 2: Posterior Distribution on the Maximum R2 when the Dividend-Price Ratio Predicts
Returns
                                                                    100
                  1                                                                   prior
                                                                     90               posterior
                 0.9
                                                                     80
                 0.8
                                                                     70
                 0.7

                                              probability density
                                                                     60
                 0.6
       P(R2>k)




                                                                     50
                 0.5

                 0.4                                                 40

                 0.3                                                 30

                 0.2                                                 20

                 0.1                                                 10

                  0                                                   0
                       0   0.02     0.04                                  0   0.02     0.04
                               k                                                 R2


Notes: The left panel shows the prior and the posterior probability that the maximum R2
over two assets exceeds a value k. The right panel shows the probability density function
for the prior and the posterior of the maximum R2 . The prior volatility of normalized β,
ση , is set equal to 0.08. The assets are a stock index and a long-term bond. The predictor
variable is the dividend-price ratio and the data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
Figure 3: Posterior Distribution on the Maximum R2 when the Yield Spread Predicts Returns
                                                                    100
                  1                                                                   prior
                                                                     90               posterior
                 0.9
                                                                     80
                 0.8
                                                                     70
                 0.7

                                              probability density
                                                                     60
                 0.6
       P(R2>k)




                                                                     50
                 0.5

                 0.4                                                 40

                 0.3                                                 30

                 0.2                                                 20

                 0.1                                                 10

                  0                                                   0
                       0   0.02     0.04                                  0   0.02     0.04
                               k                                                 R2


Notes: The left panel shows the prior and the posterior probability that the maximum R2
over two assets exceeds a value k. The right panel shows the probability density function
for the prior and the posterior of the maximum R2 . The prior volatility of normalized β,
ση , is set equal to 0.08. The assets are a stock index and a long-term bond. The predictor
variable is the yield spread and the data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
                                                     Figure 4: Conditional Expected Returns and Holdings when the Dividend-Price Ratio Pre-
                                                     dicts Returns
                                                                   Bond                                         Stock
                                             4                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                           P.02 = 0

                                             3                                             P          = 0.0005                                                  3
                                                                                                .02
 Quarterly percentage excess return




                                                                                                                    Quarterly percentage excess return
                                                                                           P.02 = 0.075
                                             2                                             P          = 0.999                                                   2
                                                                                                .02

                                             1                                                                                                                  1

                                             0                                                                                                                  0

                                            −1                                                                                                                 −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              P.02 = 0
                                            −2                                                                                                                 −2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              P.02 = 0.0005
                                                                                                                                                                                                              P.02 = 0.075
                                            −3                                                                                                                 −3
                                                                                                                                                                                                              P.02 = 0.999
                                            −4                                                                                                                 −4
                                                     −4.2    −4    −3.8 −3.6 −3.4 −3.2                −3    −2.8                                                        −4.2    −4    −3.8 −3.6 −3.4 −3.2                −3   −2.8
                                                                    Log Dividend−Price Ratio                                                                                           Log Dividend−Price Ratio

                                                 2                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                            P         =0                                                                                                       P         =0
                                                                                                .02                                                                                                                .02
                                                                                            P.02 = 0.0005                                                                                                      P.02 = 0.0005
Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                                                   Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                             1.5                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                            P.02 = 0.075                                                                                                       P.02 = 0.075
                                                 1                                          P.02 = 0.999                                                            1                                          P.02 = 0.999

                                             0.5                                                                                                                0.5

                                                 0                                                                                                                  0

                                            −0.5                                                                                                               −0.5

                                             −1                                                                                                                 −1

                                            −1.5                                                                                                               −1.5

                                             −2                                                                                                                 −2
                                                      −4.2    −4    −3.8 −3.6 −3.4 −3.2               −3    −2.8                                                         −4.2    −4    −3.8 −3.6 −3.4 −3.2               −3   −2.8
                                                                     Log Dividend−Price Ratio                                                                                           Log Dividend−Price Ratio



                                                     Notes: Conditional expected returns (top two plots) and portfolio holdings (bottom two
                                                     plots) as functions of the log dividend-price ratio. Conditional expected returns are calcu-
                                                     lated using the predictive distribution. Given the predictive distribution, portfolios maximize
                                                     mean-variance utility for risk aversion parameter A = 5. Assets are a stock index, a long-term
                                                     bond, and the riskfree asset (not shown). Prior beliefs are indexed by P.02 , the probability
                                                     that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%. P.02 = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic
                                                     prior; P.02 = 0.999 corresponds to the diﬀuse prior. Diamonds correspond to the sample
                                                     mean and plus and minus one and two sample standard deviations of the predictor variable.
                                                     Data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
                                                 Figure 5: Conditional Expected Returns and Holdings when the Yield Spread Predicts
                                                 Returns
                                                             Bond                                        Stock
                                             4                                                                                                           4

                                             3                                                                                                           3
Quarterly percentage excess return




                                                                                                             Quarterly percentage excess return
                                             2                                                                                                           2

                                             1                                                                                                           1                                                P.02 = 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          P      = 0.0005
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .02
                                             0                                                                                                           0                                                P.02 = 0.075
                                                                                                                                                                                                          P      = 0.999
                                            −1                                                                                                          −1                                                 .02

                                                                                        P.02 = 0
                                            −2                                                                                                          −2
                                                                                        P.02 = 0.0005
                                                                                        P.02 = 0.075
                                            −3                                                                                                          −3
                                                                                        P.02 = 0.999
                                            −4                                                                                                          −4
                                                  −1   −0.5     0     0.5    1     1.5    2     2.5     3                                                        −1    −0.5      0     0.5    1     1.5    2       2.5      3
                                                              Yield Spread (5 year − 3 month)                                                                                  Yield Spread (5 year − 3 month)

                                             3
                                                                                                                                                             2
Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                                            Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                             2                                                                                                           1.5

                                                                                                                                                             1
                                             1
                                                                                                                                                         0.5

                                             0                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                        −0.5
                                            −1
                                                                                        P.02 = 0                                                                                                          P.02 = 0
                                                                                        P.02 = 0.0005                                                    −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          P.02 = 0.0005
                                            −2                                          P.02 = 0.075                                                                                                      P.02 = 0.075
                                                                                                                                                        −1.5
                                                                                        P.02 = 0.999                                                                                                      P.02 = 0.999
                                            −3                                                                                                           −2
                                                  −1   −0.5     0     0.5    1     1.5    2     2.5     3                                                         −1    −0.5      0     0.5    1     1.5    2      2.5      3
                                                              Yield Spread (5 year − 3 month)                                                                                   Yield Spread (5 year − 3 month)



                                                 Notes: Conditional expected returns (top two plots) and portfolio holdings (bottom two
                                                 plots) as functions of the yield spread. Conditional expected returns are calculated using
                                                 the predictive distribution. Given the predictive distribution, portfolios maximize mean-
                                                 variance utility for risk aversion parameter A = 5. Assets are a stock index, a long-term
                                                 bond, and the riskfree asset (not shown). Prior beliefs are indexed by P.02 , the probability
                                                 that the R2 from the predictive regression exceeds 2%. P.02 = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic
                                                 prior; P.02 = 0.999 corresponds to the diﬀuse prior. Diamonds correspond to the sample
                                                 mean and plus and minus one and two sample standard deviations of the predictor variable.
                                                 Data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
Figure 6: Time Series of the Dividend-Price Ratio and Portfolio Holdings for the Diﬀuse
Prior

                                                    1.5
                                                                                             10 year
       Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                             Stock
                                                     1                                       Dividend−Price Ratio


                                                    0.5


                                                     0


                                                   −0.5


                                                    −1


                                                   −1.5
                                                          1975   1980   1985       1990   1995      2000        2005
                                                                               Time


Notes: Time series of optimal portfolio holdings in the long-term (10-year) bond and in
the stock index and the de-meaned log dividend-price ratio. Not shown are holdings in
the riskfree asset. For each year beginning in 1972, the predictive distribution for returns
is computed using the data up to that year assuming that the dividend-price ratio is the
predictor variable. Given the predictive distribution, the portfolio maximizes mean-variance
utility for risk aversion parameter A = 5. Data are from 1952 to 2004.
Figure 7: Time Series of Posterior Means and Stock Holdings when the Dividend-Price Ratio
Predicts Returns
                             Panel A: Betas for Stock Returns
                                                                                                               P.02 = 0
                                                                                                               P.02 = 0.0005
                                                                                                               P.02 = 0.075
                                                                                                               P.02 = 0.999
                                                      10                                                       Reg.

                                                       8
          mean β




                                                       6


                                                       4


                                                       2


                                                       0
                                                               1975      1980     1985        1990   1995   2000
                                                                                           Time

                                                                                Panel B: Stock Holdings
                                                                                                               P.02 = 0
                                                                                                               P.02 = 0.0005

                                                           2                                                   P.02 = 0.075
          Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                                               P.02 = 0.999
                                                       1.5
                                                                                                               Reg.
                                                           1

                                                       0.5

                                                           0

                                                      −0.5

                                                       −1

                                                      −1.5

                                                       −2
                                                                  1975     1980     1985      1990   1995   2000      2005
                                                                                           Time


Notes: Panel A shows the posterior mean of β (the coeﬃcient on the predictor variable
for stock returns); Panel B shows the portfolio holdings in the stock index. For each year
beginning in 1972, the posterior distribution is computed using the data up to that year.
Optimal portfolios for the mean-variance investor are computed quarterly for risk aversion
A = 5. Prior beliefs are indexed by P.02 , the probability that the R2 from the predictive
regression exceeds 2%. P.02 = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P.02 = 0.999 corresponds
to the diﬀuse prior. Also shown are results from ordinary least squares regression (Reg).
Data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
Figure 8: Time Series of Posterior Means and Bond Holdings when the Dividend-Price Ratio
Predicts Returns
                             Panel A: Betas for Bond Returns
                                                                                                            P.02 = 0
                                                                                                            P.02 = 0.0005
                                                                                                            P.02 = 0.075
                                                        3
                                                                                                            P.02 = 0.999

                                                      2.5                                                   Reg.

                                                        2
          mean β




                                                      1.5

                                                        1

                                                      0.5

                                                        0

                                                             1975     1980     1985        1990   1995   2000
                                                                                        Time

                                                                             Panel B: Bond Holdings
                                                                                                            P.02 = 0
                                                                                                            P         = 0.0005
                                                                                                                .02

                                                        2                                                   P.02 = 0.075
          Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                                            P.02 = 0.999
                                                       1.5
                                                                                                            Reg.
                                                        1

                                                       0.5

                                                        0

                                                      −0.5

                                                       −1

                                                      −1.5

                                                       −2
                                                               1975     1980     1985      1990   1995   2000          2005
                                                                                        Time


Notes: Panel A shows the posterior mean of β (the coeﬃcient on the predictor variable for
long-term bond returns); Panel B shows the portfolio holdings in the long-term bond. For
each year beginning in 1972, the posterior distribution is computed using the data up to
that year. Optimal portfolios for the mean-variance investor are computed quarterly for
risk aversion A = 5. Prior beliefs are indexed by P.02 , the probability that the R2 from the
predictive regression exceeds 2%. P.02 = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P.02 = 0.999
corresponds to the diﬀuse prior. Also shown are results from ordinary least squares regression
(Reg). Data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
  Figure 9: Time Series of the Yield Spread and Portfolio Holdings for the Diﬀuse Prior

                                                    4
                                                                                                10 year
       Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                    3                                           Stock
                                                                                                yield spread
                                                    2

                                                    1

                                                    0

                                                   −1

                                                   −2

                                                   −3

                                                   −4
                                                        1975   1980   1985       1990   1995   2000        2005
                                                                             Time


Notes: Time series of optimal portfolio holdings in the long-term (10-year) bond and in the
stock index and the de-meaned yield spread. Not shown are holdings in the riskfree asset.
For each year beginning in 1972, the predictive distribution for returns is computed using
the data up to that year assuming that the yield spread is the predictor variable. Given
the predictive distribution, the portfolio maximizes mean-variance utility for risk aversion
parameter A = 5. Data are from 1952 to 2004.
Figure 10: Time Series of Posterior Means and Stock Holdings when the Yield Spread
Predicts Returns
                          Panel A: Betas for Stock Returns
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.0005
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.075
                                                       3.5
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.999
                                                         3
                                                                                                             Reg.
                                                       2.5
          Annualized mean β




                                                         2

                                                       1.5

                                                         1

                                                       0.5

                                                         0
                                                              1975     1980     1985        1990   1995   2000
                                                                                         Time

                                                                              Panel B: Stock Holdings
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0
                                                                                                             P         = 0.0005
                                                                                                                 .02

                                                         2                                                   P.02 = 0.075
           Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.999
                                                        1.5
                                                                                                             Reg.
                                                         1

                                                        0.5

                                                         0

                                                       −0.5

                                                        −1

                                                       −1.5

                                                        −2
                                                                1975     1980     1985      1990   1995   2000          2005
                                                                                         Time


Notes: Panel A shows the posterior mean of β (the coeﬃcient on the predictor variable
for stock returns); Panel B shows the portfolio holdings in the stock index. For each year
beginning in 1972, the posterior distribution is computed using the data up to that year.
Optimal portfolios for the mean-variance investor are computed quarterly for risk aversion
A = 5. Prior beliefs are indexed by P.02 , the probability that the R2 from the predictive
regression exceeds 2%. P.02 = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P.02 = 0.999 corresponds
to the diﬀuse prior. Also shown are results from ordinary least squares regression (Reg).
Data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
Figure 11: Time Series of Posterior Means and Bond Holdings when the Yield Spread Pre-
dicts Returns
                            Panel A: Betas for Bond Returns
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.0005
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.075
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.999
                                                       0.8
                                                                                                             Reg.
                                                       0.7
          Annualized mean β




                                                       0.6
                                                       0.5
                                                       0.4
                                                       0.3
                                                       0.2
                                                       0.1
                                                         0
                                                              1975     1980     1985        1990   1995   2000
                                                                                         Time

                                                                              Panel B: Bond Holdings
                                                                                                             P.02 = 0
                                                                                                             P         = 0.0005
                                                                                                                 .02

                                                         2                                                   P.02 = 0.075
           Portfolio holding as a multiple of wealth




                                                                                                             P.02 = 0.999
                                                        1.5
                                                                                                             Reg.
                                                         1

                                                        0.5

                                                         0

                                                       −0.5

                                                        −1

                                                       −1.5

                                                        −2
                                                                1975     1980     1985      1990   1995   2000          2005
                                                                                         Time


Notes: Panel A shows the posterior mean of β (the coeﬃcient on the predictor variable for
long-term bond returns); Panel B shows the portfolio holdings in the long-term bond. For
each year beginning in 1972, the posterior distribution is computed using the data up to
that year. Optimal portfolios for the mean-variance investor are computed quarterly for
risk aversion A = 5. Prior beliefs are indexed by P.02 , the probability that the R2 from the
predictive regression exceeds 2%. P.02 = 0 corresponds to the dogmatic prior; P.02 = 0.999
corresponds to the diﬀuse prior. Also shown are results from ordinary least squares regression
(Reg). Data are quarterly from 1952 to 2004.
