                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   OPEN-ECONOMY IMPLICATIONS OF
               TWO MODELS OF BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS


                         Alan C. Stockman

                            Ai Tee Koh



                     Working Paper No. 131T




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 19814




The final draft of this paper was written while Stockman was a
Visiting Professor, Graduate Institute of International Studies,
Geneva. The authors wish to thank Robert Flood, Jeremy Greenwood,
Robert Hodrick, Robert King, and Michael Parkiri for helpful com-
ments. Stocknian gratefully acknowledges research support from the
National Science Foundation, grant no. SES—83O9576. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                   NBER Working Paper #1317
                                   March 1984




             Open-Economy Implications of
          Two Models of Business Fluctuations


                      ABSTRACT


     This paper shows how open—economy implications of

alternative business—cycle models can be used to discriminate

between those models. Open—economy versions of two well—known

models are presented: a model with predetermined nominal wages

and a model in which nominal disturbances are misperceived as

real disturbances. In the former model applied to a small

economy with flexible exchange rates, an unanticipated increase

in the money supply increases output of both traded and nontraded

goods, lowers the relative price of nontraded goods, and induces

a current—account surplus. In the latter model, an unperceived

increase in the money supply increases output of nontraded goods

but reduces output of traded goods, raises the relative price

of nontraded goods, and induces a current—account deficit.


                                  Alan C. Stockman
                                  Department of Economics
                                  University of Rochester
                                  Rochester, NY 14627
                                   (716) 275—4427

                                  Ai Tee Koh
                                  Dept. of Economics and Statistics
                                  National University of Singapore
                                  Kent Ridge, Singapore 0511
                                                                             1


    This paper shows how the open-economy implications of alternative models

of aggregate business fluctuations can be exploited to test those models.

Most research on models of business cycles has been concentrated on closed

economies.   Open-economy versIons of those models have been developed

primarily for discussions of policy implications. However, much more can be

learned about business cycles by applying these models to open economies in

order to develop and test implications about the cyclical comovements of

"•tt•l" variables such as the current account of the balance of
payments relative prices of nontraded and traded goods, the terms of trade,

and the exchange rate. By examining open-economy models of business cycles,

we can learn more not only about open economies but about business

fluctuations in relatively closed economies.


   We discuss a concrete example. Section II develops a model of a small

open economy with flexible exchange rates that can be used to contrast a

"nominal-wage-contract" model based on work by Gray (1976), Fischer (1977),

and Taylor (1980) with a "misperceptions" model based on work by Lucas (1972,

1975), and Barro (1980). In the former model, monetary disturbances can have

real effects because the nominal wage is at least partly predetermined. In

the latter model, monetary disturbances can have real effects because they are

misperceived by agents as real disturbances. While both of these models have

been cirticized as being inadequate in various ways (with issues such as

observability of money, optimality of the nominal contracts, and implications

for real wages), these two classes of models are still widely discussed, and

no alternative model of real effects of money is as widely-accepted or

discussed. So it seems useful to develop additional implications of these

models that can be used to evaluate their consistency with the data. We show
                                                                            2

that extensions of these models to a small open economy lead to contrasting

implications for the effect of a monetary disturbance on the current account

of the balance of payments, the relative price of nontraded in terms of traded

goods, and output and consumption of traded goods.    In addition, the models

have different implications for the subsequent dynamics of relative and

nominal prices, output of nontraded goods, consumption of traded goods, and

the exchange rate.
                                                                               3

II. A Common Model

      This:   section   sets out common features of the wage-contract and

misperceptions models that we study. We consider a small open economy with

flexible exchange rates that produces and consumes two nonstorable goods, one

traded and one nontraded. There are two assets available: domestic money and

bonds denominated in foreign currency. In the misperceptions version of the

model, the domestic economy is divided into local goods markets or "islands"

as in Lucas (1972, 1975) and Barro (1976, 1980), to which individuals are

randomly allocated at the start of each period. The traded good and the two

assets can be traded both with individuals in other islands and in the rest of

the world. However, the nontraded good cannot be traded either across islands

or internationally. Our open-economy extension of the misperceptions model

thus differs from the earlier works by Saidi (1980, 1982), Lawrence (1981),

and Kimbrough (1983). Our open-economy extension of the nominal-wage contract

model is similar to that of Marston (1984) and Flood and Marion (1982), though

its focus is different.


      The demands for traded and nontraded goods are, in log-form,


      T(z) =                  + a(z) +                                          (1)

and

      N(z) = -a(PN      (z)PT) + a(z) + (m-Em) + (z)                            (2)



In the misperceptions version of the model, (1) and (2) give demands by

individuals on each island, indexed by z.    In the wage-contract version of the

                                                              -      is the (log)
model, the index z can be ignored in (1) and (2).1

relative price of the nontraded good (in z). a(z) is a wealth term showing
                                                                                       4

the net level of foreign-currency assets held by the domestic country (in z)

at the beginning of period t. m =
                                           M
                                               -
                                                   Mi    is the change in the (log) money

supply at time t, which occurs through transfer payments from the government.

E         is the expectation of m conditional on information available at time t
    t
(in z). m -          Etm   is then the unperceived (in z) change in the money supply.

As explained in Barro (1980), variations in this term produce wealth effects:

an increase in m given E m raises wealth because each individual interprets

his own transfer payment as a transfer of (money) resources to him from other

individuals. On the other hand, if m and E m rise together, the individual
                                                    zt
correctly sees that increase in his own money holding reflects a general

increase in the money supply which, because it raises.nominal prices, does not

add to his real money stock. The term m - E               m is an approximation of this
                                              zt
wealth effect; the derivation is discussed in Barro (1980).


        A random disturbance to the demand for nontraded goods, (z), has been

included in (2). For simplicity, we have omitted a similar term in (1), and

we assume that t(z) sums to zero across


        We assume that the demand for money is


           =         +          + ZN + (ii-c2)T                                             (3)


where N(z) and T(z) are outputs of nontraded and traded goods (in z), and

         N, and          are averages (over z) of PN(z), N(z), and T(z), It is
N'
straightforward to include a nominal interest rate in (3) but it complicates

the model's solution without changing its qualitative characteristics. The

supply of money is


           =
               Mtl   + m                                                                    (4)
                                                                                          5

where mt is an j,j.d. normal random variable with mean zero and variance
                                                                                          m
and is independent of


      The domestic country faces an exogenous foreign-currency price of traded

goods            and the domestic-currency price is assumed to be


                                                                                               (5)


where        is i.i.d. normal with mean zero, variance           (possibly zero), and is

independent of t(z) and


      Supplies of traded and nontraded goods are obtained by equating the

marginal product of labor in each sector to the (own-product) real wage. In

log form,


                                         +
      T(z) =                                 u(z)                                             (6)

and

             =
      N(z)         N(wt(z)N(z)).
                                                                                               (7)



We have assumed that the nominal wage Wjz) is equated across industries (in

z) and have included a random disturbance term, jt(z). to (6). We assume
                                                             2
        is i.i.d. normal with mean zero, variance                and   is   indepencient of

£(z), m, and             As   in   (1) and (2), the index z can be ignored in the wage-

contract version of the model.
                                                                            6

IM.   Differences in Supply

      While (6) and (7) characterize output supply jn both the nominal-wage-
congract and misperception versions of the model, wage determination differs

in the two models.


A. The Nominal-Contracts Model


      In this model we assume that the nominal wage Wt(or W(z)) is fixed in

t-1, before the realization of random variables in t.    Incomplete indexation

would not affect the main features of the model. Employment is assumed,

following Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977), to be determined on the demand side.

A more realistic wage-setting process, following the work of Taylor (1980),

might involve longer-term overlapping contracts and other features. Although

it is not required for our purposes, one might assume that the wage W. is set

in t-l at the conditional expectation (based on t-l information) of the

nominal wage in (8) below.


B. The Misperceptions Model


      Labor supply is a function of the real wage in terms of the consumption

bundle and of wealth, s.o the equilibrium wage in z is assumed to be


      W(z) = u1PT + (1w1)PN (z).+ w2a(z) + w3(mt••Ezmt).                         (8)



Substituting into (6) and using (5) we have
                                                                                     7

     T(z)     XT(1wl)(PN(z)tPT•t) - XTw2a(z)

              XTw3(mEm) + v(z)                                                            (9)


                                      -
                                          a(z)       -
                                                           (rnt_Ezmt)   + 1i(z),


and, similarly,



     N(z)
                                  -
                                          a(z)   -
                                                         a(m_E2rn).                (10)


     The misperceptions model differs from the nominal-wage contracts model in

two ways.    First, the nominal wage W(z) is determined by labor market

equilibrium in period t and is given by (8) rather than being set in period

t-l. Second, while individuals in the nominal-wage contracts model know, in

period t, all variables dated t and earlier, in the misperceptions model an

individual in z at date t knows only variables dated t-l and earlier, plus the

prices on economy-wide markets e and             and the price of the nontraded good

in his own local market, N (z). From this information he extracts estimates

of      + ' rn,   t(z), and t(z); there are misperceptions in the sense that

these estimates are not perfect, i.e., generally, E
                                                              t
                                                               m m.
                                                                                                 8

IV. Solutions of the Model
A.   With Nominal-Wage Contracting

                                                                                             d
     Conditional on the predetermined nominal wage W, equating N and

gives'


          =                        + cze +
                   (AN+)[XNWt                                      + a].                     (11)


Note that the money-wealth term,               m -   E        m, is zero because individuals can
                                                         zt
observe            all   current    prices and infer the                   money supply exactly.
(Alternatively, we can think of individuals as having direct observations on

the money supply.) Equating money supply to money demand and using (5)-(7)

and (11), one obtains                                                  .

     e=             1C(XN+c4)(1tl+mt)
                                          -



               - Wt[(l)XN      -
                                   XNUI
                                          -
                                              ()XTN+al)]                                             (12)


               -    a [(I)ad + 2XNa2]) -             -

where


     6 XN + a1 + QXNa1 + C                                    >   0.
                                          Q)XT(XN)                                               (13)


Then combining (11) and (12),


         =
               ó'{a(Ni+m)
          .+              +        + (11Q)AT(XN+al)]                                                 (14)
               Wt[XN

          +
                   a[4 + (i12)XTa2]).
                                                                               9

Since an increase in m, given the predetermined W1, raises both e and

 (6) and (7) imply that it raises outputs of both traded and nontraded goods.

While consumption of the nontraded good rises with its output, the relative

price of the nontraded good falls since


          -         =   ó
              "Tt           XN(Nl+m) + &XNt

                    + ócx2[l +
                                  lXN
                                        +
                                            ()AT]a                                  (15)


                    +


(1)   then implies that an increase in m given W lowers the demand for traded

goods.       Since an increase in mt raises T but lowers T it creates a

balance-of-trade surplus (relative to the initial situation).         In sum, an

increase in the money supply in t that was unexpected as of t-l and not

reflected in the nominal wage established then raises output of both traded

and nontraded goods, lowers the relative price of nontraded goods (while

raising the nominal price) and creates a trade surplus.


B. With Misperceptions


      Equating N(z) with N(z) gives




      PN(z) -           = (mtzmt)           +
                                                (z)      +
                                                             jtt(z)          (16)



             _d
where .1 = a. + a. and '. ..d
                 s
                          =.+                 s
                                             ..       Then
            1    1            1     1         1


                                                  S
              =               +
      N(z)        A(m-Em)         A'a(z) +_t(z)                                 (17)
                                                                                   10

where
            sd ds
      A
               a1


             sd ds
            a1a2-a1a2
      A'
                  a1

     We assume that A > 0 so that an increase in m - E             m raises output of
                                                              zt
nontraded goods. This assumption corresponds to a similar one made in the

closed-economy models to which this model corresponds..5 Note that, in any

case, (16) implies that an increase in m - E
                                                   tm   raises N (z) -
                                                                   t       t
     The demand for traded goods, using (16), is


     T(z) (+)(m-Em)                                                               (18)
                                      d
                        d
              +
                   (12)a(z) +
so   that an increase in m - E     m raises the demand for traded goods. Output
                                 zt
of traded goods is



     T(z)                                                                         (19)


                             -
                                 —t(z)    + P(z)

so a monetary disturbance unambiguously lowers the production of traded goods.


     Using (16) and money-market equilibrium, one can obtain results for

nominal prices:
                                                                                                     11

           =          +              - QA   +
                 Mt

                  +              -       cA +                                                      (20)


                  -
                          (1-cz)11

where N                      a, and              are the economy-wide averages (over z) of N (z),
           t                                                                                   t
E   m, a(z) and 1i(z). The term in s(z) drops out of (20) as we have
 zt
aggregated over z. Similarly,


         =        +                              +


             +    [(_l)_a            -   2A' +
                                                 (-c2)(—2+)]a                                      (21)


             -                   -          -
                  (T)_Q)P

Notice that the coefficient of                            -
                                                              Em   in (21) can be either positive or

negative.         Because M enters (21) separately with a unit coefficient, a

positive coefficient of m -                               implies that the exchange rate overshoots
                                                     Em
its long-run equilibrium level in response to an unperceived increase in the

money supply (i.e. holding fixed Em). Similarly, a negative coefficient

implies undershooting.


      The method of undetermined coefficients can.be used to solve the model in

the presence of rational expectations. In the general case, no closed-form

solution to the model is possible. However, we consider the restricted case

in which


                  -   A      +                            =   0                                    (22)
                                                1u1 3
                                                                            12

so that, in (21), a monetary disturbance that is not currently perceived has a

unit effect on the exchange rate (neither overshooting nor undershooting).

Given (22), the solution is given in the Appendix. A monetary disturbance

raises the relative price of nontraded goods and, therefore, raises output

along with consumption. But the wealth effect of the monetary shock and the

fall in the relative price of the traded good both increases demand for the

traded good and reduces its output, creating a balance-of-trade deficit.
                                                                               13

V.     Discussion

      An unanticipated increase in the money supply in the nominal-wage-contract

versin of the model raises output of both traded and nontraded goods, lowers

the relative price of nontraded goods, raises the exchange rate (by a greater

amount than predicted by purchasing power parity because of the fall in the

relative price of nontraded goods) and the nominal price of nontraded goods,

and lowers consumption of traded goods. The higher output and lower demand

for    traded goods show up as a trade or current-account surplus relative to the
original    situation. The current-account surplus raises wealth and, by (15),
leads   to a higher relative price of nontraded goods in subsequent periods. in
a    fuller model with overlapping contracts, the subsequent dynamics (which are

trivial    in the simple model presented above) would depend on the magnitude of
this    wealth increase through the current account and   on the dynamics of wage
changes.    The increase in a+1 also leads to greater output of nontraded goods

in subsequent periods as long as A >      0, and to a greater demand for traded
goods in subsequent periods.

      An increase in the money SUPi   in the misperceptions version of the model
is   not fully perceived by individuals. As a result, the relative price of

nontraded goods rises, output of nontraded goods rises, but output of traded

goods falls, both because of the wealth effect on aggregate labor supply and

because the relative price change induces factors to move from the traded

goods sector to the nontraded goods sector. The money supply increase also

leads to an increase in consumption of traded goods. Both      the fall in supply
and increase in demand for traded goods operate to produce a trade or current-

account deficit relative to the original situation. This current account
                                                                                                14

deficit reduces the net stock of foreign assets in subsequent periods, and

this reduces the demands for both traded and nontraded goods in subsequent

periods, lowering the relative price of nontraded goods and their output, and

turning the original current-account deficit into a current account surplus.


    The effects of an increase in the money supply on the nominal price of

nontraded goods and on the exchange rate areambiguous. Given the demand for

money (e.g. if      = = 0),          the nominal price of nontraded goods initially

rises--see (20). But the increased output of nontraded goods could increase

the demand for money enough that N falls, if 2 and A are sufficiently large.
                                   t
The effect of unperceived money on the exchange rate is ambiguous even if the

demand for money is fixed (e.g.             ii
                                                     = 0).    While nominal variables such as

the exchange rate rise to the extent the money supply increase is perceived,

unperceived money raises             -           , and   this occurs partly through a rise in
                                 t         t
    and a fall in         ,   which in turn occurs through a fall in the exchange
                      t
rate. Greater output of nontraded goods tends to lower the exchange rate

through an increase in the demand for money, while lower output of traded

goods tends to raise the exchange rate.


   The inference problem in the misperceptions model involves sorting out
                                                                                              m.
    +             and p from observations on e, T' and PN(z). By (5),

this reduces trivially to the problem of extracting estimates of
                                                                                       m, (z),
and p from        (or e) and              (z). Since a rise in                can be due to either
     t
              t                      :t                                   t
a rise in rn or a fall in p, and a rise in                        -       can be due to increases
                                                              t       t
in m, p, or t(z), changes in m are partly misperceived as changes in Pt
and .t(z), and this leads to the results discussed above.
                                                                            15

    One should be careful not to reject the implications of either version of

the model on the basis of casual evidence, since the discussion here has held

fixed disturbances originating in the rest of the world. Econometric analysis

of the implications of the model must account for the effects of foreign

disturbances. It should be clear, for example, that simultaneous unexpected

increases in the money supply in the rest of the world, but not in the

domestic country, would induce a current account deficit in the nominal

contract version of the model.


   The nominal-wage-contract and misperception models of aggregate business

fluctuations have similar implications in closed economies, though they can be

tested by distinguishing empirically between unanticipated         money and
(currently) unperceived money, or in ways pursued by Ahined (1983). However,

these models have strikingly different implications when extended to an open

economy. Thus, the example presented in this paper both suggests a new set of

tests to which these two models of business cycles can be subjected, and

illustrates a procedure for obtaining new testable implications from other

closed-economy macroeconomic models.
                                                                                         16

                                      Footnotes


1.   Two alternative interpretations of the wage-contract model are possible.

     First, one can ignore the index z and think of the domestic country as

     not being divided into local markets or islands.               In that case, the

     nontraded good can be traded domestically but not internationally.

     Alternatively, if the reader wishes to make the wage-contract model more

     similar to the misperceptions model, he can retain the notion of islands

     in the wage-contract model. As long as individuals observe the current

     1ir1 r'f 1-hA mrr1AY i,r1'u , 1-hA
                                    ——. Av4rAnr-c   rf   41pnd'z——wh'fch
                                                                   -.——  14m4t drmA*zie-

     trade   of the nontraded good- -will not produce the confusion of nominal

     and   real   shocks that is the main feature of the misperceptions model.

2.   We have also omitted intertemporal relative prices from our demand and

     supply functions for simplicity.             Closed-economy versions of the

     misperceptions model have generally focused on intertemporal rather than

     intratemporal relative prices. Intertemporal substitution is discussed

     in an earlier, longer version of this paper.           If substitution over time

     is large enough, some of the results reported in this paper can be

     changed.       Most empirical studies have, however, failed to find

     substantial intertemporal substitution.

3.   Assuming a nil response of the demand for money to th.e nominal interest

     rate in (3) simplifies the model without affecting the qualitative

     behavior of real variables.

4.   We ignore the index z here. Alternatively, (11) describes N (z).                    But

     as long as each island z is identical ex ante, (11) describes                   ,   the
                                                                                 t
     average price of nontraded goods, and (12)-(15) follow.
                                                                           17

5.   Barro arid   King (1983) have shown that in a closed-economy model with
     identical consumers, no investment, and a time-separable utility

     function, the number corresponding to A must be zero.     Without time-

     separable utility, that magnitude can be      positive, but then many

     intertemporal relative prices should be included in the demand functions.

     While this argument may pose a problem for the closed-economy models, it

     poses no problem in an open economy.
                                                                       18

                                          Appendix

   Given    (22),   the misperceptions model has the solution


                         (l-b2)a3        a2
    PN(z) -                         m +—a(z)
                                                                  (Al)


                     + b2u3(i-)     tt + _______
                         a1+b1a3          a1+b1a3



               =
and, with
                    e+       +




    e=          + m +      [(-l)     -   A'   +
                                                  (-Q)( +)}a
                                                                  (A2)

           - (T-2)P -                             -


where


   b1 a1[(2z ac2 a2 >                             0             (A3)




   b2       [1 + (n-)2-] e (0,1).                                           (A4)
                                                                              19

                                       References

S. Ahmed, 1983, "Wage Irtdexation and the Phillips Curve Slope: A Cross-
      Industry Analysis," University of Rochester.

R.J. Barro, 1976, "Rtl Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"
      Journal of Monetary Economics 2, January, 1-32.

__________ 1980, "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"
      Econometrica 48, September, 1393-1417.

__________ and R.G. King, 1982, "Time-Seperable Preferences and Intertemporal-
      Substitution Models of Business Cycles," University of Rochester.

S. Fischer, 1977, "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
      Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Econoiiy.85, February, 191-205.

R. Flood and N. Marion, 1982, "The Transmission of Disturbances under
      Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing,." Quarte1y
      Journal of Economics, February, 43-66.

J. Gray, "Wage-Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of Monetary
      Economics 2, April, 221-236.

K. Kimbrough, 1983, "Aggregate Information and the Role of Monetary Policy in
      an Open Economy," Duke University Working Paper.

C. Lawrence, 1981, "A Stochastic Model of the International Business Cycle
      under Floating Exchange Rates," University of Chicago.

R.E. Lucas, Jr., 1972, "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of
      Economic Theory 4, April, 103-124.

__________   1975, "Art Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of
      Political Economy 83, December, 1113-1144.

R. Marston, 1984, "Stabilization Policy in Open Economies," forthcoming in R.
     Jones and P. Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International. Economics,
     Amsterdam: North-Holland.

N.H. Saidi,   1980,  "Fluctuating Exchange Rates and the International
     Transmission of Economic Disturbances," JMCB, 12, November, 575-591.

_________     1982,   "Expectations, International Business Cycles, and the
     Balance of Payments," JMCB, August, 327-346.

A. Stockman and A. Koh, 1982, "Models of Business Fluctuations in Open
     Economies," University of Rochester.

J.B. Taylor, 1980, "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of
      Political Economy 88, February, 1-23.
