                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ASSESSMENT OF U.S. CAP-AND-TRADE PROPOSALS

                                           Sergey Paltsev
                                           John M. Reilly
                                          Henry D. Jacoby
                                         Angelo C. Gurgel
                                         Gilbert E. Metcalf
                                         Andrei P. Sokolov
                                         Jennifer F. Holak

                                        Working Paper 13176
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13176


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




Development of the underlying analysis models and other research-based tools used in this study was
supported separately by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Biological and Environmental Research
[BER] (DE-FG02-94ER61937), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (XA-83042801-0), the
Electric Power Research Institute, and by a consortium of industry and foundation sponsors. Also,
thanks to Justin Anderson and Marcus Sarofim for research assistance and to our colleagues in the
Joint Program for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Sergey Paltsev, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, Angelo C. Gurgel, Gilbert E. Metcalf,
Andrei P. Sokolov , and Jennifer F. Holak . All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
Assessment of U.S. Cap-and-Trade Proposals
Sergey Paltsev, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, Angelo C. Gurgel, Gilbert E. Metcalf, Andrei
P. Sokolov , and Jennifer F. Holak
NBER Working Paper No. 13176
June 2007
JEL No. Q4,Q48,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT


The MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis model is applied to synthetic policies that
match key attributes of a set of cap-and-trade proposals being considered by the U.S. Congress
in spring 2007. The bills fall into two groups: one specifies emissions reductions of 50% to 80%
below 1990 levels by 2050; the other establishes a tightening target for emissions intensity and
stipulates a time-path for a "safety valve" limit on the emission price that approximately
stabilizes U.S. emissions at the 2008 level. Initial period prices are estimated between $7 and
$50 per ton CO2-e with these prices rising by a factor of four by 2050. Welfare costs vary from
near zero to less than 0.5% at the start, rising in the most stringent case to near 2% in 2050. If
allowances were auctioned these proposals could produce revenue between $100 billion and
$500 billion per year depending on the case. Outcomes from U.S. policies depend on mitigation
effort abroad, and simulations are provided to illuminate terms-of-trade effects that influence the
emissions prices and welfare effects, and even the environmental effectiveness, of U.S. actions.
Sensitivity tests also are provided of several of key design features. Finally, the U.S. proposals,
and the assumptions about effort elsewhere, are extended to 2100 to allow exploration of the
potential role of these bills in the longer-term challenge of reducing climate change risk.
Simulations show that the 50% to 80% targets are consistent with global goals of atmospheric
stabilization at 450 to 550 ppmv CO2 but only if other nations, including the developing
countries, follow suit.

Sergey Paltsev                                       Henry D. Jacoby
Joint Program on the Science and                     Joint Program on the Science and
Policy of Global Change                              Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Bldg E40                    77 Massachusetts Avenue, Bldg E40
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
paltsev@MIT.EDU                                      hjacoby@MIT.EDU

John M. Reilly                                       Angelo C. Gurgel
Joint Program on the Science and                     Joint Program on the Science and
Policy of Global Change                              Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Bldg E40                    77 Massachusetts Avenue, Bldg E40
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
jreilly@mit.edu                                      gurgel@mit.edu
Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu

Andrei P. Sokolov
Joint Program on the Science and
Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Bldg E40
Cambridge, MA 02139
sokolov@mit.edu

Jennifer F. Holak
Joint Program on the Science and
Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Bldg E40
Cambridge, MA 02139
holak@mit.edu
1. INTRODUCTION
    A number of alternative approaches to greenhouse-gas mitigation are under
consideration in the United States, but the policy instrument now receiving greatest
attention is a national cap-and-trade system. Several bills have been filed in the Congress
or are under development. In this report we assess the economic and energy system
implications of these proposals, not comparing particular bills in detail but studying
synthetic versions that span their main features and illuminate the differences among
them. To carry out the economic aspects of the assessment we rely on the MIT Emissions
Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model. The implications of different emissions
paths for atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations and potential climate change are
explored using the earth science portions of the MIT Integrated Global System Model
(IGSM) of which EPPA is a component.
    The term “cap-and-trade” is used to describe a policy that identifies greenhouse-gas-
emitting entities covered by the system, sets caps on their emissions and allows trading in
the resulting emissions allowances. The “entities” are the points of responsibility for
emissions and they may be defined at various levels in the economic system from the
coal mine and refinery gate (upstream) to the firm or gasoline station (downstream). At
these points the emissions accounting is carried out. Emissions allowances (actually
entries in an electronic bookkeeping system) are distributed such that the total is equal to
the national cap, and covered entities must surrender allowances equal to their emissions,
or the emissions that result when the fuel they supply is burned. Market trading in these
allowances establishes a price on emissions that in turn creates economic incentives for
cost-effective abatement.1 It is common practice to distribute allowances to the entities
that are the point of regulation, but this procedure is not a requirement of the system.
Allowances could be distributed without charge to any persons, firms or other
organizations in the economy, or they could be auctioned.
    We begin the assessment of current proposals in Section 2 by laying out aspects of
system design, and conditions external to the U.S., that influence the performance of cap-
and-trade systems. In Section 3 the economic model used in the analysis is described and
the assumptions underlying a set of “core” policy cases are identified, including the
relative stringency of abatement, the emissions allowance paths, and mitigation
undertaken abroad. Section 4 then presents results for the core cases, including price and
welfare effects, impacts on energy markets and revenue potential if allowances are
auctioned. It is worth noting that, although the focus is on a cap-and-trade system, many
of the results are directly applicable to a carbon tax with the same coverage and
emissions target.2 In Section 4 it becomes evident how dependent the results are on

1
  For a discussion of the history of cap-and-trade systems in the U.S. and analysis of their application to
CO2 see Ellerman et al. (2003). A previous U.S. proposal of a cap-and-trade system for greenhouse gases
was the Climate Stewardship Act of 2003 (S. 139) introduced in 2003 by Senators McCain and Lieberman.
Analyses of this earlier legislation are available in Paltsev et al. (2003) and the US EIA (2003).
2
  Tax and quantity instruments have different properties in terms of economic cost and effectiveness under
uncertainty, but the scenarios analyzed in this report are simulated in a non-stochastic framework, and in
this context tax and quantity constraints are equivalent. Choice between tax and quantity constraints raises
important economic issues that deserve attention but are beyond the scope of this analysis.


                                                     2
assumptions about mitigation undertaken in other countries, through terms-of-trade
effects, and Section 5 explores this phenomenon in greater detail.
    Of necessity the comparison of the core cases requires a common set of system
definitions so in Section 6 we investigate various alternative specifications including
differences in banking, sectoral coverage, revenue recycling, the provision of a safety
valve and international permit trading. One important difference among cases is the role
of biofuels, and Section 7 provides a more detailed look at this option and its implications
for land use.
    The proposals under study specify targets only to 2050, which is too short a period for
consideration of the climate impacts. Therefore in Section 8 assumptions are made for the
latter half of the century and estimates are provided of the resulting reduction in
atmospheric CO2 concentrations and in projected global temperature change. Section 9
offers some conclusions.
2. ISSUES IN SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
   The economic and environmental effects of a cap-and-trade system depend on its
features within a particular country, and also on activities in other countries through the
influence of trade in energy, non-energy goods and emissions allowances. As background
for the assumptions applied in assessing potential U.S. systems, a brief review of these
factors is in order. Definitions of terms used in discussing greenhouse gas control
policies, especially cap-and-trade systems, are provided in Appendix A.
   2.1 System Design Features
   Cap-and-trade legislation will include a large number of details, and any U.S. system
likely will be a negotiated compromise among current proposals. In forming judgments
about economic implications of system design a few of these features are of greatest
importance.
   Stringency of the emissions target. The targeted emissions reduction over the time
horizon of the policy is among the most important determinants of policy cost and its
climate benefits. Many of the bills considered here state an emissions target for 2050, and
that is one way to compare them. However, a better measure of stringency is the sum of
national emissions permitted between the start of the policy and mid-century. Such a
comparison is used to benchmark the analysis below.
   Point of regulation. Current proposals differ in the points in the economic system
where the cap is applied (upstream or downstream) and the method of allowance
distribution (for free or by auction). The primary effect of this choice of point of
regulation is to determine which entities must comply with the regulatory system by
monitoring emissions, maintaining records, and submitting allowances. The direct cost of
emissions abatement may not be incurred at this stage in the production process. For
example, in an upstream system where one point of regulation likely would be at oil
refineries, emissions abatement would come mainly from reductions in fuel use
downstream. The costs of this abatement would include additional spending for more
efficient vehicles, heating equipment and alternative fuels, or the sacrifice of amenities
that increase fuel consumption (e.g., larger, more powerful vehicles). Refiners do not
directly control abatement (except for emissions in the refinery process itself) but only
influence fuel use by passing on the allowance cost to petroleum product consumers.



                                             3
   Similarly, a chemical company will make essentially the same decisions about product
line and equipment choices whether it pays a separate natural gas price and surrenders
allowances for the emissions released, or simply pays a higher fuel price that includes the
allowance cost premium. An upstream allowance system thus assumes that the coal mine,
gas gathering point, refinery gate and import terminal will pass through the bulk of the
allowance cost to subsequent stages in the economic system and ultimately to goods and
services.
   How much of the direct mitigation cost is passed forward to consumers is not a choice
made by firms but rather depends on the underlying elasticities of supply and demand for
the goods and services being produced, and this can be further affected by rate-setting
agencies that oversee regulated utilities depending on how the value of allowances are
treated in setting rates. The essential point that bears emphasis is that the ultimate
distribution of control costs under a cap-and-trade system, especially in unregulated
markets, is determined by market forces, not by the choice of upstream or downstream
implementation. This fact frees up policy makers to implement such systems at the stage
of production where implementation costs are lowest.
   Method of allowance distribution and distributional implications. Whether the point
of obligation is upstream, downstream or some hybrid, emission allowances are valuable
assets and the way they are distributed can have a substantial effect on equity aspects of
the system. If allowances are auctioned, then the overall distributional effect depends on
what is done with the revenue. If the allocations are distributed on some “grandfathering”
principle to firms at the point of regulation, then these firms receive the asset value or
scarcity rent.3 The U.S. sulfur system and the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS)
are directed toward the point of combustion, and so the firms covered by them are
bearing some direct cost of abatement, in spending on improved efficiency, fuel
switching, sulfur scrubbing and the like. In trial phase of the EU ETS, however,
electricity price changes have appeared to reflect not so much the direct mitigation
expenses but the changing marginal cost of permits, even though they were distributed
for free. Given that the electricity markets are mostly deregulated in Europe such a pass
through of permit price is, or should have been, expected.
   In the U.S., on the other hand, where much of the electricity market remains regulated
by public utility commissions, rates may not be allowed to rise unless there is an actual
cost incurred by the utility. Under that circumstance the value of the allowance asset does
not create value for the utility and electricity consumers will benefit relative to the case
where rates fully reflected CO2 prices; i.e. rates will not rise as much and utilities will not
recover the permit value through higher electricity rates. The downside of this aspect of
regulated utility markets is that, because electricity prices will not rise to reflect the full
allowance cost, electricity consumers will not have as much of an incentive to reduce
their electricity consumption. If the most efficient abatement response involves mostly
fuel-switching within the electric sector the inefficiency imposed in such a regulatory
setting may be limited. On the other hand, in the refinery example used above very little
abatement would occur if fuel prices did not increase to reflect marginal CO2 prices, and
so if concern about rising fuel prices led to some form of price regulation, such as
imposition of price controls, it would defeat the purpose of the CO2 policy.

3
 In markets under cost-of-service regulation, like some U.S. electric utilities, public authorities may not
allow firms to realize scarcity rents in this way.


                                                      4
    To summarize, who bears the ultimate burden of the costs of abatement depends on
the complex interaction of markets (see, e.g., Fullerton and Metcalf, 2002). In an
idealized “neoclassical” model of the economy the burden of the mitigation costs under a
cap-and-trade program is independent of the point of regulation. One implication of this
principle is that while upstream regulation would create incentives for abatement, the
costs of abatement need not be borne upstream. Thus, free distribution of allowances to
upstream entities can create an inequitable outcome where they receive a valuable asset
but ultimately pass on most of the cost to downstream fuel users. Of course, the actual
economy diverges from the way it is represented in idealized economic models, and so
the point of regulation can affect outcomes in substantial ways. However, that
qualification does not change the conclusion that, to the degree the distributional impacts
of the policy are a concern, the focus needs to be on who actually bears the economic
burden of the policy, not who happens to be given the task of turning in allowances or
even who is directly responsible for abating emissions. On equity grounds, the revenue
from auctioning permits or the distribution of free allowances could be directed to those
who ultimately bear the cost of abatement, whether it is low-income consumers, coal
mine owners, coal miners or other groups. To correctly assess the cost implications for
different groups requires a detailed representation of the economy, including
representation of features such as cost-of-service regulation as in some U.S. electric
utilities.
    Banking and borrowing of permits. Cap-and-trade systems generally define a set of
accounting periods and allocate allowed emissions separately for each period. An
important design feature is whether entities under the cap can shift their obligations
across periods. If higher costs are expected in the future, firms have an incentive to over-
comply early-on and “bank” the excess for use in meeting future obligations. Or they
might be allowed to under-comply, “borrowing” from the future by shifting the deficit
forward to add to the obligation in subsequent periods. Many cap-and-trade systems
allow banking. Provision for borrowing is less common, perhaps because of default risk.
In systems that plan for tightening over time, creating the expectation of rising cost,
banking is an economic response that will tend to convert any prescribed period-by-
period set of targets into a cost-minimizing path with the same total emissions over the
policy horizon.
    Coverage by sector and greenhouse gas. Cap-and-trade systems are sometimes
proposed that include CO2 only, or CO2 plus some combination of the other greenhouse
gases. A multi-gas implementation then requires some set of exchange rates (Global
Warming Potentials or GWPs are used in this study) to allow aggregation of their various
effects. Also, systems vary by the number of sectors covered. The EU ETS, for example,
covers only electric utilities and heavy industry, and some of the systems assessed below
omit households, agriculture, and small entities.
    Revenue recycling. If a portion of the allowances is auctioned, or a safety valve
provision (discussed next) yields sales proceeds, the system will generate government
revenue. One possible application of these funds is the reduction of taxes either on capital
(corporate income, dividends or capital gains) or labor (earned income). Existing taxes
distort choices in the economy and reducing them may lower this distorting effect and
increase economic activity, an effect termed a “double dividend” because the greenhouse
gas (GHG) policy would yield not only an environmental dividend but also an economic



                                             5
one. There is a possibility that the efficiency improvements from tax reduction could
completely offset the direct cost of the abatement policy, an outcome called a “strong”
double dividend. The case where the emission control cost is reduced but not completely
offset by revenue recycling has been referred to as a “weak” double dividend. It is also
possible if energy is highly taxed that revenue recycling can actually reduce economic
activity (see Metcalf et al., 2004) but this outcome is unlikely in the U.S. where energy is
only lightly taxed.
   Provision of a safety valve. When the emissions cap is set there is uncertainty as to
how high the emissions price may rise. To guard against price spikes that may threaten
excess short-run economic cost (or the survival of the system itself) a price ceiling may
be added to the system. Under such a so-called “safety valve” the government offers to
sell allowances in unlimited amounts at a fixed price, perhaps at levels rising over time.4
Whether the safety valve is likely to be triggered can be controlled by joint selection of
the number of allowances issued and the safety valve price. The tighter (looser) the cap
the higher (lower) the expected allowance price in the absence of the safety valve. If the
safety valve price is set relatively high in relation to the expected emissions price then
resort to government sales would be less likely. If the safety valve is set relatively low in
relation to the expected price then this provision is better thought of as an emissions tax
with allocated exemptions.
   Note that with a safety valve the original cap is no longer met with certainty. A tight
cap with a relatively low safety valve will mean the cap very likely will be exceeded. A
loose cap with a relatively high safety valve will make it much more likely that the cap is
actually met.
   Linkage with non-U.S. systems. The emissions price realized in a U.S. cap-and-trade
system could be substantially affected by linkage to outside systems. Relatively low cost
emission reductions may be available in projects carried out in other countries (e.g.,
forest projects) and the admission of such credits can reduce the domestic emissions price
and economic cost. If the U.S. is linked to foreign trading systems, a common emissions
price will emerge, but whether that result is higher or lower than the autarkic U.S. price
would depend on the relative stringency of the before-connection caps in the different
systems.
   2.2 External Factors
   In addition to the features that may be built into cap-and-trade legislation, a number of
external factors will influence the economic effects of the system. Two are of particular
interest.
   Non-U.S. mitigation measures. Estimates of the cost of emissions mitigation in the
U.S. will be influenced by emissions control measures being taken elsewhere. Most
important, the level of global control will affect the prices of crude oil and other fossil
fuels that the U.S. either imports or exports, and the prices of traded quantities of
biofuels. Trade in non-energy goods also will be affected, although the effects on the U.S.
are generally small in relation to the influence on trade in energy goods. These so-called
terms-of-trade effects play an important role in assessment the cost of potential U.S.
measures as will be seen below.

4
 For an analysis of these systems and their relation to banking and borrowing see Jacoby and Ellerman
(2004).


                                                    6
   Trade restriction. Biofuels offer a relatively low-cost alternative for emission
mitigation in the transport sector, and if unrestrained (and depending on emissions targets
in other countries) the trade in these fuels could have large effects on land use and related
issues of environmental degradation and food prices. In the U.S. biofuels are popularly
seen as an abundant domestic resource that could reduce dependence on foreign oil,
although imports of ethanol into the U.S. are currently restricted by tariffs.
In the analysis we try to provide insight into many of the issues identified above.
However the nature of the model we employ is better suited to examine some of them
than others. In the next section we describe the model and some of its limitations.
3. ANALYSIS METHOD
    3.1 The Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model
    To assess costs and energy system implications of these proposed mitigation measures
we apply the MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model. The standard
version of the EPPA model is a multi-region, multi-sector recursive-dynamic
representation of the global economy (Paltsev et al., 2005). In a recursive-dynamic
solution economic actors are modeled as having “myopic” expectations.5 This
assumption means that current period investment, savings, and consumption decisions are
made on the basis of current period prices. This version of the model is applied below.
    The level of aggregation of the model is presented in Table 1, and model features are
further elaborated in Appendix B. The model includes representation of abatement of
non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions (CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs and SF6) and the
calculations consider both the emissions mitigation that occurs as a byproduct of actions
directed at CO2 and reductions resulting from gas-specific control measures. Targeted
control measures include reductions in the emissions of: CO2 from the combustion of
fossil fuels; the industrial gases that replace CFCs controlled by the Montreal Protocol
and produced at aluminum smelters; CH4 from a number of sources, and N2O from
chemical production and improved management of inorganic fertilizer applications. More
detail on how abatement costs are represented for these substances is provided in Hyman
et al. (2003).
    Non-energy activities are aggregated to six sectors, as shown in the table. The energy
sector, which emits several of the non-CO2 gases as well as CO2, is modeled in more
detail. The synthetic coal gas industry produces a perfect substitute for natural gas. The
oil shale industry produces a perfect substitute for refined oil. All electricity generation
technologies produce perfectly substitutable electricity except for Solar and Wind, which
is modeled as producing an imperfect substitute, reflecting its intermittent output.
Biomass use is included both in transport fuel and electric generation although it does not

5
  An alternative, forward-looking version of the EPPA model optimizes choices over time where economic
actors are said to have “perfect foresight.” Such a forward-looking solution provides a more complete
realization of neoclassical economic theory, leading to economic choices that are optimized over time as
well as across sectors and regions. In a companion report Gurgel et al. (2007) compare the forward-looking
EPPA results with those of the recursive model used here for the same core scenarios. They find that the
basic behavior of the forward-looking model in terms of abatement and CO2-e prices is very similar to the
recursive model, the main difference being that optimization through time leads to somewhat lower welfare
costs as one might expect. They explore additional aspects of policies for which the forward-looking
version is particularly appropriate, and results for revenue recycling are summarized below.


                                                    7
penetrate the electric sector in these simulations. There are 16 geographical regions
represented explicitly in the model including major countries (the U.S., Japan, Canada,
China, India, and Indonesia) and 10 regions that are an aggregation of countries.
    When viewing the EPPA model results for emissions prices and welfare costs it is well
to remember that in any period the model seeks out the least-cost reductions regardless of
which of the six categories of gases is controlled or from which sector they originate,
applying the same marginal emissions penalty across all controlled sources. This set of
conditions, often referred to as “what” and “where” flexibility, will tend to lead to least-
cost abatement. To the degree that cap-and-trade legislation departs from these ideal
conditions, costs for any level of greenhouse gas reduction will be higher than computed
in a model of this type.
    The results also depend on a number of aspects of model structure and particular input
assumptions that greatly simplify the representation of economic structure and decision-
making. For example, the difficulty of achieving any emissions path is influenced by
assumptions about population and productivity growth that underlie the no-policy
reference case. The simulations also embody a particular representation of the structure
of the economy including the relative ease of substitution among the inputs to production
and the behavior of consumers in the face of changing prices of fuels, electricity and
other goods and services. Further critical assumptions must be made about the cost and
performance of new technologies and what might limit their market penetration.
Specifications of alternatives to conventional technologies in the electric sector and in
transportation are particularly important. Finally, the EPPA model draws heavily on
neoclassical economic theory. While this underpinning is a strength in some regards, the
model fails to capture many economic rigidities that could lead to unemployment or
misallocation of resources nor does it capture regulatory and policy details that are, as
discussed earlier, particularly important in the utility sector.
    Given the many assumptions that are necessary to model national and global economic
systems, the precise numerical results are not as important as the insights to be gained
about the general direction of changes in the economy and components of the energy
system and about the approximate magnitude of the price and welfare effects to be
expected given alternative features of cap-and-trade design. An uncertainty analysis of
these proposals (e.g., Webster et al., 2002), a task beyond the scope of this study, would
be required to quantify the range about any particular result, although the relative impacts
of caps of different stringency likely would be preserved. Policy design inevitably
involves a process to reevaluate decisions as new information is gained, rather then
deciding once and for all on a long-term policy based on any single numerical analysis.
   3.2 Policy Options and Scenario Assumptions for the “Core” Results
   In presenting the assessment results we first explore (in Section 4) a set of “core”
results applying features that are most common among the proposed cap-and-trade bills.
Then, in Section 5, we consider variation in system features over such dimensions as
coverage, banking and borrowing, trade restrictions and revenue recycling. We focus the
discussion on results that illustrate measures of cost, and effects on energy and
agricultural markets. A more complete set of results for each of the scenarios is provided
in an appendix to this working paper available at the NBER website. The key features of
the set of “core” simulations are the following.



                                             8
    Stringency, coverage, banking and the safety valve. Most of the current proposals
specify emissions reductions goals for the period from 2012 to 2050. A selection of these
is presented in Table 2 along with their most prominent features. In several cases a target
is stated for 2050 in terms of a percentage reduction below 1990 emissions, providing a
firm numerical goal for allowance allocation only in that year. The initial year allowance
level is often benchmarked to emissions in the year the bill is passed, or in one case an
average of the three years after. The most recent year’s emissions inventory available as
of this writing is 2005, and so assuming the bill is passed in 2007 or 2008 requires some
extrapolation. While some of the bills provide a formula for computing allowances in
intervening years others do not, offering targets only for one or two intermediate years.
Still other proposals describe emissions allowances that depend on economic growth. For
the core cases, we have specified three allowance paths that start in 2012 by returning to
2008 levels, extrapolating 2008 emissions from the 2005 inventory by assuming growth
at the recent historical rate of 1% per year as documented in U.S. EPA (2006). We then
assume a linear time-path of allowance allocation between this level in 2012 and a 2050
target equal to: (1) 2008 emissions levels, (2) 50% below 1990, and (3) 80% below 1990.
    Following the convention noted above, cases are labeled by the cumulative number of
allowances that would be made available between 2012 and 2050 in billions of metric tons
(bmt), or gigatons, of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2-e) greenhouse gas emissions. These
amounts are 287 bmt in the case of holding emission flat at 2008 levels, 203 bmt when
allowance allocations are cut to 50% below 1990 by 2050, and 167 bmt when allowance
allocations are cut to 80% below 1990 by 2050. These allowance paths are plotted in
Figure 1. Also shown in the figure is our approximation of the allowance paths specified
in current bills. In some cases judgments were required to fill in an allowance path that is
incompletely specified in the legislation. Also, some of these bills were drafts, or subject to
revision, and so readers need to check their status to insure the comparison remains
appropriate.
    With fixed total allowances over the whole period, and banking, the actual time-path
of allowance allocation will not affect the CO2 prices, energy markets, and other
projections simulated by the model in these core runs.6 It is for this reason that an
informative way to compare the bills studied here is by the cumulative allowance
allocations under each. This is also a good way to show which of the scenarios we have
run is most comparable to specific bills. Table 3 arranges the bills in the order of
stringency, least to most, along with our three core cases. The 287 bmt case is close to the
Udall-Petri Bill, the 203 bmt case comes just about at the Feinstein Bill level, and the 167
bmt case is very close to the Sanders-Boxer Bill. Our estimate of total emissions
including uncovered sectors for the Lieberman-McCain Bill places it slightly above the
203 bmt case. Kerry-Snowe lies just about halfway between the 167 and 203 bmt cases.
On the low side of the 167 bmt case is Waxman and on the high side of the 287 bmt case
is Bingaman-Specter, each about 18-19 bmt outside our range. Note that the Bingaman-
Specter draft and Udall-Petri include a safety valve feature and so to the extent the safety


6
  In cases where allowances are auctioned, the time-path affects the auction revenue in each year, and if this
revenue is recycled to lower taxes the timing has some effect on the economy and emissions, and
potentially affects emissions prices policy cost. The effects of recycling on CO2-e prices are small,
however.


                                                      9
valve is triggered emissions are determined by the price mechanism and are not
necessarily fixed.
   Throughout the analysis the cap covers the emissions of the six categories of
greenhouse gases identified in U.S. policy statements and in the Kyoto Protocol (CO2,
CH4, N2O, SF6, HFSs and PFCs), with the gases aggregated at the 100-year GWP rates
used in US EPA (2006). The “core” definition also assumes that the cap applies to all
sectors of the economy except emissions of CO2 from land use, and no credits for CO2
sequestration by forests or soils are included. It is also important to note that in the core
cases nuclear power is assumed to be limited by concerns for safety and siting of new
plants, and thus nuclear capacity is not allowed to expand.
   The focus of current cap-and-trade legislation on the pre-2050 period leaves open the
question of what level of allowances will be available afterward. Extrapolating a linear
decline rate would lead eventually to negative allowances.7 When we extend the policies
beyond 2050 in the analysis below we assume that the allowance level in 2050 is simply
held constant at that level for the remainder of the century. However, we do not simulate
banking into the post-2050 period and so the economic results reported are unaffected by
the post-2050 assumptions.
   International linkage, non-U.S. mitigation measures and trade restriction. The
“core” policy scenarios provide no possibility for crediting reductions achieved in ex-
U.S. systems such as the Kyoto-sanctioned Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) or
other trading systems such as the EU Emission Trading Scheme. However, it assumed
that other regions pursue climate policies as follows: Europe, Japan, Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand follow an allowance path that is falling gradually from the simulated
Kyoto emissions levels in 2012 to 50% below 1990 in 2050.8 All other regions adopt a
policy beginning in 2025 that returns and holds them at year 2015 emissions levels
through 2034, and then returns and maintains them at 2000 emissions levels from 2035 to
2050. We assume no emissions trading among regions, although implicitly a trading
system operates within each of the EPPA regions/countries that include, for example, the
EU as a single region (see Table 1).


7
  A negative allowance allocation is not impossible. If, for example, international emissions trading were in
effect developed countries could receive a negative allowance allocation, and they would be required to
purchase allowances from developing countries to make up for this negative allocation in addition to any
emissions they have. Or some have discussed the possibility of using biomass as a feedstock for hydrogen,
stripping out the carbon and storing it underground, or stripping carbon out of the air and storing it. Were
these technologies considered realistically feasible at large-scale, a global net allocation could eventually
be negative and atmospheric concentrations would then reverse and decline.
8
  To provide an allowance path that falls gradually at first, accelerating as 2050 is approached, we fit a
simple quadratic function, solving the equation:
    X 2050 − X 2012 = btarget * t
                                    2
                                        ,
          for the coefficient btarget where t is time (2012 = 0; 2050 =38) and X2012 and X2050 are emissions
targets for the year 2012 and 2050 respectively. With X2012 set to the 2008 emission level as estimated
above and the X2050 target given above we can solve the equation for btarget (target = 10, 30, 50, 70, 80)
when t = 50 – 12 = 38. We can then use the equation below to solve for all other years (XYEAR):
    X YEAR = btarget * t + X 2012 .
                        2



          The EPPA model solves only every 5-years, and so the first year for which we simulate policy
costs is the year 2015.


                                                      10
   Allowance allocation and revenue recycling. Allowances are assumed to be
distributed for free. The distributional implications of abatement and allowance allocation
were discussed Section 2.1. In a model like EPPA, however, with a single representative
agent that owns all resources (i.e. labor, capital, other assets), all costs necessarily fall on
that single agent and there is no difference if allowances are dispensed for free in a lump
sum manner, or allowances are auctioned and the revenue is distributed in a lump sum
manner. Thus, we are not able to deal with the variety of distributional issues raised in
Section 2.1.
   Distributional effects will vary depending on who owns what resources and how the
costs of different goods change. For example, if lower income people spend a larger
percentage of their income on energy, the impact of rising energy prices will have a
disproportionately large effect on them. Similarly, if energy costs are higher because of
heating requirements in Northern States or for air conditioning in the South, people there
may be disproportionately affected compared to the Pacific States where the climate is
relatively mild. If the point of regulation is midstream— e.g., electric utilities, industrial
emitters and refiners—and allowances are given to them freely, this new asset will
represent increased value for these firms and their shareholders to the extent product
prices reflect the marginal CO2 prices. Meanwhile, asset values and employment at
upstream coal companies could decline. If, on the other hand, allowances were auctioned
and the revenue distributed in a lump sum manner (e.g., equally to every citizen, every
adult citizen, or every taxpayer), the distributional effects would change substantially.
4. CORE RESULTS
   The estimates presented in this section are dependent on assumptions in Section 3.2
about how U.S. policy is implemented and on emissions controls assumed to be imposed
in other countries. The core assumptions are designed to set a context for assessment of
these proposals but many factors come into play and other assumptions are also plausible.
Moreover, the bills include different features, some of which may or may not be
exercised, are incompletely specified, or may change. For example, linkage with
emissions trading with other countries is authorized or anticipated in some of the bills,
but may depend on a later judgment by the Administration that the foreign system is
sound. Also, several of the bills include regulatory measures (e.g., tightening of auto
design regulations), renewable portfolio standards, and specific expenditure programs
(e.g., R&D and technology subsidies) that we do not model. Thus, this section is a
starting point for exploration of the costs and other impacts of the proposed legislation.
Section 4 addresses the sensitivity of these results to several of the core assumptions.
   4.1 Emissions, Greenhouse Gas Prices and Welfare Cost
   All three emissions reductions paths show net banking, with GHG emissions below
the allocations in early years and exceeding them in later ones (Figure 2). Thus, for
example, projected emissions in 2050 in the 167 bmt case (allowances in 2050 at 80%
below 1990) are only about 50% below 1990. Similarly, for the 203 bmt case emissions
in 2050 are a little over 40% below 1990 even though allowances allocated in 2050 are
50% below 1990. The 287 bmt case has emissions in 2050 about 5.5% above the
allowance allocation in that year.
   The bump-up in emissions in 2035 is due to assumptions about policies abroad and the
resulting effects on international fuel markets, as the developing countries ramp down


                                              11
their emissions in 2035. Their emissions reductions result in lower demand for fossil
fuels, especially petroleum, reducing their prices. The U.S., with the banking provision,
takes advantage of this effect by consuming relatively more petroleum products when the
fuel price falls. Since the U.S. must meet its overall cap over the period to 2050 these
added emissions must be made up for with greater reductions (and banking) in earlier
periods. Other assumptions about policies abroad could smooth out or eliminate this
effect, but the U.S. would still likely exhibit net banking.
    The core scenarios assume all-greenhouse-gas policies with emissions trading among
gases at their Global Warming Potential (GWP) values. All prices are thus CO2-
equivalent prices (noted CO2-e) and that is the case throughout this report. CO2-e prices
for the 287, 203, and 167 bmt cases in the initial projection year (2015) are $18, $41, and
$53 per ton CO2-e (all in 2005 prices) as graphed in Figure 3a and shown in Table 4.
The design of the scenarios ensures that prices rise at the real interest rate, assumed
constant at 4% per annum. With banking allowance, holders decide whether to bank or
not by comparing the expected rate of return on abatement (and banking of allowances)
to returns on other financial instruments and alter their banking behavior until these
returns are equalized. The result is that by 2050 carbon prices reach $70, $161, and $210
per ton CO2-e for the 287, 203, and 167 bmt cases. (Solutions where banking is not
allowed are explored in Section 6.1.)
    Recognizing that there is uncertainty in emissions growth and abatement cost means it
is highly unlikely that the price path would follow this smooth increase because market
participants might start with one set of expectations only to have them change as new
information was revealed.
    As discussed in Appendix B the version of the EPPA model used here incorporates
endogenous labor supply, allowing employment to respond to changes in the market
economy. Under this formulation the welfare measure includes not only changes in
aggregate market consumption but also effects on leisure time. The main measure of
overall economic cost we report is change in welfare that, following standard economic
theory, is measured as equivalent variation.9 The results for the three core scenarios are
graphed in Figure 3b and shown in Table 4. Other macroeconomic measures (macro-
economic market consumption, GDP) are provided in Appendix C. The initial (2015)
levels of welfare effects are quite small at 0.01, –0.04%, and –0.08%, ending at –0.18, –
1.45, and –1.79% in 2050 for the 287, 203, and 167 bmt cases, respectively.10

9
  The general equilibrium modeling convention is based on economic theory whereby workers willingly
choose to work or not, and when they choose not to work they value their non-work time at the marginal
wage rate. Carbon dioxide mitigation tends to increase the cost of consuming market goods and thus
workers have a tendency to choose to work less, and thus have more non-work time. As a result, the
percentage welfare changes in Figure 3b and Table 4 combine a loss of market consumption that is partly
offset by a gain in leisure. Moreover, the denominator is larger by the amount of leisure accounted for in
the model, which for our accounting increases the denominator by about 17%. How much non-work time to
account is somewhat arbitrary and so the denominator in this calculation can be made larger or smaller
depending on how much time is accounted. For the model used here we assume a reasonable number of
potential labor hours rather than accounting all waking hours of people of all ages. For a discussion, see
Matus et al. (2007).
10
   If the endpoint percentage below 1990 is the same but the reduction path is more gradual following the
quadratic path we have specified for other countries (see footnote 8) more cumulative allowances are
available and the overall policy cost is less. We simulated the model in such cases for endpoints 50% and
80% below 1990. Cumulative emissions in these two cases are 230 and 206 bmt compared with 203 and


                                                   12
   Given the smooth rise in the CO2-e price a similarly smooth increase in the welfare
cost might be expected. Instead the percentage loss increases through 2030, drops back in
2035, and then increases again. This pattern results because there are two components of
the welfare change. One is the direct cost of abatement that can be calculated as the area
under a marginal abatement curve. A second stems from general equilibrium interactions,
and in this case it is mostly the effect of terms-of-trade impacts on the U.S. resulting from
climate policy abroad. Thus, as with the emissions path shown in Figure 2, this pattern is
driven by assumptions about policy in the rest of the world, especially the tightening of
policies in developing countries in 2035.11
   Because of the importance of these terms-of-trade effects it is useful to recall the core
assumptions about international actions. These cases vary the stringency of the policy in
the U.S. but leave unchanged the mitigation efforts of the rest of the world. In the 203
bmt case the U.S. takes on reduction targets similar to other developed countries with the
developing countries following later. Whereas the U.S. and developed country allowance
allocation is 50% below 1990 in 2050, developing countries are still at their 2000 levels.
Although the developing country targets are less stringent relative to 1990 emissions
levels, this policy nevertheless represents quite stringent reductions for rapidly growing
developing countries. In the 167 bmt case the U.S. mitigation efforts are more stringent
than other developed countries in terms of abatement relative to 1990 emissions levels,
while in the 287 bmt case the U.S. lags behind them. In this less ambitious case the U.S.
effort eventually falls behind that of developing countries, even while the U.S. benefits
from terms-of-trade effects.
   In viewing these results it is well to keep in mind the political realism of the more- and
less-stringent cases, where the U.S. makes a stronger or weaker effort in relation to
others. For our purpose a common assumption about external conditions provides a point
of departure for comparing different U.S. effort levels. We alter the level of effort
assumed abroad in sensitivity analysis discussed below to help isolate the terms-of-trade
effects from the costs directly associated with abatement in the U.S. The importance of
assumptions about mitigation efforts abroad in assessment of U.S. domestic proposals is
further emphasized in Section 5 where we explore alternative scenarios of rest-of-world
effort. Together these core and alternative scenarios highlight the strategic implications of
cooperative and non-cooperative mitigation that arise through terms-of-trade effects,
further complicating policy coordination among countries with different impressions of
climate impacts and with incentives to “free ride” on abatement efforts elsewhere.
   4.2 The Role of the Non-CO2 Gases
   Inclusion of non-CO2 greenhouse gases in the policy can be important in reducing the
policy cost. Recall that the reduction scenarios are defined in terms of CO2 equivalents
(CO2-e) with the non-CO2 gases weighted in terms of their GWPs. Initial levels of


167 bmt with a linear decline, and thus they obviously lead to higher emissions. Consequently the CO2-e
prices are lower—initially $35 and $42 compared with $41 and $53 for the linear paths, rising to $140 and
$165 by 2050, and the welfare losses are lower, 1.08 and 1.48 in 2050 compared with the 1.45 and 1.79
with the linear assumption.
11
   In the forward-looking version of EPPA (Gurgel et al., 2007) consumption changes are smoothed over
time as is expected when agents can look ahead and shift present consumptions and savings decisions when
they anticipate a future shock.


                                                   13
reduction of several of these gases can be achieved at low cost relative to CO2, so they
are a natural early target for control efforts. Their relative role, period by period, is
illustrated in Figure 4, using the 203 bmt case as an example. Note that in 2015 these
gases represent roughly one-third of CO2-e reductions, their fraction falling to a quarter in
2020 and to one-fifth in 2025. After that time the reductions to be achieved from
controlling these gases is pretty much exhausted, so the absolute level of abatement
increases very little, and their contribution relative to total CO2-e abatement falls to
around a tenth in 2050.
    The same pattern holds in the other cases. In general, at lower CO2-e prices the non-
CO2 gases play a larger relative role and can forestall the need for rapid adjustment in the
energy sector while contributing, especially in the case of methane, near-term climate
benefits. While beyond the scope of this analysis, Reilly et al. (2006) provide an
evaluation of the cost-effectiveness and climate effects of including non-CO2 GHGs in a
control regime. These findings suggest that even though their relative importance falls
over time in policies aimed at substantial reductions in greenhouse gases, their overall
role in a cost-effective strategy should not be overlooked.
    4.3 Energy Market Effects
    The proposed policies have substantial effects on fuels and electricity markets, both in
terms of prices and quantities consumed. In reviewing these results it is important to
distinguish between the price of fuels themselves and the cost of using them, where the
consumer expenditure includes the fuel price and the emissions charge. The carbon
contents of fuels are relatively stable, so the price inclusive of the emissions charge can
be calculated by adding the appropriate CO2 penalty for a gallon, barrel, ton, or tcf of the
fuel. Table 5 shows the added cost resulting from a $27 per ton CO2-e price for a variety
of fuels and the percentage increase this implies relative to the average price for these
fuels for 2001-2005 (excluding Federal and State excise taxes). In an upstream system the
CO2-e price will be embedded in the fuel price while in a downstream system the fuel
user will pay separately for the fuel and for the allowance. Mixed systems will have the
carbon charge embedded in some fuel prices and separate from others. We follow the
convention of reporting the fuel prices, exclusive of any carbon charge, and electricity
prices inclusive of carbon charges because the effect of carbon prices on the electricity
price depends on the mix of fuels, and the degree of capture and sequestration, among
other things, which change across scenarios.
    The percentage price increases for fuels will vary from these estimates as the CO2-e
price varies, and also with changes in the fuel price. The EPPA model projects fuel price
changes in the reference, and also that these prices will further change as a result of
mitigation policy. In addition, the base price and price projection for any particular year
is most appropriately viewed as a five-year average because the model simulates the
economy in 5-year time steps. The results for the reference and core cases are shown in
Figure 5. For a sense of the actual fuel prices projected in these scenarios the index
values in the figure can be multiplied by the base prices in Table 5.
    The fuel price effects of mitigation policies can be summarized as follows. There are
reductions in petroleum product prices relative to the reference projection due to
reductions in the crude oil price. This result reflects the fact that there is significant rent
in the crude oil price, and the global policy to restrict carbon emissions reduces oil


                                              14
consumption, acting in effect like a monopsony buyer that extracts some of the producer
rent. The reduction in overall world demand for oil has a strong effect, relative to the
reference, in all cases. The relatively smaller difference among the policy cases occurs
because only the stringency of the U.S. policy is varying. We also see the effect of
strengthening of the policy in developing countries in 2035, which causes oil prices to
fall relative to the reference. Across the core policy cases, then, petroleum product prices
rise by about 25% in contrast to more than doubling in the no-policy reference.
    Natural gas markets in EPPA are modeled such that international prices do not fully
equalize, and so changes in domestic demand can have a larger effect on domestic prices.
Whether this result accurately describes emerging global gas markets depends on how
fast LNG infrastructure can be developed, especially whether terminals in the U.S. will
be built to keep pace with demand, and LNG production facilities abroad can expand.
Many analysts see a single world gas market emerging soon, and so the EPPA model
structure may underestimate the potential role of natural gas and overestimate the rise in
domestic prices. However, with a global policy other regions also change their demand
for gas, and exert strong pressure on prices even with a world market. Under emissions
mitigation U.S. gas prices approximately follow the reference level for the first 10 years,
rising above the reference through 2030 or 2040 depending on the policy case, and then
again falling below the reference price. This price pattern reflects the changing role of
gas under CO2 policy. Depending on the CO2 and fuel prices, gas can be a relatively low-
carbon fuel for electricity generation where it substitutes for coal. However, at higher
carbon prices coal generation with CO2 capture and storage (CCS) is even less CO2
intensive and more economic. In other end uses for natural gas, such as in space heating,
a CO2 price spurs increased efficiency or a switch to electricity thereby reducing the
demand for gas. Thus, the rise in the price of gas in middle years occurs when the
increase in demand for gas for electricity generation is strong and offsets decreased
demand elsewhere in the economy. As carbon prices rise further, coal with CCS displaces
natural gas generation and the demand for gas, and its price, falls relative to the reference.
How fast this transition occurs depends on the stringency of the policy.
    There is relatively little rent in coal prices, so the model results show less adjustment
in the price (and more in the quantity of coal consumed). The rents are mostly eliminated
by 2030, but thereafter coal generation with CCS enters and coal demand and prices
recover. The electricity price is inclusive of the carbon charge and emissions mitigation
increases prices relative to the reference. The EPPA model includes increasing
adjustment costs when technologies expand rapidly, and these policies involve a rapid
transformation of electricity generation. This feature of the sector results in electricity
prices overshooting the long-run level as this adjustment occurs, and then falling from
that level by 2040, especially in the more stringent 167 and 203 bmt cases. By that time,
the electricity sector is substantially de-carbonized. The difference between the electricity
price in the policy cases and the reference is the marginal cost of adding capture and
sequestration, plus any difference in the carbon dioxide price, times any remaining
emissions. Since we assume a capture efficiency of 90% and upwards, differences in the
carbon dioxide price across scenarios have a minimal effect on electricity prices.
    Table 5 and Figure 5 can be used together with CO2-e prices in Table 4 to estimate the
projected user cost of fuel. Table 5 provides 5-year average prices for 2002-2006.
(Ideally the 2003-2007 period would be used as a basis for comparison, as it is centered



                                             15
on 2005, but 2007 data are not yet available.) Thus, for example, the petroleum product
price index in the 167 bmt case is at 1.45 in 2025, and multiplying this result by the 5-
year average gasoline price in Table 5 of $1.40 (the $0.42 from federal and state excise
taxes must be subtracted from $1.82 so that the tax is not multiplied) gives a projected
gasoline price (excluding the carbon charge and excise taxes) of about $2.03. Adding the
excise tax back on gives a projected gasoline price of $2.45. The CO2-e price in 2025 for
the 167 bmt case is $79 per ton CO2-e or about 2.92 times the $27 CO2-e ($0.26 per
gallon) benchmark in Table 5. The carbon charge per gallon then is 2.92 times $0.26, or
$0.76. Adding this premium to the gasoline price gives a total user cost of gasoline of
$3.21. (If the cap-and-trade implementation was upstream this would be the price
consumers would see at the pump.) Absent the policy, the EPPA model projects a 2025
reference price for petroleum products of 1.69 times the 2005 level, which is $2.79
(including the excise tax). This means that the incidence of the $0.76 CO2 cost per gallon
for the 167 bmt policy is projected to be split such that $0.42 (the difference between the
policy and reference gasoline prices) is passed through to the consumer and the
remaining $0.34 is passed back to producers mainly affecting returns to crude oil. Note,
however, that cost incidence is strongly affected by the assumption that the world pursues
a carbon policy. If the policy were only implemented in the U.S., then the effect on world
oil prices is smaller, and much more of the carbon tax burden would fall on U.S.
consumers.
    As presented in Figure 6, all three core policy cases show substantial reductions in
primary energy use compared to the reference case, an increase in the use of natural gas
through about 2030 that parallels a significant absolute reduction in the use of coal, and
growth in the use of coal again after 2030. Shale oil production begins to take market
share in the 2040-2045 period in the reference but it does not appear in any of the policy
cases. The return of coal is a result of the economic viability of coal power generation
with carbon capture and storage (CCS).
    In many respects the three core policy cases are similar in their effects on primary
energy use. The main difference among them is that the more stringent cases accelerate
the shift in the power sector first to gas and then to coal with CCS, and generate greater
reductions in overall energy use. The other major energy market change is the substantial
growth in biofuel liquids to replace petroleum products in the 203 and 167 bmt cases.12 In
these cases, petroleum product use falls by 32% to over 40% from the present level of
use, whereas in the reference case petroleum product use rises by about 87%. In the 287
bmt case only small amounts of biofuel liquids enter the market, and the CO2-e price is
not sufficient to induce much of a reduction in petroleum product use.


12
  At this point it is worth recalling the dependence of results on EPPA model structure and input
assumptions. It is assumed that biofuels will be allowed to compete for market share on an economic basis,
without constraints because of environmental or other side effects. The implications of this assumption are
explored in Section 7. The same assumption applies to CO2 capture and storage. Relaxation of these
assumptions about competition on an economic basis would raise the estimated emissions price and welfare
cost of each of the cap-and-trade cases. On the other hand, the reference scenario does not fully address
environmental issues associated with shale oil development and continued expansion of fuel use and
associated pollutant emissions. Adding environmental constraints on these could change technological
choices in the reference and reduce fossil fuel use from what we project thus leaving less reduction needed
to meet a given greenhouse gas target.


                                                    16
    The CO2-e price has a substantial impact on the price of gasoline, especially in the
more stringent cases. The CO2-e price alone would add over $2.00 to the price of a gallon
in the 167 bmt case and nearly $0.70 in the 287 bmt case. But because the reduction of
fuel demand depresses petroleum product prices by $0.30 to over $1.00 per gallon in later
periods, the incentive effects on gasoline consumption are reduced, especially in the less
stringent cases. Thus, while the effects of the policy on the world market for petroleum
and petroleum product prices convey a terms-of-trade advantage for the U.S., they at the
same time lead to relatively smaller incentives for reducing petroleum product use.
    A striking aspect of the 203 bmt case is that biofuels enter in 2025 and 2030, then
shrink in 2035 only to again take market share toward the end of the study period. This
again is a result that comes from the tightening of the policy in developing countries,
which reduces the oil price but increases the price of liquids from biofuels as developing
countries use them to meet their CO2 obligations. Biofuels are modeled as a perfect
substitute for refined oil products in EPPA and so the clearing price for biofuels is the
refined oil price plus the CO2 charge, which they do not bear, and so that margin goes to
biofuels producers. An analysis limited to the U.S. might indicate biofuel entry into the
U.S. market at lower net gasoline prices, and would not show the drop in 2035 in the 203
bmt case even as CO2-e prices rise.
    The broader lesson to be drawn from these results is not the specific timing of biofuel
use in the U.S. but the importance of considering international competition for biofuels
especially with strong CO2 policies abroad. We examine some of the implications of
expanded biofuel use in Section 7, but one result relevant to this behavior of U.S. biofuel
use is that the fluctuation in the 203 bmt case is primarily a U.S. consumption effect: we
do not see a drop in global production of biomass fuel in 2035. Thus, the reduction in
biofuel use in the U.S. does not reflect a threat to the viability of a biofuel industry; quite
the contrary, it results from increased demand for biofuels abroad. With flex-fuel vehicles
it is not so hard to imagine that the fuel mix in the U.S. could change substantially from
year to year as relative prices change.
    It is important to note that the large demand for biofuel is a result of it being the main
alternative to fossil-based transportation fuel in the EPPA model. If the model included
relatively low cost vehicles that could be run in total or in part on electricity—an option
requiring improvements in battery technology—then the demand for biofuels could be
substantially reduced, to be replaced by demand for electricity. The basic determinant of
which technology wins in an economic model, presuming an equal quality of service
delivered, is which is less expensive. Where there are close technology competitors then
small changes in estimated cost, well within ranges of uncertainty about where
breakthroughs may occur, can lead to a different technology choice and mix of energy
inputs. Section 6.3 considers nuclear and carbon capture and storage as alternatives in the
electric, but a similar sensitivity analysis could well be applied to transportation
alternatives.
   4.4 Potential Revenue from an Allowance Auction or a Greenhouse Gas tax
   As noted previously, there are various ways to administer a policy designed to create
price incentives for reducing GHG emissions. In a cap-and-trade system the allowances
can be given away or they can be auctioned. Or the emissions penalty could be set
directly by a CO2 tax. In the case of the tax or allowance auction a stream of revenue is
generated. The CO2-e price times the number of tons of allowances distributed in any


                                              17
period gives the total value of the allowances distributed, or alternatively the amount of
auction or tax revenue that could have been collected. Options for use of the revenue
include lump-sum distribution to households, reducing labor or capital taxes, or spending
the funds for other purposes (e.g., R&D or low-income fuel assistance). In Section 6.4 we
explore the potential effects of revenue recycling. Here our interest is in the gross amount
of potential revenue generated, or alternatively the size of the asset transfer involved in a
lump sum distribution.
   As can be seen from Table 6 the potential revenue streams are substantial, ranging in
just the first period of the policy from $130 billion in the 287 bmt case to $366 billion in
the 167 bmt case. Potential revenue rises most rapidly in the 287 bmt case; the annual
allowances distributed are the same in each year and the allowance price rises at 4% and
so revenue necessarily rises at 4%. While the allowance prices are also rising at 4% in the
203 and 167 bmt cases, the number of allowances distributed each year is falling, thus
revenue necessarily rises at less than 4% per year. In the 167 bmt case, revenue peaks
around 2030 and declines by about 40% from this peak by 2050, ending up almost 32%
below the 2015 level, and at about one-half the 2050 level of the other two cases. Table 6
also shows the potential tax disbursement to a family-of-four household each year. For
this purpose we have simply divided the population by 4 as if the population were
divided into four-person households and then divided the total revenue by this artificially
constructed number of households. The amount ranges from about $1630 to $4560 in
2015, and ranges from about $2520 to $5190 in 2050.
   To further illustrate the fiscal potential of an allowance auction or equivalent
emissions tax we also include in Table 6 the CO2-e auction proceeds as a percentage of
Federal tax revenue.13 The potential auction revenue is substantial—about 10-15% of
total Federal tax revenue in many periods across the three cases but ranging from a low of
5% to nearly 20%. Thus if the revenue were used to cut taxes evenly across different
income groups and income sources, this would be approximately the percentage
reduction in the Federal tax bill that taxpayers could expect to see. If, as we discuss in
Section 6.4, the tax cuts were directed either toward labor or capital taxes then the rate
cuts would be higher and the changes in individual tax bills would depend on the degree
to which their income was from labor or from investment returns.
5. EXPLORATION OF TERMS-OF-TRADE EFFECTS
    The core cases assume that the U.S. adopts a cap-and-trade measure that is not linked
to policies in the rest of world and that, across alternative U.S. policy cases, the
mitigation effort remains unchanged elsewhere. As shown above, policies abroad can
influence the U.S. through a terms-of-trade effect even without linking emissions trading
systems.
    Recall that in the core cases developed countries pursue a gradual cut to 50% below
1990 by 2050, and that developing countries begin mitigating in 2025 by cutting
emissions back to 2015 levels, returning to 2000 levels in 2035 and holding at this level
through 2050. We do not simulate banking in countries abroad, nor do we allow
international emissions trading among regions. To test alternatives to this scenario we

13
  Tax rates in EPPA are based on combined Federal, State and local taxes. For purposes of estimating the
Federal share, we have assumed that it grows at the rate of GDP and that remaining tax revenue is State and
local taxes.


                                                    18
consider two cases: (1) only the U.S. and other developed countries take mitigation action
(noted US+DEV), and (2) mitigation policy is only pursued in the U.S. (noted US only).
These are extreme assumptions—it would not make much sense for the U.S. to pursue
these policies if no other country followed suit, and given the importance of developing
countries it may even be unlikely that the developed countries including the U.S. would
pursue these paths through 2050 if others failed to follow. While less extreme cases could
be simulated, the cases examined here allow us to identify the terms-of-trade effects of
policies adopted abroad.
     Figure 7 illustrates the effects of the different assumptions on the CO2-equivalent
price in the U.S. for the 203 bmt case, and Figure 8 reports the U.S. welfare effects for
all three cases.14 As can be seen in Figure 7, the more aggressive the mitigation action
taken abroad the higher the required CO2-e price in the U.S. Consistently across all three
of the U.S. policy variants the CO2-e price is highest if all countries mitigate (here,
represented by the assumed reductions underlying the core 203 bmt case). U.S. prices are
somewhat lower if only the developed countries reduce (US+DEV) and lower still if only
the U.S. mitigates (US only). Two factors contribute to this result. As previously noted,
mitigation policy abroad reduces the world oil price, so that achieving the same reduction
of oil use at this lower price requires a higher CO2-e price in the U.S.; in effect the U.S.
emissions price needs to make up for the drop in the world oil price. Second, more
stringent mitigation policy abroad leads to greater global biofuel use, and the resulting
higher biofuel prices require higher U.S. CO2-e prices to achieve the needed reductions.
     Moving to the welfare costs in Figure 8, lower CO2-e prices generally result in lower
direct15 mitigation cost, which is one part of the measured welfare change. Terms-of-
trade effects, potentially through all markets but more importantly through oil and
agricultural markets, also influence the results. Agricultural markets are strongly affected
by competition for land from biomass energy production. Because of the different factors
operating in each scenario, we need to take these one by one to understand the results.
     In the 287 bmt cases the carbon price is somewhat lower with less mitigation abroad,
and this lower direct cost of the policy tends to drive the results in early years. Few
biofuels are used by the U.S in this scenario. However, after 2035 in the core cases, when
the policy is tightened in developing countries, two important positive terms-of-trade
benefits accrue to the U.S. First, world oil prices are lower and since the U.S. is a big oil
importer this is beneficial. And second, demand for biofuels increases abroad, and even
though the U.S. uses little in this case, this change raises agricultural prices through land-
market impacts. Since the U.S. is a net agricultural exporter this effect also results in a
terms-of-trade benefit. Thus, the welfare costs fall in the U.S. after 2035 compared with
earlier years, even though the direct cost is growing. Reducing or eliminating mitigation

14
   For the CO2-e price, the 167 bmt and 287 bmt cases show a pattern similar to that shown for 203 bmt and
are omitted to simplify the figure. The data for these other two cases is provided in Appendix C.
15
   It is useful again to distinguish between the direct abatement cost and additional economic impacts that
stem from interactions with the rest of the economy—general equilibrium (GE) effects. The direct cost is a
measure that can be obtained by integrating under a marginal abatement cost curve, or can be approximated
as the triangle area under the abatement curve equal to 0.5 × CO2-e price × quantity abated. GE effects can
stem from interactions with pre-existing distortions (e.g., taxes) from externally induced terms-of-trade
effects, from the fact that the domestic policy itself creates terms-of-trade effects, and from other rigidities
in the economy. Many aspects of model structure produce GE effects that are not easy to separately
measure because of the inherent interactions in the economy.


                                                      19
abroad eliminates these positive terms-of-trade effects and a smoother pattern of costs
emerges over time, as we would expect given the CO2-e price path in the U.S.
     The 203 bmt cases show the strongest effects on U.S. CO2-e prices from changes in
the mitigation policy abroad, and thus the direct cost of the policy is lower with less
mitigation effort abroad compared to the core cases. This is the dominant effect in the
near term and is responsible for the lower welfare cost through 2030 when less is done
abroad. Without the strengthening of the developing country policy in 2035, we do not
see the significant terms-of-trade benefit from lower oil prices at that point, and so the
welfare loss continues to increase in these scenarios. By 2050, however, the added direct
cost in the core case is beginning to cancel out the terms-of-trade benefit, and so the
welfare cost in all three cases are similar. In large part this result is due to the biofuels
market. Recall that in the 203 bmt core case biofuels enter strongly in U.S. energy
consumption in 2025, and 2030, and then shrink in 2035, reappearing later. Biofuel is
mostly imported in these scenarios, and so its increasing price due to a stronger
mitigation effort abroad creates a further terms-of-trade loss, but not if there are few
imports as in 2035 in the core case. Since the mitigation level required in the U.S. can be
achieved without biomass consumption in 2035, oil imports are considerably larger than
in the preceding or following years, and the terms-of-trade benefit is that much greater.
This sharp reduction in biofuels use does not occur in the cases with less mitigation
abroad, and thus we see a smoother pattern of welfare change over time.
     The 167 bmt cases show the smallest difference in the U.S. CO2-e price and welfare
effects among cases. In large part, this policy requires fairly drastic emissions reductions
in the U.S. Thus, oil consumption is much lower in these cases so the flexibility to
increase it when the price falls in 2035 is severely limited and the terms-of-trade benefit
is less. When the U.S. is mitigating alone there is less pressure on biofuels markets,
lowering the cost of substituting biofuels for petroleum products and reducing the terms-
of-trade loss in the biofuels market. The bioenergy market and land-use implications of
biofuels use are discussed in greater detail in Section 7.
     One way to isolate the terms-of-trade effects that arise from policies outside the U.S.
is to consider the difference in the welfare cost in the U.S. with and without action in the
rest of the world. We make that calculation in Table 7. Also, because banking is
redistributing the effects through time it is useful to look at the net difference over the
whole period. For this purpose we calculate the discounted (Net Present Value) loss in
percentage terms. If the net terms-of-trade effects originating from policy abroad are
positive, then the NPV difference will be positive and vice versa. As shown in the table,
the terms-of-trade calculation in the 287 bmt case is positive, reflecting the strong effect
of lower world oil prices. The U.S. consumes very little biofuel in this scenario and so the
potentially negative effect on the terms of trade from that source is not relevant. In the
203 and 167 bmt cases there are net terms-of-trade losses as discussed above because the
CO2 constraints greatly limit U.S. oil consumption and thus the terms-of trade benefits
from this source. Imported biofuels become an important source of terms-of-trade losses.
6. ALTERNATIVE DESIGN FEATURES AND EXTERNAL CONDITIONS
   We next turn to a set of scenarios that consider alternative design features, exploring
aspects of the scenarios that affect the estimated cost and highlighting other aspects of the
results. In this part of the assessment a limited set of results is presented. More complete


                                             20
results for all scenarios, including welfare, consumption, GDP, energy market,
greenhouse gas emissions by gas, fuels used in electricity generation, and biofuels and
agricultural trade are presented in Appendix C.
   6.1 The Effects of Banking
   Many of the current proposals allow banking of allowances. As discussed above and
shown in Figure 2, banking results in a reallocation of the abatement effort toward the
near term so that less stringent reductions are needed in later years. In Figure 9 we report
the effect on CO2-e prices (Panel a) and welfare (Panel b) of cases with No Banking (NB)
compared with the results for core cases that include banking. We expect the CO2-e
prices to start out lower and end up higher in the no banking (NB) cases, and that is the
pattern that emerges. The initial (2015) NB prices are $6, $10 and $17 per ton CO2-e
compared with $18, $41, and $53 for the 287, 203, and 167 bmt cases, respectively. They
rise to $77, $262, and $2559 by 2050 in the NB cases compared with $70, $161, and
$210 per ton CO2-e for the 287, 203, and 167 bmt cases. The increase in CO2-e prices in
2050 under the 203 bmt case and 2045 in the 167 bmt case (off the scale in Figure 9)
result from the difficulties of reducing emissions in transportation. More details on this
result are discussed below in Section 7 where we address biofuels and land-use
implications.
   Not surprisingly the welfare effects show a similar pattern, and losses rise to nearly
5% in the 167 bmt case. Note that without banking a target of 80% below 1990 emissions
yields emissions 91% below the reference, and thus we are simulating an economy that is
operating with less than 10% of reference emissions. Put another way, the economy of
2050 is more than three times the size of the current economy and population has
increased by nearly one-third and yet the U.S. is emitting only about 15% of the GHGs of
today. The EPPA model assumes substantial improvement in efficiencies throughout the
economy, and price increases in transportation and other parts of the economy stimulate
further technological substitution. Thus, even to achieve the results shown here
considerable advance in technology is needed, but to achieve an economy that is nearly
GHG-free at reasonable cost will require technological advances beyond those we have
modeled.
   We would expect the banking cases to show a lower Net Present Value welfare cost
over the study period even considering that the higher costs in later years under No
Banking are discounted at the 4% economy-wide interest rate. That result does hold for
the 287 and 167 bmt cases but the difference is not very large. In the 287 bmt case, the
NPV loss rounds to only 0.08% with banking and 0.07% without banking. Looking at
more (and not necessarily meaningful) significant digits shows just how small the
difference is—loss is 0.077% in the 287 bmt case and 0.074% in the NB case. The NPV
loss for 167 bmt is 0.41% in the banking case and 0.42% in the NB case.
   The 203 bmt case shows a slight advantage for the NB case (0.24% compared with
0.26%), an unexpected result. The likely reason is that there are extra-fuel-market
influences, such as terms-of-trade effects that are not fully reflected in the allowance
banking decision, and this may also reflect incomplete reallocation through time in the
recursive-dynamic structure that does not fully optimize through time. While the
banking-NB comparison shows very small differences in our scenarios in terms of NPV,
banking provisions provide flexibility in the face of uncertainty that we have not



                                            21
modeled, and so the numerical result here should not be interpreted as suggesting that
banking is not a useful policy design feature.
    6.2 Limited Sectoral Coverage
    Some of the proposals that focus on a downstream emissions cap exempt entities
below some annual emissions level such as 10,000 tons of CO2. One rationale is that
monitoring small emitters would be too costly. In principle, such a provision would
exclude the transportation sector with its many individual vehicles, but existing bills
include it by moving the cap upstream to refiners who then must carry allowances for
emissions that will result from the transportation fuel they sell. To represent this feature,
we simulated a policy that exempts agriculture, households (i.e. natural gas and heating
oil), and the service sector. Included under the cap are energy-intensive industry, other
manufacturing, electric utilities, refineries, and transportation fuels. (The exempted
sectors are not unaffected by the mitigation policy: inclusion of electric utilities under the
cap means that their electricity prices will rise.) The limitation on coverage means that
77% of emissions as of 2005 are under the cap, and to simulate this policy we simply
scale economy-wide allowances down by this amount over the whole period. It turns out
in the EPPA reference that emissions from the covered sectors are growing somewhat
more rapidly than the exempt sectors, and so by 2050 the covered sectors account for
83% of economy-wide emissions in the reference.
    The CO2-e prices are somewhat lower with sector exemptions compared with the
economy-wide policy results (Table 8). Since the allowance allocation is proportionally
scaled as a first approximation one might expect little difference. To the extent a
difference exists it is because abatement is relatively easier or more difficult in the
covered and exempted sectors, and over time there is differential growth between the
two. Since emissions of the covered sectors are growing slightly more rapidly than the
exempt ones, proportionally scaling down the allowances based on the share of emissions
in the covered sectors in 2005 would, by itself, tend to lead to somewhat higher prices.
Likely offsetting this effect is the inclusion of electric power under the cap where the
availability of a variety of low carbon technologies usually results in this sector abating
more than proportionally to other sectors. Additionally, the non-CO2 GHGs are
inexpensive to abate, especially those from non-agriculture sources, and they are included
in the covered sectors. With fewer sectors competing for allowances released by
abatement in the electric sector and from non-CO2 GHG abatement, CO2-e prices are
lower compared with the economy-wide cases.
    As shown in Table 9 the welfare costs are lower with these sectors exempted than for
the economy-wide cap. With sectors exempted the abatement required is proportionally
less, and so as a first approximation we would expect the cost to be proportionally less as
well. Costs are also lower because the CO2-e price is somewhat lower. Once past the first
few years, the sector welfare costs are about 70% of the economy-wide cost. In early
years when the CO2-e price is low much of the abatement is from non-CO2 GHGs as
shown in Figure 4 and even more so for the exemption case, lowering the welfare cost to
about one-half that of the economy-wide policy.
    Of course, the lower cost is associated with a less environmentally effective policy
because of the higher emissions (Figure 10). One concern would be a widening gap in
emissions between economy-wide implementation and implementation with sector
exemptions, which would occur if the exempt sector emissions were growing rapidly.


                                             22
This result might reflect leakage because the mitigation policy led to shifts of production
among sectors. Leakage of CO2—increases in emissions in the non-covered sectors
compared to the reference emissions from these sectors— are 0.7, 1.0, and 1.1 bmt over
the 38-year horizon of the policy in the 287, 203, and 167 bmt cases, respectively,
relatively small compared with the total emissions allowed in these cases.

    6.3 Nuclear Power and Carbon Capture and Storage
    In the core cases we limited nuclear electricity generation to that possible with current
capacity on the basis that safety and siting concerns would prevent additional
construction. With strong greenhouse gas policy such concerns may be overcome,
especially if other major technologies such as carbon capture and storage can not be
successfully developed, run into their own set of regulatory concerns, or turn out to be
very expensive. To explore the possible outcome we relax the limitation on nuclear
expansion, and assume that new generation plants become available that can produce
delivered power at a 25% mark-up over coal generated electricity without CCS.16 The
coal CCS generation technology is assumed to have a mark-up of about 20% above coal
without CCS.
    Figure 11 shows the penetration of nuclear power and coal generation with and
without CCS in the 203 bmt core case. The 25% mark-up on nuclear with a 20% mark-up
on CCS is just about the level needed to make nuclear competitive with CCS given that
CCS bears some cost associated with CO2 emissions that are not captured and stored, and
given the changing fuel and other prices simulated in the model. With removal of non-
economic limitations nuclear penetrates strongly beginning in 2020, reaching 20 EJ by
2050, over six times current production (Figure 11a). The fate of CCS is the mirror
image. With nuclear limited, CCS expands beginning in 2020 to about 18 EJ in 2050.
When nuclear is allowed to compete on economic terms, some CCS is viable but it begins
losing out to nuclear after 2040, when the CO2-e price has risen substantially. Coal
generation without CCS disappears in either case.
    These relatively detailed results help illustrate the scale of effort required to meet these
policy constraints. There are just over 100 nuclear reactors in the U.S. today, and so a six-
fold increase in nuclear generation would require the construction of on the order of 500
additional reactors. If nuclear cannot penetrate the market the scale issue is not avoided but
instead is transferred to CCS, requiring siting and construction of about the same number
of new CCS plants. The need to phase out coal without CCS indicates the potential value
of a CCS technology that could be used to retrofit existing generation plants, extending the
life of existing investment and limiting the number of completely new plants that were
needed. The capital intensity of these technologies are a concern as we find that the
investment demand needed for such expansions crowds out investment in other areas of the
economy, and thus increases the welfare cost of the policy.




16
  The mark-up is relative to the cost of electricity including transmissions and distribution (T&D) charges.
Engineering estimates typically compare costs at the busbar, and in such comparison the mark-up would be
higher because T&D costs are the same regardless of the generation technology.


                                                    23
    6.4 Revenue Recycling
    A large body of economic analysis shows economic gains from auctioning allowances
and using the revenue to lower existing taxes on labor and capital. The recursive dynamic
structure of the standard EPPA model is not well-suited to evaluating these potential
benefits. Gurgel et al. (2007) have developed a fully dynamic version of EPPA that
results in very similar the abatement levels and CO2-e prices as in the standard EPPA but
is solved as a fully dynamic model where agents have perfect foresight. They use this
version of EPPA to investigate revenue recycling and other issues, simulating the same
287, 203, and 167 bmt policies. It is not possible to completely investigate the many
issues involved in revenue recycling here, but given the general interest in this topic it is
useful to give some general indication of the magnitude of benefits revenue recycling
could achieve.
    Gurgel et al. (2007) find a 15% to as much as 70% reduction in the welfare cost when
allowance auction revenue is used to lower capital taxes and a 5% to 20% reduction in
cost when labor taxes are reduced. This result is consistent with other research that
generally shows a greater benefit from capital tax recycling. The percentage reduction in
cost is largest for the 287 bmt case and smallest for the 167 bmt case. One reason for this
difference across cases lies in the fact that the denominator in this calculation—the
welfare cost of the policy without recycling—is higher in the 167 bmt case. Another is
that any benefit from revenue recycling depends first on how much revenue there is.
Recall from Table 6 that while potential revenue starts out much higher in the 167 bmt
case because of the high initial CO2-e price, it actually falls off substantially by the end of
the period because so few permits are available for auction when the policy becomes very
tight. In the 287 bmt case, the revenue stream starts low but grows substantially over the
period. Thus, the tax rate cut is not very different across the cases because they yield
similar flows of revenue, so the numerator in the calculation—the recycling benefit—is
not that different across the cases.17 An important insight to be gained, then, is that a very
tight policy that auctions very few permits will generate very little revenue. Stabilization
ultimately requires very low emissions and so revenue recycling benefits are a transitory
feature in stabilizations policies.
   6.5 Provision of a Safety Valve
   At various points in the discussion we have pointed out the similarities between a cap-
and-trade system and an emissions tax. Another option introduced in Section 2.1 is a
hybrid consisting of cap-and-trade system with a safety valve. In such a regime
provisions are included that cap the CO2-e price. This idea was prominently part of a
report by a National Commission on Energy Policy (NCEP, 2004), and the level of the
price cap identified in one of the proposals summarized in Table 2 follows the
recommendations of that report. Usually the proposed price caps follow a time-path that
rises at an estimated (real) rate of interest. Such a price path approximates an efficient
allocation of abatement over time by keeping the net present value emissions price


17
  An important aspect to consider is that the welfare costs of the policy in forward-looking model are
considerably lower than in the recursive model because it is optimizing over time as well as among sectors.
Thus, applying these percentage cost reductions to results from the recursive model may overstate the
potential revenue recycling benefits.


                                                    24
constant, and this approach is consistent with the price path we derive for a cap-and-trade
system with banking.
    The term “safety valve” comes from the notion that the price cap would be set
substantially above expected prices under the cap to prevent the price from spiking in
extreme circumstances. Recall from Section 2.1 that “high” is relative to the stringency of
the cap and the expected emission price. A low level in relation to the stringency of the
cap can assure that the safety operates frequently which, as noted above, would work
much like a CO2 tax with allocated exemptions. If the safety valve is likely to always be
triggered, the level of allowances distributed for free regulates how much revenue the
government receives. If the cap is high enough so that the safety valve is only rarely
triggered the policy becomes equivalent to a pure cap-and-trade system.
    The analysis we conduct can provide only limited insights with regard to the value of
the safety valve in policy design. In particular, the above discussion highlights the fact
that the motivation for a safety valve is to limit cost given uncertainty. To capture the
value of the safety valve we would need to stochastically simulate the EPPA model, a
task that is beyond the scope of this effort. As long as we are simulating EPPA in a non-
stochastic mode, however, for every quantity constraint there is a price path that will
deliver that same amount of abatement. And vice versa: the amount of abatement
generated by a price path can be observed and the policy instead specified as a quantity
constraint. Thus, the policy cases as simulated above can be interpreted as a cap-and-
trade system, as a tax system in which the tax level is set at the prices observed in our
simulations, or as a cap-and-trade system with a safety valve set at the price level we
simulate.
    For example, the 203 bmt case could be interpreted instead as a CO2 tax policy with
the tax rising from $41 to $161 per ton CO2-e. Or that price level can be interpreted as a
safety valve price path as long as allowance allocation was no more than the 203 bmt. If,
for example, the cap was set at one-half of the 203 bmt and the allowance path was just
cut in half each year, the only effect would be to reduce tax revenue by one-half. No
other aspects of the scenario are changed by this reinterpretation. The only case where
differences will appear is if tax or auction revenue is used to cut taxes as in Section 6.4.
Cutting the revenue in half by distributing half of the allowances for free would mean
that the capital tax rate could not be cut as far, and any tax recycling benefits would be
reduced.
    It is also useful to note that, in the world of certainty that we are simulating, if the
safety valve price rises at an economy-wide rate of interest and that is the same rate at
which banking decisions are made, then either the safety valve is always triggered or it is
never triggered. This result follows from simple algebra—both the banking price and the
safety valve price rise at the same rate, and so if one is higher than the other at any point
it is higher at all points. Of course, the safety valve need not rise at the rate of interest—it
could be fixed at a flat level—or the legislatively prescribed rate of increase might not
match the actual rate that traders are using in their banking decisions.18 The inter-


18
  A difference between the rate of increase in the safety valve and the banking rate would tend, in a
“certain” world, to generate two periods—one where the safety valve is triggered and one where it is not.
Which comes first depends on whether the banking rate is higher or lower than the prescribed rate of
increase in the safety valve. The U.S. Energy Information Administration (US EIA, 2007) used a banking


                                                    25
relationship of banking behavior and the safety valve should not be surprising. They are
competing policy features that are both intended to smooth out short-term variations in
the prices that might come about because economic activity and emissions can vary from
a long-term trend. If both are included in a policy, one of them will likely dominate the
other depending on the safety valve level and increase compared with the banking rate.
    Finally, it is worth pointing out that setting the level of a safety valve to limit cost
must consider whether it will achieve the desired level of abatement or not. Legislation
that prescribes either a safety valve price or a cap is inevitably subject to review as to the
adequacy of the policy and its cost, and such reviews are written into the various
legislative proposals. The popular view of a price/safety valve policy instrument is that it
provides certainty in the policy cost while creating uncertainty in how much abatement
will be achieved, while a cap-and-trade instrument creates certainty in environmental
effectiveness but leaves uncertainty in the cost. This stark characterization of the
difference is only valid in a world where the policies are never revised. A cap that turns
out more expensive than anticipated could be revised and loosened. A safety valve path
that is not achieving significant reductions might be revised upward. Changing evidence
of the threat of climate change could also lead to revisions, in either direction, of a price
or quantity instrument. There is thus likely to be less difference between these
instruments over the long-term where over-arching goals of the policy are shaped by
improved understanding of the science and economics of the problem, and prices and
quantities are revised to be consistent with that improving knowledge.
    Applying these concepts we construct a policy case with a price path similar to the one
proposed in the National Energy Commissions report (NCEP, 2004) that begins at $6 per
ton CO2-e and rises to about $39 per ton CO2-e by 2050.19 Then to explore the potential
costs and effectiveness of the safety valve we conduct four simulations reported in Figure
12: (1) the safety valve (SV) case in the U.S. with the standard assumptions in the core
cases about mitigation efforts abroad (US+ROW), (2) the SV case in the U.S. and no
mitigation action abroad (US only), (3) no action in the U.S., and the standard assumptions
about effort abroad (ROW only), and (4) the SV case in the U.S. with the safety valve price
being revised upward in 2030 and standard assumptions about action abroad (SV Revised
2030). The SV Revised 2030 case is an artificial construction to illustrate the possibility
that events may unfold in ways that lead to a revision some time before 2050. If we knew
now what these events were we would reshape the overall price path to start higher and rise
at 5%, without a sudden revision.
    Figure 12a shows the standard safety valve price path and the path when the price is
revised in 2030. In the revised path, the price is doubled in 2030 and then continues to
grow at 5% per year. Figure 12b shows the welfare effects. Here, as in the 287 bmt
revenue recycling case, the U.S. welfare change is small initially and then welfare
actually improves relative to the no-policy reference case; that is, the policy appears to be
beneficial to the economy. The US Only and ROW Only simulations confirm that the
welfare benefit in the US+ROW case is a terms-of-trade effect. In the US Only case there
is always a welfare cost and it rises over time as the CO2-e price rises. The ROW Only

rate of 8% with a safety valve rising at 5%. As a result the cap was binding in early years and the banking
price rose at 8% eventually catching up to and triggering the safety valve.
19
   This level has also been adopted in the Bingaman-Specter draft legislation and analyzed by the EIA (US
EIA, 2007).


                                                    26
case shows even larger benefits for the U.S. than the US+ROW case. Thus, relative to
that case the addition of a policy in the U.S. reduces welfare.
    The plausibility of the rest of the world pursuing a fairly stringent policy while the
U.S. is pursuing a relatively weaker one can be questioned. In that regard, one way to
motivate the SV Revised 2030 case is that with developing countries joining in 2025, the
U.S. might then see reason to intensify its efforts by revising upward the safety valve
price in 2030, with this leadership move then bringing a further commitment of
developing countries in 2035. As the SV Revised 2030 case shows in Figure 12b, the
upward revision of the safety valve basically eliminates the net terms-of-trade gain from
the ROW policy, leaving the U.S. better off with the revision than if it had pursued the
safety valve without the rest of the world. Obviously, such a scenario of international
cooperation is fairly simple-minded speculation on our part, but it does illustrate the
degree to which decisions about the level of U.S. effort over an extended period depends
on what other countries do, and whether or not U.S. leadership generates a following.
    In cap-and-trade cases total emissions must be less than the cap. With a price
instrument the price is certain but the level of emissions is uncertain. While we do not
represent many of the inevitable uncertainties in economic projections the different
assumptions about international policy can be seen as one of the uncertain aspects of the
future. And, as shown in Figure 12c, what the rest world does in terms of mitigation
strongly affects U.S. emissions and the effectiveness of a price instrument. Here we also
plot the reference level of emissions when there is no policy in the U.S. or the rest of the
world. First, note that the U.S. emissions drop about 1800 mmt of CO2-e below the
reference in the US+ROW case by 2025, and then do not drop much more below the
reference for most of the rest of the period even though the CO2-e price is escalating at
5% per year. However, it can be seen from the ROW Only case that U.S. emissions
without a policy would have risen above the reference, reflecting leakage from the ROW
policy into the U.S. The main source of this leakage in the EPPA model is lower world
oil prices that then lead to greater petroleum product use. Compared, then, to the ROW
Only case the escalating CO2-e price gradually increases the level of abatement.
Somewhat more surprising is that in the US Only case, the policy with the specified
safety valve becomes very effective toward the end of the period. Recall that the EPPA
model reference petroleum product prices rise substantially if the world is not taking
action, as shown previously in Figure 5. Thus with mitigation only by the U.S., biofuels
become economically competitive with refined oil, lowering emissions at the safety
valve-determined emissions price.
    The SV Revised 2030 case can be further motivated by the observed pattern of
emissions with and without policy in the rest of the world. One can imagine that a broad
goal of the safety valve policy is to hold U.S. emissions flat over the longer term and that
is being roughly accomplished in the US Only case. However, that goal is not being met by
2030/2035 in the US+ROW policy. Our doubling of the safety valve price in 2030 gets the
U.S. back on track to hold emissions more or less flat, and that revision can be seen as an
adjustment in the safety valve price to keep the U.S. headed toward a quantity target,
retaining the safety valve instrument to protect against short-term price spikes but
unwilling to live with the long-term implications for emissions if it is not adjusted.




                                            27
     6.6 International Allowance Trading
   We turn next to the potential implications of international emissions trading. As shown
above, banking reallocates abatement and cost through time making it difficult to sort out
the impact of other design features. To isolate the effects of emissions trading, therefore,
we simulate scenarios without banking. Note also that in the core scenarios there is no
trading among regions. Here we create a scenario where all world regions except the U.S.
trade among themselves. This further allows a focus on just the implications for the U.S.
of joining an international emissions trading system.20
   Pre-trade and trading prices for the 203 bmt and 167 bmt cases are shown in Figure
13.21 Panel (a) shows pre-trade prices and panel (b) contrasts the world trading price with
the pre-trade prices in the rest of the world (ROW). Note that the ROW pre-trade prices
are affected by the policy in the U.S. The factors producing this effect are the same as
those behind the influence of ROW actions on U.S. domestic prices: under more stringent
U.S. controls, reduced U.S. demand for oil and higher demand for biofuels combine to
widen the gap between fossil and non-fossil alternatives thus requiring a higher CO2-e
price abroad to meet the assumed emissions cap.
   Figure 13a shows that the pre-trade price differences are relatively small in the 203
bmt case up to 2045, with the U.S. pre-trade price higher than the world price so the U.S.
would be a net buyer of allowances if it joined the international trading system. The 167
bmt case has U.S. pre-trade prices further above those in the ROW, and so this is a case
where the U.S. would be a strong net purchaser of allowances after 2035. Figure 13b
compares the world trading price and the ROW pre-trade price (note the difference in
vertical scale). The effect on the world price of the U.S. joining the emissions trading
system is moderate in the 203 bmt case (an increase of about a little less than $10 per ton
CO2-e) in later years, and somewhat greater (around $20 per ton CO2-e) in the 167 bmt
case. It is noteworthy that the indirect effects on the world price through terms of trade
and international price changes are at least as great as the direct effect of the U.S.
entering the trading system.
   Regarding the welfare effects of trading, shown in Table 10, we find the conventional
result that emissions trading improves welfare for the U.S. in the 167 and 287 bmt cases.
The improvement is substantial in the 167 bmt case because the pre-trade prices in the
U.S. were quite large by the end of period, generating substantial direct mitigation policy
costs. The U.S. is a small net seller of allowances in almost all years in the 287 bmt case,
and this generates no change or small welfare gains in all years. The 203 bmt case shows
emissions trading to be welfare worsening for the U.S. This perverse outcome can be
produced by interactions with existing distortions in the economy or through terms-of-
trade effects (Babiker et al., 2004; Paltsev et al., 2007). In this case, it is likely that terms-
of-trade effects are driving this result. As Webster et al. (2006) show, if the direct gains
from trade are relatively small (because the pre-trade price difference is small) then
indirect effects through changes in the terms of trade can dominate the direct trading
benefits. Here the likely dominating terms-of-trade effects occur because by entering the

20
   Going from no trading to trading abroad has some effects on the U.S. through terms-of-trade changes but
these are relatively minor.
21
   The U.S. pre-trade price in the 287 bmt case is very similar to the ROW pre-trade price, and thus there is
little incentive for trade. To simplify the figure this case is omitted.


                                                     28
permit market the U.S. forces more abatement abroad. A main avenue of abatement is the
use of biofuels, and this drives up the world price of this fuel, which the U.S. imports.
This effect worsens the terms of trade.
    More broadly, in many policy-design discussions allowance credits from outside the
U.S. trading system are seen as a means to lower the cost of the greenhouse gas policy in
the U.S. But this argument assumes that there is a low-cost supply of credits for which
there is little competition—i.e. that the U.S. is the only significant country pursuing a
stringent mitigation policy. If other developed countries are pursuing a policy of similar
stringency, the CO2-e price in these regions will be similar to that in the U.S. and so they
will not be a source of low-cost allowances.
    Before the developing countries take on a policy they may be a source of credits
through the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol, but the
evidence suggests that because of the project-based nature of such credits only a
relatively small percentage of the potential reductions in developing countries can
actually be formulated as projects that would meet CDM criteria. Thus, the U.S. and
other developed countries will compete for a relatively limited supply, with some but
limited savings in the U.S. If the developing countries take on a real cap sometime in the
next decade or so, and given their relatively rapidly growing emissions, the prices they
would see are not that different from those obtained in the U.S. in our model simulations
(under the 203 bmt case) and so there is little potential U.S. benefit. It is only when the
U.S. agrees to bear a substantial share of the reduction burden by accepting a much
tighter policy than other countries that emissions trading brings significant benefits.
    Emissions trading probably ought to be seen, therefore, mainly as an instrument by
which the U.S. and perhaps other developed countries might accept a large share of the
cost burden, either on the basis that this is “fair” or to induce developing countries to take
on at least some commitment by implicitly agreeing to pay for their reductions by
awarding allowances that we will purchase from them. If instead U.S. policy is designed
so that the U.S. mitigation effort is comparable to that of other regions (i.e. the CO2-e
price is likely to be within 50% or so of other regions) then there is a substantial chance
that trading will have little benefit for the U.S., or may be welfare worsening.
    Another aspect of these scenarios is the likely role of biofuels as a substitute for
international allowance trading. To the extent biofuels are providing abatement at the
margin, and this is especially true in the 203 bmt case, the common global biofuel price
will tend to equalize CO2-e prices among regions: regions with relatively tight constraints
will import more biofuels causing the CO2-e price to be lower than it would otherwise,
whereas regions with relatively looser constraints will not compete as effectively for
biofuels and their CO2-e price will not be as low as it would be if the biofuel price had
not been bid-up by countries with tighter constraints.22

22
   The possibility of the domestic prices of a non-traded good or factor input (in this case the CO2-e
allowance price) to equalize across countries is consistent with basic economic theory as expressed in the
well-known factor price equalization theorem that predicts equalization of wages and returns to capital
even in the presence of restrictions on capital and labor mobility. An important element of the theorem is
perfect substitution of foreign and domestic goods, which we have represented in the case of biofuels.
Imperfect substitution of other goods, and limits on mobility of labor and capital mean that CO2-e prices
actually diverge among regions in EPPA simulations. Relaxing these assumptions could tend to result in
greater convergence in CO2-e prices among regions even without emissions trading. One implication of this
argument is that, if some regions are not capped, the CO2-e price could approach zero because production


                                                   29
7. BIOFUELS AND LAND USE
    As already discussed in several sections, biofuel liquids play an important role in the
mitigation scenarios, as they are the main non-carbon alternative to petroleum products
that we represent in the EPPA model. Corn-based ethanol production has grown rapidly
in the U.S. in the past few years, but even with that growth total ethanol production in the
U.S. is a very small percentage of total gasoline consumption (about 2%). Brazil is one of
the major producers internationally, and while production there is substantial relative to
Brazil’s domestic gasoline consumption, total Brazilian ethanol production is about equal
to that in the U.S. This comparison simply highlights the fact that U.S. petroleum
consumption is very large relative to existing ethanol production. It is also important to
realize that the principal motivation for using ethanol in fuels in the U.S. currently is as
an oxygenating additive. This source of demand (and the production needed to supply it)
is not explicitly represented in the EPPA model, but is part of aggregated agriculture and
industry sectors in the EPPA database.
    For biofuels to make a substantial contribution to CO2 abatement in the U.S. their
supply would need to expand considerably beyond its role as a fuel additive. In addition,
how ethanol is produced would need to change. Current ethanol production processes in
the U.S. actually emit a fair amount of CO2 because fossil fuels are used in the distillation
process, and to a lesser extent in growing the corn. Further, the expansion of corn-based
ethanol production is limited—if the entire U.S. corn crop were turned to ethanol one
estimate is that it would supply less than 10% of U.S. gasoline demand. Focus has
therefore shifted to production of biofuels from cellulosic plant material, which while not
yet commercialized is highly promising. Cellulosic conversion utilizes much more of the
energy in the biomass, and a broader range of crops can be used.
    Biofuel liquids in the EPPA model are based on the assumption that cellulosic
conversion processes are successfully commercialized and that the energy needed in the
conversion/ distillation process is also supplied by biomass so that there is no net CO2
release. A source of biomass process energy could actually be the lignin in biomass,
which cellulosic conversion processes closest to commercialization cannot convert to
liquid fuels. While other processes are under development that would break down the
lignin as well, if heat energy is required in the processing of ethanol anyway then the
lignin by-product can be used directly for that purpose, without a further costly
conversion. If not, some other, relatively expensive non-fossil source of energy would be
required, or the process would need to include carbon capture and sequestration. The
EPPA model assumptions about the cost and efficiency of ethanol production are in line
with engineering estimates, once scale economies are realized and experience is gained
with initial demonstration plants (see Paltsev et al., 2005).
    Before focusing attention on the EPPA results, the magnitude of the potential land
pressure from biomass can be illustrated using some simple calculations presented in
Table 11. On the assumptions detailed above and in the table, if all U.S. cropland,
grassland, and forestland were used to produce biomass liquids, total U.S. production
could reach about 81 exajoules (EJ). Coincidentally, this quantity would just cover the 78
EJ of petroleum product consumption in the U.S. in 2050 in our reference projection.

and consumption activities would shift to the uncapped regions—leakage from the policy would be
complete.


                                                  30
Needless to say, converting every bit of grassland, forestland and cropland to biomass
production would have massive implications for land use, and would leave no land left
for food, forest, and fiber production—thus it is a purely hypothetical calculation. From
this simple calculation it should be evident that biofuels production, even at levels that
would offset 10 or 15% of petroleum product use, would have substantial effects on
agricultural markets and on land use.
    Some popular estimates of U.S. biomass potential suggest greater possibilities but
often they involve a comparison of total biomass energy, failing to consider conversion
losses or assuming some other source is available for process energy. Or studies compare
U.S. biomass energy to just U.S. oil imports or current gasoline consumption, failing to
consider the likelihood that demand for fuels will increase. Others further assume that
greater efficiency in vehicles, without increased miles driven, will actually reduce fuel
demand over time. The EPPA model projects continuing increase in vehicle fuel
efficiency even in the reference case, where vehicle efficiency improves by nearly 60%
by 2050 in vehicles of all types (i.e. including commercial transport) compared to the
fleet average today. Thus, the 78 EJ of petroleum product use in the U.S. already includes
assumptions about aggressive improvement in vehicle efficiency.
    The EPPA model results for biofuels are presented in Figure 14 with two
assumptions: as in earlier simulations with free trade in biofuels, and in a set of cases
where there is no biofuel trade (noted NobioTR). We find that with free trade, biofuel use
is substantial in the 203 bmt and 167 bmt cases, rising to 34 to 36 EJ in the core cases, as
shown in Figure 14a. The 287 bmt case results in very little U.S. biofuels consumption—
less than 1 EJ in any year, and so we do not show it in the figure. World liquid biofuel
use is substantial in all three cases (Figure 14b), reaching 92 to 127 EJ, because the rest
of the world is pursuing the same strong greenhouse gas policy in all cases. Thus, the
main difference is the changes in biofuel use in the U.S. The 287 bmt case, if the U.S.
pursued the policy alone, would lead to substantial biofuels use in the U.S., but demand
from the rest of the world prices the U.S. out of the market, with other mitigation options
able to more cheaply meet the U.S. cap. As the estimates in Table 11 suggest, if produced
domestically, the amounts used in the U.S. would require on the order of 40% of U.S.
cropland, forestland, and grassland (about 700 million acres). To produce the world total
ethanol production of 127 EJ would require about 2.5 billion acres (or about 1 billion
hectares).
    The EPPA model projects, however, that virtually all of the U.S. biofuels would be
imported. Some U.S. domestic production (less than 0.8 EJ) finally occurs in 2050 in the
203 bmt and 167 bmt case. Interest in biofuels use in the U.S. is often heightened by the
belief that we would be able to rely on a domestic resource. In that regard, the EPPA
model may not ideally represent differential productivity of biofuels across the world.
However, it is notable that the U.S. currently restricts biofuels imports to support the
domestic industry. Might the U.S. rely on its domestic biofuels production capability? To
examine this possibility we also show a case where trade in biofuels is restricted,
requiring that any use in the U.S. (or in any region) be domestically produced within that
region. Biofuel use in these cases is shown in Figure 14 as well, noted NobioTR. As
might be expected, the restriction leads to lower biofuels use in the U.S. and in the total
for the world, but biofuel use, and hence production, in the U.S. is substantial, rising into
the 25 to 30 EJ range by the end of the period as compared to the 30 to 35 EJ under free



                                             31
trade. This quantity of biofuel would still require about 30% of all U.S. crop, grass, and
forestland or over 500 million acres of land.
    Figure 15 illustrates one of the important implications of a substantial biofuels
industry for the 167 bmt case. The U.S. now is a substantial net agricultural exporter, and
under the EPPA reference without greenhouse gas policy this pattern is projected to
continue. In the core cases, U.S. net agricultural exports are projected to more than
double compared with the reference. As other regions expand biofuel production, they
import more agricultural goods and thus U.S. net exports grow. The significant effect of
barring biofuels imports into the U.S. under a stringent climate policy is that domestic
production of biofuels significantly reduces agricultural production, and instead of the
U.S. being a significant net exporter of agricultural products we become a large net
importer. Whereas net exports today are on the order of $20 billion, the U.S. grows to be
a net importer of over $80 billion of agricultural commodities. The agricultural sector in
the EPPA model is highly aggregated—a single sector includes crops, livestock, and
forestry. As a result, one should not put too much stock in the absolute value of net
exports in the reference—it could be higher or lower depending on how agricultural
productivity advances in the U.S. relative to other regions of the world. However, if on
the order 25 EJ of ethanol must be produced in the U.S., requiring on the order of 500
million acres of land, it is nearly inevitable that this would lead to the U.S. becoming a
substantial agricultural importer.
    Several other critical aspects of this level of biofuels production are worth pointing
out. In keeping with U.S. proposals as well as with policy developments abroad such the
EU ETS or the Kyoto Protocol (see Reilly and Asadoorian, 2007), we have not extended
the cap-and-trade system to cover land-use emissions. If included at all, land use is often
covered under a crediting system. However, as shown by McCarl and Reilly (2006),
except for quite low CO2-e prices the economics of biofuels tends to dominate the
economics of carbon sequestration in soils. The implication is that, at the level of biofuels
demand simulated here, there would be scant incentive to protect carbon in soils and
vegetation through a credit system. Landowners would instead tend to convert land to
biofuels or more intense cropping.
    Whether the biofuels themselves are produced on existing cropland or not, the overall
need for cropland would require significant conversion of land from less intensively
managed grass and forestland. This initial disruption would lead to significant CO2
release from soils and vegetation. If mature forests are converted it can take decades of
biofuels production to make up for the initial carbon loss. Whether the land is located in
the U.S. or abroad its conversion is likely to contribute substantial carbon emissions,
substantially negating the savings from reduced fossil energy use. Thus, one of the most
serious issues raised in this analysis is the need to expand a cap-and-trade system to
include land-use change emissions, and to be doubly concerned about leakage from
reductions in the U.S., through biofuels imports, unless mitigation policies abroad that
include land-use emissions are in place.
8. CENTURY SCALE EMISSIONS AND CLIMATE RESULTS
    The policy time-horizon of 2050 in the current congressional proposals is long
relative to the planning horizon for government efforts that may extend no more than a
few years to a decade, but as described in the recent IPCC report (IPCC, 2007) the world


                                             32
is already committed to a substantial amount of warming through 2050, even if
atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations were stabilized at today’s levels. Moreover,
stabilization of concentrations at today’s levels would require that the entire world
immediately reduce emissions to very low levels, a feat that would be politically difficult
and economically costly. To begin to assess the adequacy of proposed policies in the face
of goals such as stabilization of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, or of holding total
warming below a target such as 2°C, requires a time horizon of at least 100 years and
simulation of the emissions projections from human activities that result from these
policy scenarios through an earth system model.
     To explore climate response we use the MIT Integrated Global System Model
(IGSM), described in detail in Sokolov et al. (2005), and we extend the emissions
scenarios studied above through the year 2100. One advantage of the IGSM is its
flexibility to vary key parameters of climate response to represent uncertainty or to allow
it to reproduce the response of a full range of three-dimensional atmosphere-ocean
general circulation models (AO GCMs) that would, themselves, require several months
of computer time to produce a single 100-year simulation. For purposes of this report we
developed parameterizations of the IGSM that represent each of three major U.S. AO
GCM models—those of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS-SB), the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL-2.1), and the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (CCSM3). These models show somewhat different climate
responses to the same anthropogenic forcing and thereby illustrate some of the
uncertainties in translating an emissions trajectory into an estimate of climate change.
     We simulate the climate effects of six different climate policy scenarios through 2100
(see Figure 16). The first is a reference emissions forecast that includes no specific
climate policy (Reference). Then three global participation scenarios include the
international policy in our core policy scenarios in the 167, 203, and 287 bmt cases. We
extend these three cases through 2100 by holding annual emissions allowances at their
2050 level through the end of the century. (Recall that in the 203 bmt case, the U.S.,
Europe, Japan, Canada, Australia, New Zealand are 50% below 1990 levels in 2050; all
other countries are at their 2000 levels. In the 167 bmt case the U.S. is 80% below 1990
levels and in the 287 bmt case U.S. emissions are held at 2008 levels.) To examine the
climate implications of the global versus partial participation, the fifth case assumes
abatement efforts in developing countries are delayed until 2050, at which point
mitigation efforts return them to 2000 levels where they remain through 2100
(Developing Countries Delayed). The sixth case assumes developing countries take no
abatement action through 2100 (Developed Only). Abatement in the developed countries
remains unchanged in these latter two cases and the U.S. policy is set at the 203 bmt
level.
     Assumption of such abrupt changes in policy, such as developing countries suddenly
returning to 2000 levels in 2050, is not very realistic but what matters for a long-term
goal such as stabilization are cumulative emissions and so more realistic time-paths with
the same level of cumulative emissions over the century can be imagined. Similarly,
since we are not focusing on abatement cost after 2050, one can imagine different ways
in which the abatement effort is shared among countries post 2050, and as long as
cumulative global emissions are the same the long-term climate consequences will be
little affected.



                                            33
     The scenarios include all greenhouse gases and policies to abate them. The EPPA
model also projects aerosols and tropospheric ozone precursors, and while the GHG
policies simulated here do not include targets for these substances, to the extent policy
affects the level of combustion of fossil fuels and other activities that generate emissions,
it affects these other greenhouse substances as well. The emissions levels projected by
EPPA of these substances, as they change among GHG policy scenarios, are simulated
through the IGSM and contribute to the projected changes in climate. We focus on the
CO2 concentrations (which are only indirectly affected by the level of other substances)
and the global mean surface temperature change (which is affected by the level of GHGs
and all other radiatively active substances). Concentrations of other gases such as
methane, nitrous oxide, and of aerosols and ozone also change but are not shown here.
     As shown in Figure 16, the CO2 concentrations reach 880 ppmv by 2100 in the
Reference, rising at an accelerating rate. The results show the importance of developing
country participation in the determination of long-term CO2 concentrations. In the
Developed Only case the growth in atmospheric concentrations is slowed but it still
reaches 750 ppmv. In the cases where developing countries participate, however, even
when effort is delayed to 2050 concentration growth is restrained considerably and the CO2
level is at 560 ppmv in 2100. A 450 ppmv goal is sometimes advanced as a desirable
target. The most stringent policy we have simulated here, Global Participation with the
U.S. at 167 bmt, is not sufficient to meet a 450 ppmv target: by 2050 concentrations are
already at 460 ppmv.
     The different U.S. policies have relatively small effects on the CO2 concentration if
other regions do not follow the U.S. lead. This result further highlights the need for
significant international participation. The expectation of those supporting tighter targets
in the U.S. may well be that it would lead other developed countries along the same more
stringent path, and perhaps accelerate mitigation efforts in the developing countries, or
that recognizing that developing countries may delay participation the U.S. would take
stronger measures to make up for this delay. In that regard, the concentration difference
in 2100 between the 167 and 287 bmt case is just about the concentration difference
between cases where the developing countries join in 2025 versus delaying their
participation until 2050. Thus, the 167 bmt case can be viewed as the U.S. making up for
delayed developing country participation, with the 287 bmt case achieving approximately
the same concentration result if developing country participation can be achieved earlier.
In that regard, the policies we assumed to occur abroad are only a few highly stylized
possibilities, but they, rather than differences in the U.S. policy, drive the climate results.
     As far as atmospheric concentrations are concerned, it is not important where
emissions are cut, and achieving any of the atmospheric targets now under discussion
raises the question of how much more other developed countries and developing
countries would be willing to do. Our extension of the policies beyond 2050 is obviously
arbitrary. If the world pursued the Global Participation path the growth trajectory of CO2
emissions would be altered significantly, but a goal of stabilization would require still
further cuts.
     As noted above, what matters most for long-term concentration goals are cumulative
emissions over the century, so a useful way to understand how these policies contribute
to stabilization goals is to compare cumulative emissions under these scenarios to those
that would be consistent with particular stabilization levels. In that regard, the MIT IGSM



                                             34
was recently employed in development of stabilization scenarios as part of a U.S. Climate
Change Science Program exercise (US CCSP, 2006). An idealized cap-and-trade system
was implemented beginning in 2015 in which the whole world participated. The price
path of the emissions constraint over the whole period (2015-2100) was constrained to
rise at a 4% rate to simulate banking and cost-effective allocation of abatement over time.
     We show in Table 12 the cumulative emissions from 2012-2050 and from 2012-2100
for the U.S. and the world in the reference case and in the four stabilization levels of the
CCSP study.23 Also shown are the Global Participation, Delayed Developing, and
Developed Only scenarios developed here. In the table we list the stabilization levels in
the CCSP study in terms of CO2 concentration levels, 450 through 750 ppmv, although
that analysis formulated the targets as radiative forcing levels that allowed some
additional increase in other greenhouse gases. Some policy discussions have been framed
in terms of stabilization of CO2-equivalent. Obviously, a 450 ppmv CO2 target that
allows additional increases in other gases is a looser target than a 450 ppmv CO2-e target.
To illustrate this difference for the CCSP targets we have calculated the CO2-e target
equivalent to the radiative forcing levels set out in the CCSP study. Thus, as shown in
Table 12, the 450 CO2 target, considering the additional radiative forcing from other
greenhouse gases, is equivalent to a 523 CO2-e target, and the 550 CO2 target is
equivalent to a 675 CO2-e target.24 Cumulative emissions in the table are GWP-weighted
CO2-e emissions.
     Comparing the policy scenarios examined here to the CCSP results, a first
observation is that U.S. emissions through 2050 (203 bmt) and through 2100 (363 bmt)
are below emissions of the U.S. in the CCSP 450 ppmv case. Thus, if the emissions
allowances in the 203 bmt case were assigned to the U.S. under an overall global target
consistent with 450 ppmv as in the CCSP case, and with global emissions trading, then
the U.S. would take on some of the cost of abatement in other countries by purchasing
allowances from them. In that sense, the 203 bmt case is consistent with 450 ppmv, but
the policy in the rest of the world in the Global Participation scenario is too loose. The
167 bmt of emissions in that tighter U.S. case (which would lead to 236 bmt for 2012-
2100 if extended by holding at 80% below 1990 from 2050 through 2100) would transfer
even more of the cost burden to the U.S. The core case with 287 bmt is very close to the
282 bmt of U.S. emissions in the 550 ppmv CCSP scenario, but it would mean that the
U.S. would not take any responsibility for costs of abatement in other regions. If
emissions in the U.S. remained at the 2008 level through 2100, cumulative U.S.
emissions would be 662 bmt, somewhat above the CCSP 550 ppmv cumulative emissions
total of 539 bmt. Thus, even under the assumption that the U.S. took responsibility only
for its own emissions it would need to further cut its emissions after 2050 to meet a 550
ppmv goal unless other countries took on some of that responsibility.
     Looking at the global totals, in the Developing Delayed scenario the world still is
within striking distance of the 550 ppmv goal if the post-2050 targets were tightened a
little. However, this delay puts the 450 ppmv goal essentially out of reach because to
achieve it would require that virtually no more emissions be allowed after 2050. We saw


23
  The results are from the MIT contribution to the CCSP study, which also involved two other models.
24
  CO2-e levels are calculated as the concentrations of CO2 that would generate the same combined
radiative forcing coming from CO2, CH4, N2O, PFCs, HFCs, and SF6.


                                                  35
this in Figure 16 where 450 ppmv is already exceeded in these cases by 2050.25 In the
Developed Only case emissions through 2100 are more than 850 bmt above the
cumulative emissions in the 750 ppmv CCSP stabilization scenario. Concentrations are
rapidly approaching 750 ppmv in this case in 2100, and so only with draconian measures
implemented in 2100 to cut global emissions to near zero would 750 ppmv be possible.
The CCSP scenarios have concentrations in 2100 still well below 750 ppmv recognizing
that further emissions would occur after 2100 as the world continued cutting toward
levels that would eventually stabilize at 750 ppmv. There are, of course, uncertainties in
uptake that would lead to either higher or lower concentrations for these emissions
paths—one estimate is that an emissions path consistent with a 550 ppmv target might
result in actual concentrations ±50 ppmv from the target given (Webster et al., 2003).
Putting those uncertainties aside, Table 12 provides a useful way to think about how
much more effort would be required to meet specific goals, and opens the way for
discussions about which countries take up that effort and whether it is taken on sooner or
later.
    Turning to the climate effects of these scenarios, Figure 17 shows the increase in the
global mean surface temperature from 2000 for our replication of the three U.S. GCMs.
In the Reference the temperature rise by 2100 is about 3.5, 4.0 and 4.5 °C for the GFDL
2.1, CCSM3, and GISS_SB models, respectively. The Global Participation and
Developing Countries Delayed scenarios restrain the increase to be in the range of 1.7 to
2.4 °C above year 2000. Since the year 2000 temperature was already approximately 0.8
°C above the pre-industrial level, even these assumed mitigation policies would yield a
2100 temperature 0.5 to 1.2 °C above the 2 °C goal identified by the EU. The Developed
Only scenario cuts only about 0.5 °C of the warming from the reference, again
illustrating the importance of developing country participation. As the CO2 concentration
results foreshadow, the differences in the global mean surface temperature increase
among the three U.S. policy scenarios are relatively small, and thus a primary motivation
for the U.S. to choose a tighter policy is to stimulate more stringent policies abroad.
    Compared with previous proposals, many of the bills now in Congress propose much
deeper cuts, and have specified a policy over a longer horizon. Thus, it is possible to
begin to assess their implications for future climate, making some crucial but at least
plausible assumptions about actions in the rest of the world. On the one hand, if U.S.
measures can help bring along the world, then reduction in warming from what might
occur without any mitigation action is substantial. On the other hand, even with the very
substantial measures proposed, and the whole world eventually falling in line, we could
expect to see additional warming of twice to three times that we have seen over the last
century, if these AO GCMs reasonably represent the response of the earth system to
increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. Failure to take any action, or failure to
substantially involve the developing countries would, according to these estimates, lead
to very substantial warming over the century.



25
  The approximate nature of the cumulative emissions comes into play here—if cumulative emissions
could be exactly related to concentrations then they should be below 450 ppmv in 2050. However, if the
emissions occur over a shorter period of time the ocean is not able to take the CO2 up as fast, and so there is
some difference if the cumulative emissions are over 50 years or 100 years—in this case about 10 ppmv.


                                                      36
9. CONCLUSIONS
     There is a wide range of proposals in the U.S. Congress that would impose mandatory
controls on U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, yielding substantial reductions in U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions relative to a projected reference growth. The scenarios
explored here span the range of stringency of these bills. Not all of the proposals have
specified the mechanisms by which they would achieve their reduction targets. We
implemented them as pure cap-and-trade systems with one alternative where we specified
a price path.
It is probably useful to identify two groups of Congressional proposals. One set seeks
dramatic reductions in U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, setting targets for 2050 that are as
much as 80% below U.S. emissions in 1990. Several of these proposals have been crafted
with a goal of putting the U.S. on a path toward targets like 450 ppmv CO2 stabilization
or 2 °C temperature increase from the pre-industrial level, assuming that the rest of the
world takes substantial mitigation measures as well. This group includes the McCain-
Lieberman, Boxer-Sanders, Feinstein, Waxman, and Kerr-Snowe bills. Another set of
proposals have more modest reduction goals, deflecting U.S. emissions growth or
possibly stabilizing U.S. emissions, and include a safety valve feature to limit the cost
increase. This set includes the Bingaman-Specter and Udall-Petri proposals.
     Table 13 summarizes these Bills and indicates their approximate costs by identifying
the case we simulated that seems closest in terms of the overall cap or CO2 price. The
table reports the CO2-e price in 2015 and 2050 and the welfare cost in 2020 and 2050.
Apart from the many limitations of any modeling effort of this type, an important caveat
to these cost estimates is that the scenarios we simulated represent pure economic-
incentive based policies with banking undertaken on the assumption that the policies are
expected to be implemented as designed to 2050. The actual Congressional proposals all
include other provisions, from funds for R&D to other requirements such as a renewable
portfolio standards or efficiency standards. In other cases the actual form of the policy
that would achieve these quantitative targets is incompletely specified or left up to the
executive agency that would implement the policy. Most also include provisions that
would allow revision of the goals with changing evidence of the threat of climate change,
and necessary provision, but one that adds uncertainty to the level of the cap or the price.
     Those proposals with goals of substantially cutting U.S. emissions between now and
2050 would likely generate prices in the range of $30 to $55 per ton of CO2-e in 2015,
rising to the range of $120 to over $200 by 2050: economic welfare losses from the
mitigation policy are estimated to rise to 1.1% to almost 2% by 2050. If economic
decision-makers were less than confident that measures would be imposed without
relaxation to 2050 then there might be somewhat lower levels of banking, leading to
lower prices and costs in early periods and higher prices and costs later, as suggested by
Figure 9. Banking also depends critically on expectations about future technology, and
the market may assess those prospects very differently from how we have specified them.
Optimism about future technology would reduce banking and near-term abatement and
CO2-e prices. Greater pessimism on future technology or abatement potential would drive
near term prices and abatement higher. No assessment was carried out of the economic
effects of climate change avoided or ancillary benefits of emissions mitigation, but of
course these benefits would provide at least a partial offset to the mitigation cost.
However, because of the long-lived nature of greenhouse gases and the moderating


                                            37
influence of the ocean, much of the climate benefit of reductions through 2050 would
accrue beyond the horizon of this analysis.
    Those proposals that would slow or stop the rise in emissions but not substantially cut
them from today’s levels have somewhat lower costs. A policy that froze emissions at
2008 levels would generate a price of $18 per ton of CO2-e in 2015, rising to around $70
by 2050. Related proposals specify a safety valve of $6 per ton of CO2-e rising to $39 by
2050. If the U.S. pursued this target alone it would essentially freeze emissions at 2008
levels and have welfare costs that rose to just above 0.4%, but the effectiveness and cost
of this proposal depends highly on assumptions about policy abroad, as well as other
uncertainties that we have not explored.
    More important than these specific numbers are some broad insights that may help
shape U.S. greenhouse gas mitigation policy:
   • The cost of policy in the U.S. is greatly affected by policies in the rest of the world.
      A stringent policy elsewhere reduces oil prices and confers a terms-of-trade
      advantage to the U.S. On the other hand, such a policy abroad raises the cost of
      biomass energy, conferring a substantial terms-of-trade loss when the U.S. has a
      strong mitigation policy. Together these two changes widen the gap between
      petroleum product and biofuels prices with a tighter target abroad. The implication
      is that a higher CO2-e price in the U.S. is required to meet the same emissions
      target. If a price instrument is used instead, then the effectiveness of U.S.
      abatement depends on efforts elsewhere. With a less stringent U.S. policy, terms-
      of-trade benefits from reductions in the world oil price can lead to an improvement
      in welfare in the U.S. compared to the case where there was not mitigation policy
      anywhere.
   • International emissions trading does not lead to substantial economic efficiency
       gains unless the U.S. policy is much more stringent than the policy in other
       regions. If the U.S. policy is similar in stringency (comparing pre-trade CO2-e
       prices) trade can be welfare worsening because of terms-of-trade effects. One
       reason emissions trading is less important is that trade in biofuels tends to close the
       gap between pre-trade emissions prices so that this energy-trade substitutes for
       trading in emissions allowances.
   • Cutting emissions in the U.S. and world implies a transition to carbon-free
      transportation fuels. One of the more technology-ready options is biofuels.
      However, at a scale to contribute substantially to abatement it would require
      hundreds of millions of acres of land in the U.S. and perhaps 1 billion hectares (2.5
      billion acres) worldwide. This level of production would require conversion of
      land to bioenergy crops and in the process could release carbon stored in
      vegetation and soils. We were not able to investigate the magnitude of this effect,
      but given the area of land involved it would be large. To avoid reductions in
      carbon dioxide emissions from fuel use being offset by land use emissions, it will
      be necessary to price land-use emissions similarly to emissions from fossil fuel.




                                             38
      Ideally, land-use emissions would be part of the same cap-and-trade system as fuel
      emissions, or would be subject to the same CO2-e tax or price incentive.
   • With no restrictions on biomass trade we find that the U.S. would mainly be an
      importer of biofuels when there is a stringent domestic mitigation policy. Rather
      than going to biofuels production, U.S. farmland would be used to produce food
      for export; regions abroad would devote more of their agricultural land to biomass
      and import agricultural products from the U.S. If we restrict U.S. biofuels use to
      domestically produced feedstock, on the order of 500 million acres of U.S. land
      would be required, more than the total of all current U.S. cropland. In this case, the
      U.S. would become a large importer of food, fiber, and forest products, rather than
      the net exporter of these products as is currently the case.
   • Potential revenue from allowance sales or a CO2-e tax (or windfall gain to those to
      whom allowances were freely distributed) are substantial under the emissions
      limits we examined, ranging from about $130 to $370 billion per year in 2015 to
      $250 to $515 billion per year in 2050. In more stringent policies revenue falls off
      in later years because the number allowances falls off faster than the CO2-e price
      rises. If distributed to households, the annual distribution would be on the order of
      $1600 to $4900 per family-of-four household. The CO2-e revenue is on the order
      of 10 to 15% of estimated future total Federal tax revenue, ranging across
      scenarios and over time from 5 to nearly 20%.
   • One use of auction or tax revenue is to cut existing taxes, for example on labor and
      capital. Capital tax reductions would likely reduce costs more than use of revenue
      to reduce labor taxes. Potential revenue under more stringent bills consistent with
      stabilization of concentrations falls because so few allowances are available for
      auction and this can ultimately limit the benefits of revenue recycling.
The purpose of U.S. mitigation measures is to substantially reduce the amount of climate
change we would otherwise experience. Absent controls on greenhouse gas emissions,
global temperatures could rise by 3.5 to 4.5 °C by 2100 given our reference emissions
and reflecting a climate response to greenhouse gas emissions like that of the models of
the three major U.S. climate modeling centers. Our results confirm the well-known fact
of global climate change: to meet temperature or concentration goals requires concerted
efforts from much of the world over a substantial period of time. With rapid growth in
developing countries, failure to control their emissions could lead to a substantial
increase in global temperature even if the U.S. and other developed countries pursue
stringent policies.
    It is useful to evaluate the global costs and global benefits of achieving such targets,
as difficult as that is to do. However, it is not possible to connect specific U.S. policy
targets with a particular global concentration or temperature target, and therefore the
avoided damages, because any climate gains depend on efforts in the rest of the world.
And unfortunately, absent a global agreement a country’s best strategy in terms of its
own self-interest is to do little and free-ride on the actions of others. Of course, if all
behave in this way very little mitigation will be achieved. If a cooperative solution is at



                                             39
all possible, therefore, a major strategic consideration in setting U.S. policy targets should
be their value in leading other major countries to take on similar efforts.
     Also at issue is the equitable sharing of the cost burden of emissions reduction. Such
equity concerns are inextricably linked to the strategic objective of getting other countries
to mitigate their own greenhouse gas emissions. Poorer countries see a U.S. and developed
world that has freely emitted CO2 over the history of fossil use, and are thus responsible
for the level of concentrations we see today. And they see economies with far higher
incomes that are in a better position to afford the burden of mitigation. Thus, a perception
of the U.S. taking on an equitable share of the burden of abatement is probably essential if
the U.S. policy is going to serve the strategic goal of moving climate policy forward
elsewhere. These issues are well beyond the scope of this analysis but consideration of
them is essential in determining the best policy for the U.S.


Acknowledgments
Development of the underlying analysis models and other research-based tools used in
this study was supported separately by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of
Biological and Environmental Research [BER] (DE-FG02-94ER61937), the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (XA-83042801-0), the Electric Power Research
Institute, and by a consortium of industry and foundation sponsors. Also, thanks to Justin
Anderson and Marcus Sarofim for research assistance and to our colleagues in the Joint
Program for comments and suggestions.
10. REFERENCES
Babiker M., J. Reilly, and D. Ellerman, 2000. Japanese Nuclear Power and the Kyoto
   Agreement. Journal of Japanese and International Economies, 14(3): 169-188;
   available as MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change Reprint
   2000-6.
Babiker, M., J. Reilly, M. Mayer, R. Eckaus, I. Sue Wing, R. Hyman. 2001. The MIT Emissions
   Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model: Revisions, Sensitivities, and Comparison of
   Results. MIT Joint Program Report No. 71, Cambridge, MA (available at
   http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt71.pdf).
Babiker, M.H., G.E. Metcalf and J. Reilly, 2003. Tax Distortions and Global Climate Policy.
   Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46: 269-287; MIT Joint Program
   Reprint 2003-4 (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint03-4.pdf).
Babiker, M., J. Reilly, and L. Viguier, 2004. Is emissions trading always beneficial. Energy
    Journal, 25(2): 33-56; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2004-4
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint04-4.pdf).
Bovenberg A.L., L. Goulder and D. Gurney, 2005. Efficiency Costs of Meeting Industry-
    Distributional Constraints under Environmental Permits and Taxes, Rand Journal of
    Economics, 36(4): 951-971.
Chirinko, R., S. Fazzari and A. Meyer, 2004. That elusive elasticity: A long-panel approach to
    estimating the capital–labor substitution elasticity, CESifo Working Paper 1240, Ifo Institute
    for Economic Research, Munich, Germany.
Dimaranan B., and R. McDougall, 2002. Global Trade, Assistance, and Production: The GTAP 5
    Data Base. Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana.



                                                40
Dutkiewicz, S., M. Follows and P. Parekh, 2005a. Interactions of the iron and phosphorus cycles:
   A three-dimensional model study. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 19: GB1021.
Dutkiewicz, S., A. Sokolov, J. Scott and P. Stone, 2005b. A Three-Dimensional Ocean-
   Seaice-Carbon Cycle Model and its Coupling to a Two-Dimensional Atmospheric
   Model: Uses in Climate Change Studies. MIT Joint Program for the Science and
   Policy of Global Change, Report No. 47. Cambridge, MA
   (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt47.pdf).
Dutkiewicz, S., M.J. Follows, P. Heimbach, and J. Marshall, 2006. Controls on ocean
   productivity and air-sea carbon flux: An adjoint model sensitivity study. Geophysical
   Research Letters, 33: L02603.
Ellerman, A.D., P. Joskow and D.Harrison, 2003. Emissions Trading: Experience, Lessons, and
    Considerations for Greenhouse Gases. Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Washington,
    DC.
Felzer, B., J. Reilly, J. Melillo, D. Kicklighter, M. Sarofim, C. Wang, R. Prinn and Q. Zhuang,
    2005. Future effects of ozone on carbon sequestration and climate change policy using a
    global biogeochemical model. Climatic Change, 73(3): 345-373; MIT Joint Program Reprint
    2005-8 (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint05-8.pdf).
Fullerton, D., and G. Metcalf, 2002: Tax incidence, in Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4.
    A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1787-1872.
Gurgel A., G. Metcalf, N. Osouf and J. Reilly, 2007. Computing Tax Rates for Economic
    Modeling: A Global Dataset Approach. MIT Joint Program for the Science and Policy of
    Global Change, Technical Note 11, Cambridge, MA
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_TechNote11.pdf)
Gurgel, A., S. Paltsev, J. Reilly and G. Metcalf, 2007. U.S. GHG Cap-and-Trade Proposals:
    Application of a Forward-Looking Computable General Equilibrium Model. Manuscript,
    Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Hall, C.T. and J. Kay, 2006. “Feinstein unveils Dem plan to cut greenhouse gas,” San Francisco
    Chronicle, August 25, 2006 (http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-
    bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2006/08/25/MNGCJKP5U61.DTL).
Hertel, Thomas W. 1997. Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. Cambridge
    University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hyman, R.C., J.M. Reilly, M.H. Babiker, A. De Masin, and H.D. Jacoby, 2003. Modeling Non-
    CO2 Greenhouse Gas Abatement. Environmental Modeling and Assessment, 8(3): 175-186;
    MIT Joint Program Reprint 2003-9 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1025576926029).
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change], 2001. Climate Change 2001: Mitigation,
    Contribution of Working Group III to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
    Panel on Climate Change, B. Metz et al. (eds.), Cambridge University Press, UK.
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change], 2007. Climate Change 2007: The Physical
    Science Basis, Summary for Policy Makers, IPCC Secretariat, Geneva, Switzerland,
    (http://www.ipcc.ch).
Jacoby, H., R. Eckaus, A.D. Ellermann, R. Prinn, D. Reiner, and Z. Yang, 1997. CO2 Emissions
    Limits: Economic Adjustments and the Distribution of Burdens. The Energy Journal 18:
    31-58; MIT Joint Program Reprint 1997-1
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint97-1.pdf).
Jacoby, H.D., and A.D. Ellerman, 2004. The Safety Valve and Climate Policy. Energy Policy
    32(4): 481-491; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2004-1
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint04-1.pdf).




                                               41
Jacoby, H.D., J. Reilly, J. R. McFarland, and S. Paltsev, 2006. Technology and technical change
    in the MIT EPPA model. Energy Economics, 28: 610-631; MIT Joint Program Reprint
    2006-5 (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint06-5.pdf).
Kamenkovich, I.V., A.P. Sokolov and P.H. Stone, 2002: An efficient climate model with a 3D
    ocean and statistical- dynamical atmosphere. Climate Dynamics, 19: 585-598; MIT Joint
    Program Reprint 2002-7 (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint02-7.pdf).
Kasahara, S., S. Paltsev, J. Reilly, H. Jacoby and A.D. Ellerman, 2007. Climate Change Taxes
   and Energy Efficiency in Japan. Environment and Resource Economics, in press
   (http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10640-006-9031-1).
Matus, K., T. Yang, S. Paltsev and J. Reilly, 2007. Economic benefits of air pollution regulation
   in the USA: An integrated approach. Climatic Change, in press;
   (http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-006-9185-4).
Mayer, M., C. Wang, M. Webster and R.G. Prinn, 2000. Linking local air pollution to global
   chemistry and climate. J. Geophys. Res. 10(D18): 20,869-20,896; MIT Joint Program Reprint
   2000-5 (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint00-5.pdf).
Mayer, M. R. Hyman, J. Harnisch, and J. Reilly, 2001. Emissions Inventories and Time Trends
   for Greenhouse Gases and Other Pollutants. MIT Joint Program Technical Note No. 1,
   Cambridge, MA (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_TechNote1.pdf).
McCarl, B. and J. Reilly, 2006. Agriculture in the climate change and energy price squeeze:
   Part 2: Mitigation Opportunities, Manuscript, Department of Agricultural Economics, Texas
   A&M, College Station, Texas.
McFarland, J., J. Reilly, and H. Herzog, 2004. Representing energy technologies in top-down
   economic models using bottom-up information. Energy Economics, 26(4): 685-707; Joint
   Program Reprint 2004-8 (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint04-8.pdf).
Metcalf, G.E., M.H. Babiker and J. Reilly, 2004. A Note on Weak Double Dividends. Topics in
   Economic Analysis Policy: Vol. 4 : Issue 1, Article 2.
   (http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/topics/vol4/iss1/art2).
NCEP [National Commission on Energy Policy], 2004. Ending the Energy Stalemate: A
   Bipartisan Strategy to Meet America’s Energy Challenges, Washington, DC.
Paltsev S., J. Reilly, H. Jacoby, A.D. Ellerman, and K.H. Tay, 2003. Emissions Trading to
    Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions in the United States: The McCain-Lieberman Proposal.
    MIT Joint Program for the Science and Policy of Global Change Report No. 97. Cambridge,
    MA (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt97.pdf.)
Paltsev, S., J.M. Reilly, H.D. Jacoby, R.S. Eckaus, J. McFarland, M. Sarofim, M. Asadoorian and
    M. Babiker, 2005. The MIT Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) Model:
    Version 4. MIT Joint Program for the Science and Policy of Global Change Report No. 125,
    Cambridge, MA (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt125.pdf).
Paltsev, S., J. Reilly, H. Jacoby, K. Tay, 2007. How (and Why) Do Climate Policy Costs Differ
    Among Countries? In: Human-Induced Climate Change: An Interdisciplinary Assessment,
    M. Schlesinger et al., (ed.), Cambridge University Press, forthcoming in October.
Prinn, R.G., H.D. Jacoby, A.P. Sokolov, C. Wang, X. Xiao, Z. Yang, R.S. Eckaus, P.H. Stone,
    A.D. Ellerman, J.M. Melillo, J. Fitzmaurice, D.W. Kicklighter, G. Holian, and Y. Liu, 1999.
    Integrated global system model for climate policy assessment: Feedbacks and sensitivity
    studies. Climatic Change, 41(3/4): 469-546; MIT Joint Program Reprint 1999-4
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint04-8.pdf).
Reilly, J., R. Prinn, J. Harnisch, J. Fitzmaurice, H. Jacoby, D. Kicklighter, J. Melillo, P. Stone,
    A. Sokolov, C. Wang. 1999. Multi-gas assessment of the Kyoto Protocol. Nature, 401: 549-
    555; MIT Joint Program Reprint 1999-12
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint99-12.pdf)


                                                42
Reilly, J., H.D. Jacoby and R. Prinn, 2003. Multi-Gas Contributors To Global Climate Change,
    Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Alexandria, VA
    (http://www.pewclimate.org/docUploads/Multi%2DGas%2Epdf).
Reilly, J.M, M. Sarofim, S. Paltsev and R.G. Prinn, 2006. The role of non-CO2 greenhouse gases
    in climate policy: Analysis using the MIT IGSM. Energy Journal, Special Issue #3: 503-520;
    MIT Joint Program Reprint 2006-10
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint06-10.pdf).
Reilly, J., and M. Asadoorian, 2007. Mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions from land use:
    creating incentives within greenhouse gas emissions trading systems. Climatic Change,
    80:173-197; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2007-1
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint07-1.pdf).
Reilly, J.M., S. Paltsev, B. Felzer, X. Wang, D.W. Kicklighter, J. Melillo, R. Prinn, M. Sarofim,
    A. Sokolov and C. Wang, 2007. Global economic effects of changes in crops, pasture, and
    forests due to changing climate, carbon dioxide, and ozone. Energy Policy, in press;
    preprint available at http://mit.edu/globlachange/www/docs/ReillyEtAl_EP06.pdf.
Sarofim, M., C. Forest, D. Reiner and J. Reilly, 2005. Stabilization and Global Climate Policy,
    Global and Planetary Change, 47: 266-272; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2005-5
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint05-5.pdf).
Sokolov, A.P., C.A. Schlosser, S. Dutkiewicz, S. Paltsev, D.W. Kicklighter, H.D. Jacoby, R.G.
    Prinn, C.E. Forest, J. Reilly, C. Wang, B. Felzer, M.C. Sarofim, J. Scott, P.H. Stone, J.M.
    Melillo, and J. Cohen, 2005. The MIT Integrated Global System Model (IGSM) Version 2:
    Model Description and Baseline Evaluation. MIT Joint Program Report 124, Cambridge, MA
    (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt124.pdf).
US CCSP [Climate Change Science Program], 2006. U.S. Climate Change Science Program
    Synthesis and Assessment Product 2.1, Part A: Scenarios of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and
    Atmospheric Concentrations (L. Clark, J. Edmonds, H. Jacoby, H. Pitcher, J. Reilly, R.
    Richels), Draft for Public Comment, June 26
    (http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap2-1/default.htm).
USDA [Department of Agriculture], 2006. Major Uses of Land in the United States, 2002.
    Economic Information Bulletin No. 14, 54 pp, May 2006. R. Lubowski, M. Vesterby,
    S. Bucholtz, A. Baez, and M.J. Roberts. (http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/EIB14/)
US EIA [Energy Information Administration], 2003. Analysis of S. 139, the Climate Stewardship
    Act of 2003, SR/OIAF/2003-02, Washington, DC.
US EIA [Energy Information Administration], 2007. Energy Market and Economic Impacts of a
    Proposal to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Intensity with a Cap and Trade System, Energy
    Information Administration, US Department of Energy, Report No. SR/OIAF/2007-01,
    Washington, DC.
US EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], 2001a. Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
    Developed Countries: 1990-2110, EPA-430-R-01-007, Office of Air and Radiation,
    Washington DC.
US EPA. 2001b. U.S. High GWP Gas Emissions 1990-2020. Inventories, Projections, and
    Opportunities for Reductions. Report No. EPA-000-F-97-000, US Environmental Protection
    Agency, Washington DC, June (see http://www.epa.gov/ghginfo/reports/index.html).
US EPA. 2001c. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-1999. EPA 236-
    R-01-001, US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Atmospheric Programs,
    Washington DC, April.
US EPA. 2002a. Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Developing Countries: 1990-2110,
    Draft, February, Office of Air and Radiation, Washington DC.
US EPA. 2002b. Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2000.
    Environmental Protection Agency, Report No. 430-R-06-002, Washington DC.




                                               43
US EPA, 2006. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2004,
   Environmental Protection Agency, Report No. 430-R-06-002, Washington DC, April
   (http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html).
US House of Representatives, 2006a. Keep America Competitive Global Warming Policy Act of
   2006, H.R.5049, 109th Congress, 2nd Session, Washington DC (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-
   bin/bdquery/z?d109:h.r.05049:).
US House of Representatives, 2006b. Safe Climate Act of 2006, H.R.5642, 109th Congress, 2nd
   Session, Washington DC (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d109:h.r.05642:).
US Senate, 2007a. Climate Stewardship and Innovation Act of 2007, S.280, 110th Congress, 1st
   Session, Washington DC (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c110:S.280:).
US Senate, 2007b. Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act of 2007, S.309, 110th Congress, 1st
   Session, Washington DC (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c110:S.309:).
US Senate, 2007c. Global Warming Reduction Act of 2007, S.485, 110th Congress, 1st Session,
   Washington DC (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c110:S.485:).
US Senate, 2007d. Bingaman-Specter Draft Climate Bill, 110th Congress, 1st Session, Washington
   DC. In: Energy Market and Economic Impacts of a Proposal to Reduce Greenhouse Gas
   Intensity with a Cap and Trade System [US EIA, Report No. SR/OIAF/2007-01].
Webster, M.D., M. Babiker, M. Mayer, J. M. Reilly, J. Harnisch, R. Hyman, M. C. Sarofim and
   C. Wang, 2002. Uncertainty in emissions projections for climate models. Atmospheric
   Environment, 36(22): 3659-3670; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2002-3
   http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint02-3.pdf).
Webster M., C. Forest, J. Reilly, M. Babiker, D. Kicklighter, M. Mayer, R. Prinn, M. Sarofim,
  A. Sokolov, P. Stone and C. Wang, 2003. Uncertainty analysis of climate change and policy
  response, Climatic Change, 61: 295-320; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2003-11
  http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Reprint03-11.pdf).
Webster, M., S. Paltsev & J. Reilly, 2006. The Value of Emissions Trading, MIT Joint Program
  for the Science and Policy of Global Change Report No. 132, Cambridge, MA
  (http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt132.pdf).
WRI [World Resources Institute], J. Larson, 2007. Global Warming Legislation in the 110th
  Congress (http://www.wri.org/climate/topic_content.cfm?cid=4265)
Zhuang, Q., J.M. Melillo, B.S. Felzer, D.W. Kicklighter, A.D. McGuire, A. Sokolov, R.G. Prinn,
   M.C. Sarofim, P.A. Steudler and S. Hu, 2006. CO2 and CH4 exchanges between land
   ecosystems and the atmosphere in north high latitudes over the 21st century. Geophysical
   Research Letters, 33: L17403; MIT Joint Program Reprint 2006-9
   (http://web.ics.purdue.edu/~qzhuang/Dr_ Qianlai Zhuang_files/GRL-QZhuang-
   2006GL026972.pdf)
Zhuang, Q., J.M. Melillo, A.D. McGuire, D.W. Kicklighter, R.G. Prinn, P.A. Steudler, B.S.
   Felzer and S. Hu, 2007. Net emissions of CH4 and CO2 in Alaska: Implications for the
   region’s greenhouse gas budget. Ecological Applications, 17(1): 203-212.




                                              44
                      APPENDIX A: Some Useful Terms Defined

Cap and trade system: a system that identifies emitting entities, sets a cap on total
  emissions, distributes emissions allowances to covered entities that in total equal the
  cap, requires entities to turn in allowances equal to their emissions in each period (e.g.,
  year), and allows trade (purchasing and selling) so that a market for and a price of
  emissions allowances is established.
GHG or CO2 tax: a tax per unit of greenhouse gas (GHG) or CO2 whose level is set by a
  public entity, requiring covered entities to pay the tax for every ton of GHG or CO2
  emitted. The desire to avoid paying the tax provides an economic incentive to reduce
  emissions.
Covered entity: used here to refer to organizations or individuals who are covered by a
  cap and trade system (or a GHG/CO2 tax) and therefore must surrender allowances or
  pay the tax to cover emissions for which they are deemed responsible.
Safety valve: A feature of a cap and trade system where the public entity managing the
  system announces a maximum price for allowances, and stands ready to sell as many
  additional allowances beyond the cap level that entities are willing to purchase at the
  set price.
Allowances: Certificates (more likely electronic entries) covered entities acquire and
   must surrender to cover there emissions, typically designated in tons of CO2 or CO2-
   equivalent.
Credits: If allowed under a cap and trade system, these are certificates that can be used in
  place of allowances. They are generated from activities of entities not covered by the
  cap and trade system. Entities hoping to sell into the system would need to have
  credits approved and certified on a project-by-project basis by the public entity
  overseeing the crediting activity. Approval and certification is meant to assure that the
  number of credits granted is consistent with the requirements spelled out in the policy.
  Usually this means that the entities reduced emissions from a baseline (that must be
  established and approved) by the amount of the credits they are claiming.
Opt in: A provision in a cap and trade system that would allow a non-covered entity to
  opt into the system and become a covered entity. This would typically involve
  establishing an allowance level for the entity and adding this level of allowances to the
  total cap for the whole system. Generally, the allowance level would be given freely to
  the entity thus providing an incentive to opt in: if the entity can reduce emissions at
  less than the going allowance price, they can then sell extra allowances into the system
  for a profit.
Revenue recycling: Using the revenue from a carbon tax or that obtained from
  auctioning allowances to reduce other taxes in the economy such as those on earned
  income or on capital.
Lump sum distribution of allowances (or allowance or tax revenue): Lump sum refers
  to a distribution mechanism that does not affect relative choices among goods or the
  relatively profitability of different activities. [Failure to insure lump sum distribution


                                             45
   can undermine the efficiency of a cap and trade system. Basing distribution on some
   historical data (e.g., historical emissions) that cannot be affected is a lump sum
   mechanism. However, if a program established the expectation allowance allocation in
   the future would be based on emissions in the future (e.g., allocations in 2020 based
   on emissions in 2015) then entities would have an incentive to have high emissions in
   2015 to ensure a larger allocation of allowances in 2020, and this would work counter
   to incentives to abate emissions in 2015. Distributing allowance revenue or revenue
   from a CO2 tax to those who spent the most on energy could also undermine the
   system by creating an incentive to use more energy to get a bigger share of the
   revenue that would counter the intended goal of the tax or cap system to use less
   energy and emit less CO2.]
Auctioning of allowances: in a cap and trade system, specifying that the allowances
  would be auctioned off to the highest bidders and the revenue from the auction
  collected by the public agency responsible for the system.
Grandfathering/free distribution of allowances: in a cap and trade system, specifying
  that the allowances would be distributed at no cost to those receiving them. Such
  allowances could be given to anyone or any regardless of whether they are a covered
  entity. If not covered, the presumption is that they would sell allowances into the
  market. In trading systems developed to date, the practice has been to distribute
  allowances to covered entities usually in some ratio that approximated how many they
  would “need” to cover their emissions, proportionally reduced to meet the overall cap.
  Grandfathering refers to one specific approach, using an historic year’s emissions
  level as the basis for free allowance distribution.
Banking & borrowing: Banking refers to abating below the level of allowances
  available in a period and using the extra allowances to offset emission in future years.
  Borrowing is the reverse, using allowances from the future against emissions today.
Carbon and CO2: Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the gaseous combustion product that is the
  main greenhouse gas related to human activities. By some conventions, only the
  carbon is measured and reported. The difference is the molecular weight of carbon
  dioxide (44) to that of carbon dioxide (12). Different reporting conventions thus can
  lead to values that differ by the factor of 3.667—one ton of carbon is equivalent to
  3.667 tons of CO2 and a $100/ton carbon is equal to (approximately) $27/ton CO2.
Greenhouse Gases (GHGs): Gaseous substances that are transparent to incoming short
  wave radiation (i.e. light) but reflect back long wave energy (i.e. heat) radiated from
  the earth’s surface. This heat-trapping ability leads to warming of the troposphere
  (including air temperature at the earth’s surface). Nearly all proposed GHG policies
  have focused on carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),
  perfluorocarbons (PFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6).
  Ozone (O3) and chlorofluorcarbons are also important greenhouse gases. In addition,
  aerosol particles affect the radiative balance of the atmosphere, some cooling and
  some warming the troposphere.
CO2-equivalent (CO2-eq.) emissions and prices: Denotes that non-CO2 gases are
  included and converted to a CO2-equivalent amount (See Global Warming Potentials).


                                            46
Global Warming Potentials (GWP). Indices that take into account the radiative
  properties and lifetimes of different greenhouse gases to describe their radiative effect
  relative to CO2.
Market-based approaches: Emissions policies that achieve reductions by creating
  economic incentives for abatement. Either cap and trade or an emission tax are
  generally considered to be “market-based” in that they do not mandate a specific
  technology that must be used or a specific emissions limit for individual entities that
  must be met. Covered entities have the option of buying permits or paying the tax if
  that appears to be less costly than abating. However, complying with the rules is
  mandatory.
Emissions trading: a cap and trade system and/or the process of buying and selling
  emissions allowances under such a system.
International linkage: allowing a domestic cap and trade system to be linked to a cap
   and trade system in another country, requiring that each country honor the allowances
   issued by the other.
Covered entities: Those entities covered under a cap and trade system and who must
  surrender allowances to cover their emissions (or emissions for which they are deemed
  responsible), or equivalently for a tax system those entities who must pay the tax.
Upstream and downstream regulation: The point in the fuel production, refining,
  conversion, distribution, and combustion chain where emissions are regulated.
  Downstream refers to regulation of the final fuel users who burn the fuel and release
  the emissions. Upstream refers to fossil fuel producers (importers) deemed responsible
  for emissions equal to the carbon content of the fuel sold. There are possibilities of
  midstream regulation as well, for example, gasoline retailers, petroleum refiners, or
  natural gas utilities could be required to surrender allowances (or pay a CO2 tax) for
  the carbon content of the fuel they sold.
Incidence of a tax or GHG abatement cost: Who bears the final cost of a tax or
   abatement taking into account the ability of those directly paying the tax or abating to
   pass along the cost either downstream to consumers by raising prices of goods or
   upstream to owners of production inputs (e.g., capital, labor, energy resource assets)
   through lower wages or payments for capital or resource inputs.




                                            47
                           APPENDIX B: EPPA Model Details

The EPPA model is multi-regional CGE model of the world economy (Babiker et al.,
2001; Paltsev et al., 2005), which is built on the economic and energy data from the
GTAP dataset (Dimaranan and McDougall, 2002; Hertel, 1997) and additional data for
the greenhouse gas (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs and SF6) and urban gas emissions (CO,
VOC, NOX, SO2, BC, OC, NH3) (Mayer et al., 2001) based on United States EPA
inventory data and projects (US EPA 2001a-c, 2002a,b), including endogenous costing of
the abatement of non-CO2 GHGs (Hyman et al., 2003). It has been used extensively for
the study of climate policy (Jacoby et al., 1997; Babiker et al., 2000, 2003; Paltsev et al.,
2003; Reilly et al., 2003; McFarland et al., 2004; Jacoby et al., 2006), climate
interactions and impacts (Reilly et al., 1999; Felzer et al., 2005; Sarofim et al., 2005;
Reilly et al., 2007; Matus et al., 2007), and to study uncertainty in emissions and climate
projections for climate models (Webster et al., 2002, 2003). The current level of
disaggregation of the standard EPPA version is provided in Table 1 in the text.
Several improvements have been incorporated in the model from the version documented
by Paltsev et al. (2005) that are important for the analysis in this report. In the standard
version of EPPA labor supply is exogenous and investment is set equal to savings. We
have improved the representation of taxes. Tax levels are recalculated from the GTAP
tax data as described in Gurgel et al. (2007). Regarding labor supply we have followed a
standard approach of introducing a labor-leisure trade-off as was done for an earlier
EPPA version (Babiker et al., 2002). We followed an approach of Bovenberg et al.
(2005) applied in a static setting in the recursive model, separately representing
investment in the market economy and in households (i.e. investment in owner-occupied
housing). As shown in Babiker et al. (2001), the values for elasticity of substitution
(used in the EPPA model) are related to supply elasticities and shares as:
              1− a
     ηS = σ        ,
               a
where ηS is an own-price elasticity of supply, σ is the elasticity of substitution, and a is
the value share (in our case, a share of labor or market investment).
Table B1. Parameter Values.
 Labor Sharea                        0.8
 Investment Shareb                   0.77
 Labor Supply Elasticityc            0.25
 Capital Supply Elasticityd          0.3
 a
     A share of labor in the total value of labor and leisure.
 b
    A share of non-residential investment in the total value of residential
      investment and the other investment.
 c
    Based on Babiker et al. (2002).
  d
     Based on Chirinko et al. (2004).




                                              48
                                                     Reference Case (Ref)
                                           2005    2010 2015 2020 2025                 2030      2035     2040     2045      2050
ECONOMY WIDE INDICATORS
Population (million)                        296      309      321      334      347      359      369      379      388       397
GDP (billion 2005$)                       11981    14339    16921    19773    22846    26459    30534    34929    39530     44210
% Change GDP from Reference                   --       --       --       --       --       --       --       --       --        --
Market Consumption (billion 2005$)         8217     9858    11533    13384    15364    17761    20467    23392    26456     29567
% Change Consumption from Reference           --       --       --       --       --       --       --       --       --        --
Welfare (billion 2005$)                    9656    11773    13933    16342    18948    22016    25414    29032    32780     36553
% Change Welfare from Reference(EV)           --       --       --       --       --       --       --       --       --        --
CO2-E Price (2005$/tCO2-e)                 0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00
PRICES (index, 2005=1.00)
Petroleum Product                          1.00     1.15     1.30     1.48     1.69     1.87      1.97     2.09     2.19      2.25
Natural Gas                                1.00     1.11     1.27     1.48     1.66     1.95      2.31     2.73     3.12      3.55
Coal                                       1.00     1.04     1.07     1.09     1.13     1.16      1.20     1.24     1.28      1.32
Electricity                                1.00     1.11     1.19     1.27     1.35     1.38      1.42     1.42     1.42      1.41
TRADE & PRODUCTION (selected indicators)
Bio Liquids Production in US (EJ)           0.0      0.0      0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0             0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
Net Bio Liquids Imports (EJ)                0.0      0.0      0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0             0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
Net Bio Liquids Imports (billion 2005$)    0.00     0.00     0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00            0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00
Net Crude Oil Imports (billion 2005$)     77.40    85.21    93.97 102.60 110.94 126.11          149.39   170.99   159.14    144.83
Net Agriculture Exports (billion 2005$)   25.64    25.53    20.40 19.29 14.24 12.35              11.48    10.92    11.61     14.99
GHG EMISSIONS (mmt CO2-e)
GHG Emissions                             7091.9 7680.1 8201.5 8595.6 9219.3 9884.8 10711.0 11507.3 12433.3                13283.3
CO2 Emissions                             5984.3 6517.4 6995.2 7357.3 7915.4 8518.8 9283.0 10012.9 10871.0                 11655.9
CH4 Emissions                              583.4 602.0 611.6 617.1 630.5 643.1        652.2   663.6   676.5                  683.1
N2O Emissions                              385.2 387.9 381.3 372.4 366.5 365.6        372.8   380.8   391.0                  407.3
Fluorinated Gases Emissions                140.0 173.8 214.4 250.0 308.1 358.5        404.3   451.3   496.2                  538.5
PRIMARY ENERGY USE (EJ)
Coal                                       22.6     24.3     25.8     26.6     30.9     35.0      39.9     44.8     49.6      53.3
Total Petroleum Products                   42.0     46.0     49.6     52.6     55.2     58.8      63.9     68.8     73.6      78.5
   Including Shale Oil                      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      9.7      19.6
Natural Gas                                22.5     24.7     26.8     28.9     28.4     28.3      27.7     26.8     25.8      25.1
Nuclear (primary energy eq)                 9.3      9.0      8.8      8.7      8.6      8.5       8.4      8.4      8.3       8.3
Hydro (primary energy eq)                   2.9      2.8      2.8      2.8      2.8      2.9       2.9      3.0      3.1       3.2
Renewable Elec. (primary energy eq)         0.6      0.7      0.8      1.0      0.9      1.2       1.1      1.4      1.5       1.6
Biomass Liquids                             0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
Total Primary Energy Use                   99.8    107.6    114.6    120.5    126.8    134.6     143.9    153.1    161.9     170.0
Reduced Use from Reference                  0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION (EJ)
Coal w/o CCS                                6.9      7.6      8.3      8.6     10.2     11.7      13.4     15.2     17.0      18.5
Oil w/o CCS                                 0.3      0.3      0.3      0.3      0.4      0.4       0.4      0.5      0.5       0.6
Gas w/o CCS                                 2.1      2.5      3.1      3.9      3.3      3.1       2.9      2.7      2.4       2.3
Nuclear                                     3.0      3.0      3.0      3.0      3.0      3.1       3.1      3.1      3.1       3.1
Hydro                                       0.9      1.0      1.0      1.0      1.0      1.0       1.1      1.1      1.1       1.2
Other Renewables                            0.2      0.2      0.3      0.3      0.3      0.4       0.4      0.5      0.6       0.6
Gas with CCS                                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
Coal with CCS                               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
Total Electricity Production               13.4     14.6     15.9     17.1     18.2     19.7      21.3     23.1     24.7      26.2


                       Full results from other runs are available as Appendix C at
               http://mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt146_AppendixC.pdf.




                                                            49
                                             Tables and Figures

Table 1. EPPA Model Details

 Country or Region†                           Sectors                                        Factors
 Developed                                    Non-Energy                                     Capital
  United States (USA)                          Agriculture (AGRI)                            Labor
  Canada (CAN)                                 Services (SERV)                               Crude Oil Resources
  Japan (JPN)                                  Energy-Intensive Products (EINT)              Natural Gas Resources
  European Union+ (EUR)                        Other Industries Products (OTHR)              Coal Resources
  Australia & New Zealand (ANZ)                Industrial Transportation (TRAN)              Shale Oil Resources
  Former Soviet Union (FSU)                    Household Transportation (HTRN)               Nuclear Resources
  Eastern Europe (EET)                        Energy                                         Hydro Resources
 Developing                                    Coal (COAL)                                   Wind/Solar Resources
  India (IND)                                  Crude Oil (OIL)                               Land
  China (CHN)                                  Refined Oil (ROIL)
  Indonesia (IDZ)                              Natural Gas (GAS)
  Higher Income East Asia (ASI)                Electric: Fossil (ELEC)
  Mexico (MEX)                                 Electric: Hydro (HYDR)
  Central & South America (LAM)                Electric: Nuclear (NUCL)
  Middle East (MES)                            Electric: Solar and Wind (SOLW)
  Africa (AFR)                                 Electric: Biomass (BIOM)
  Rest of World (ROW)                          Electric: Natural Gas Combined Cycle (NGCC)
                                               Electric: Coal with CCS (IGCAP)
                                               Electric: Gas with CCS (NGCAP)
                                               Oil from Shale (SYNO)
                                               Synthetic Gas (SYNG)
                                               Liquids from Biomass (B-OIL)
 †
     Specific detail on regional groupings is provided in Paltsev et al. (2005).




                                                        50
Table 2a. Congressional Bills, Basic Features

                Lieberman-McCain           Bingaman-Specter            Kerry-Snowe 2007            Sanders-Boxer 2007         Waxman 2006              Feinstein August        Udall-Petri 2006
                2007                       Draft 2007                                                                                                  2006
Bill Number/    S.280; Climate                                         S.485; Global Warming       S.309; Global Warming      H.R.5642; The Safe                               H.R.5049; Keep
Name            Stewardship and                                        Reduction Act of 2007       Pollution Reduction Act    Climate Act of 2006                              America Competitive
                Innovation Act of 2007                                                             of 2007                    (companion bill to                               Global Warming
                                                                                                                              Boxer-Sanders)                                   Policy Act of 2006
Basic           Mandatory, market-         Mandatory, market-          Mandatory, market-          Mandatory, market-         Mandatory, market-       Mandatory, market-      Mandatory, market-
Framework       based, cap on total        based, cap on GHG           based, cap on total         based, system to be        based, cap on total      based, cap on total     based, cap on total
                emissions for all large    "intensity" (emissions      emissions for all large     determined by EPA,         emissions for all        emissions for all       emissions for all
                emitters: cap & trade      per $ GDP): cap &           emitters: cap & trade       allows for cap & trade     large emitters: cap &    large emitters: cap &   large emitters: cap &
                                           trade with safety valve                                 in 1 or more sectors       trade                    trade                   trade with safety
                                                                                                                                                                               valve
Targets         Return emissions to        Targeted reduction in       Freeze emissions in         Freeze emissions in        Freeze emissions in      Cut emissions to 70%    Cap for emissions set
                2004 levels by 2012, to    GHG intensity is 2.6%       2010, and gradually         2010, achieve 1990         2010, reduce by 2%       below 1990 levels by    prospectively at
                1990 levels by 2020,       annually between 2012       reduce to 65% below         levels by 2020, reduce     per year starting in     2050.                   emission levels three
                and to 60% below 1990      and 2021, then 3.0% per     2000 levels by 2050.        by 1/3 of 80% below        2011 to reach 1990                               years after the
                levels by 2050. Target     year beginning in 2022.     Reduce to 1990 levels       1990 levels by 2030, by    levels by 2020, then                             enactment of the
                emissions are (in mmt                                  by 2020, then 2.5% per      2/3 of 80% below 1990      by 5% per year                                   legislation.
                of CO2): 2012-2019 =                                   year between 2020 and       levels by 2040, and        starting in 2021 to
                6,130; 2020-2029 =                                     2029, and 3.5% per year     80% below 1990 levels      reach 80% below
                5,239; 2030-2049 =                                     between 2030 and 2050.      by 2050.                   1990 levels by 2050.
                4,100; and 2050 on =
                2,096.
Allocation of   Undetermined percent       10% auctioned, 55%          Undetermined percent        Undetermined               Undetermined             Undetermined            20% free, 20% to
Allowances      auctioned, balance         free (but gradually         auctioned, balance          allocation, any            percent auctioned,       auctioning and          states (reduced
                allocated free             phased out), 29% to         allocated free              allowances not             balance allocated free   allocation              yearly), remaining
                                           states, 5% for ag.                                      allocated to covered                                                        60% to Treasury,
                                           sequestration, 1% early                                 entities should be given                                                    Energy Department,
                                           reduction                                               to non-covered entities                                                     and State Department
Additional      • Covered sectors          • Regulated at upstream     • Total GHGs less than      • Less then 3.6oF (2oC)    • Less then 3.6oF        • Keep temperature      • Regulated at
Details         produce about 85% of       • Safety valve: if traded   450 ppmv                    temperature increase,      (2oC) temperature        increase to 1 or 2oC    upstream
                national emissions;        allowances hit safety       • Banking                   and total GHGs less        increase, and total                              • Safety valve: $25
                • Covered entities emit,   valve price, gov. issues    • Provisions to track,      than 450 ppmv              GHGs less than 450                               per ton of carbon
                or produce or import       more allowances at that     report, verify emissions    • Suggests declining       ppmv                                             (just under $7 per ton
                products that emit, over   price: $7/metric ton of     • Non-compliance            emissions cap with         • Banking                                        of CO2), price can
                10,000 metric tons of      CO2 (escalates annually     penalties                   technology-indexed         • Provisions to track,                           only increase if the
                GHGs per year              at 5% real)                                             stop price                 report, verify                                   President and Sec. of
                • Banking                  • Banking                                               • Provisions to track,     emissions                                        State certify that
                • Borrowing (up to         • Non-compliance                                        report, verify emissions   • Non-compliance                                 other countries are
                25%)                       penalties                                                                          penalties                                        controlling their
                • Provisions to track,     • Emissions can                                                                                                                     emissions
                report, verify emissions   increase if GDP grows
                • Non-compliance           faster than intensity
                penalties                  reductions, and can
                                           exceed cap if safety
                                           valve is used



                                                                                                  51
Table 2b. Congressional Bills, Additional Details and Features
                 Lieberman-McCain             Bingaman-Specter            Kerry-Snowe 2007             Sanders-Boxer 2007           Waxman 2006            Feinstein August          Udall-Petri 2006
                 2007                         Draft 2007                                                                                                   2006
Provisions       • Credits for approved       • Every 5 yrs review of                                  • Task Force on                                     • Credits for             • 10% of allowances
Related to       projects in developing       trading partners, and                                    International Clean,                                protecting rain forests   to the State
Foreign          countries (e.g. CDM)         Congress can change                                      Low Carbon Energy                                   in developing             Department for
Reductions       • Acceptance of foreign      US cap or safety valve                                   Cooperation to increase                             countries                 spending on zero-
                 allowances                   • Credits for approved                                   clean technology use                                • Proposed                carbon and low-
                                              projects in developing                                   and access in                                       acceptance of foreign     carbon projects in
                                              countries (e.g. CDM)                                     developing countries                                allowances                developing nations
                                              • Acceptance of foreign
                                              allowances
Credit           • Limited use of credits     • Use of credits from       • Credits from               • Credits from                                      • Use of credits from     • Credits from
Provisions       from sequestration,          sequestration, non-         sequestration                sequestration                                       sequestration, non-       sequestration
                 non-covered entities,        covered entities, the use                                • Renewable energy                                  covered entities,
                 and international            of fuels as feedstocks,                                  credit program                                      international projects,
                 projects (can offset up      the export of covered                                                                                        and responsible land
                 to 30%)                      fuel or other GHGs, and                                                                                      use
                 • Farmers and foresters,     international projects                                                                                       • Farmers and
                 can earn credits to sell     • Farmers and foresters,                                                                                     foresters, can earn
                 through sequestration        can earn credits to sell                                                                                     credits to sell through
                                              through sequestration                                                                                        sequestration
Other            • Climate Change             • Climate Change Trust      • Climate Reinvestment       • EPA to carry out R&D       • Climate              • Climate Action          • Advanced Research
Features         Credit Corporation:          Fund: proceeds from         Fund: proceeds from          • Sense of Senate to         Reinvestment Fund:     Fund: proceeds from       Projects Agency-
                 proceeds from                allowance auctions and      auctions, civil penalties,   increase federal funds       proceeds from          allowance auctions        Energy: 25% of
                 allowance auctions and       safety-valve payments,      and interest, used to        for R&D 100% each            allowance auctions     and interest, used for    allowances for new
                 trading activities, used     used for technology         further Act and for          year for 10 years            and civil penalties,   technology R&D,           Energy Department
                 for transition assistance,   R&D. Fund capped at         transition assistance        • Transition assistance      used to further Act    wildlife restoration,     technology program
                 habitat restoration, and     $50 billion (excess goes    • National Climate           • Renewable and energy       and for transition     and natural resource      • 25% of allowances
                 technology R&D               to U.S. Treasury)           Change Vulnerability         efficiency portfolios:       assistance             protection                to the Secretary of
                                                                          and Resilience Program       20% of electricity must      • Renewable and        • Renewable portfolio     the Treasury, who
                                                                          • EPA to carry out R&D       be renewable by 2020         energy efficiency      for utilities;            deposits proceeds
                                                                          • Renewable and energy       • Mandatory emissions        portfolios: 20% of     • Carmakers must          from selling the
                                                                          efficiency portfolios:       standards for all electric   electricity must be    improve mileage by        allowances into the
                                                                          20% of electricity must      generation units built       renewable by 2020      10 mpg by 2017            Treasury
                                                                          be renewable by 2020         after 2012 and final         • Motor vehicle        • Emission standards
                                                                          • Motor vehicle              standards for all units,     emission standard      for power producers
                                                                          emission standard            regardless of when they                             • Increase availability
                                                                          • Renewable fuel             were built, by 2030                                 of biodiesel and E-85
                                                                          required in gasoline         • Motor vehicle                                     fuel pumps;
                                                                          • E-85 fuel pumps            emission standard                                   • Plans to extend
                                                                          • Consumer tax credits                                                           California-style
                                                                          for energy efficient                                                             green-technology
                                                                          motor vehicles                                                                   programs nationwide

* Feinstein Bill: Based on a San Francisco Chronicle article (Hall and Kay, 2006). Implementation is now expected to be proposed through 5 separate bills to be introduced in 2007.
* Olver-Gilchrist: HR-620, the Climate Stewardship Act of 2007, is similar to McCain-Lieberman 2007 above.
Sources: US House of Representatives, 2006a,b; US Senate, 2007a,b,c,d

                                                                                                   52
Table 3. Cumulative allowances available from 2012 to 2050
            Allowance Path                   Cumulative
                                            Allowances
                                           2012-2050, bmt
     Bingaman-Specter Draft 2007                306
           Udall-Petri 2006                     293
               287 bmt                          287
       Lieberman-McCain 2007                    216 (186)*
               203 bmt                          203
        Feinstein August 2006                   195
          Kerry-Snowe 2007                      179
         Sanders-Boxer 2007                     167
               167 bmt                          167
            Waxman 2007                         148
* 186 are the actual allowances for covered sectors; 216 is the estimate of total emissions
including uncovered sectors from WRI (2007). The actual national emissions depend on
growth in uncovered sectors.

Table 4. Core price and welfare results: US + World Policy
                  CO2-e Price ($/tCO2-e)              Change in Welfare (%)

             287 bmt    203 bmt     167 bmt        287 bmt   203 bmt   167 bmt
 2015          18         41          53             0.01     -0.04     -0.07
 2020          22         50          65            -0.13     -0.32     -0.55
 2025          26         61          79            -0.36     -0.69     -1.05
 2030          32         74          96            -0.45     -1.08     -1.47
 2035          39         90          117           -0.19     -0.77     -1.51
 2040          47         109         142           -0.12     -0.92     -1.84
 2045          57         133         172           -0.24     -1.28     -1.90
 2050          70         161         210           -0.18     -1.45     -1.79



Table 5. Relationship between ~ $27 per ton CO2-e price and recent average fuel
prices (Note: No adjustments for the effects of the policy on the producer price.)
              Fuel                  Base Price        Added        Added Cost
                                  Ave. 2002-2006      Cost ($)         (%)
                                     (2005$)
               Crude Oil ($/bbl)      $40.00          $12.20          30%
       Regular Gasoline ($/gal)        $1.82           $0.26          14%
             Heating Oil ($/gal)       $1.35           $0.29          21%
  Wellhead Natural Gas ($/tcf)         $5.40           $1.49          28%
 Residential Natural Gas ($/tcf)      $11.05           $1.50          14%
       Utility Coal ($/short ton)     $26.70          $55.30          207%
Source: U.S. average prices for 2002-2006 computed from DOE EIA price data. Base
cost price is the 5-year average price, except coal (2001-2005). To the gasoline price we
have added $0.42 to include the federal and an average of state gasoline excise taxes.



                                              53
Table 6. Potential CO2-e auction or tax revenue

              2015      2020       2025      2030      2035    2040    2045    2050
 Total Potential Auction/Tax Revenue (billions $/yr)
 287 bmt       130       159      193        235       286     348     423     515
 203 bmt       287       321      356        391       425     455     477     489
 167 bmt       366       392      413        425       423     399     346     250
 US Pop.      321        334       347        359      369     379     388     397
 Potential Tax disbursement/family of 4 ($/yr)*
 287 bmt      1,630    1,900     2,230       2,620     3,100   3,670   4,360   5,190
 203 bmt      3,580    3,850     4,100       4,360     4,600   4,800   4,920   4,920
 167 bmt      4,560    4,700     4,760       4,740     4,580   4,210   3,560   2,520
 CO2 Revenue as a Percentage of Non-CO2 Federal Tax Revenue (%)
 287 bmt      7         7         7        8         8        9          9      10
 203 bmt     15        14        14       13        12       11         11      10
 167 bmt     19        17        16       14        12       10          8       5
*Rounded to nearest $10.


Table 7. Isolating terms of trade effects on US welfare (% change from reference)

               Welfare in the Core Cases
               Minus Welfare for US Alone
    Year        287        203       167
                bmt        bmt       bmt
 2015-2050
                0.09       -0.01     -0.12
   NPV
    2015         0.00      -0.05     -0.02
    2020        -0.05      -0.17     -0.14
    2025        -0.05      -0.25     -0.06
    2030        -0.13      -0.35     -0.03
    2035         0.12       0.35      0.08
    2040         0.21       0.39     -0.23
    2045         0.30       0.12     -0.28
    2050         0.34      -0.10     -0.24




                                             54
Table 8. CO2-e prices with small emitting sectors exempted, banking case

  Year         Economy-Wide Cap          Agricultural, Households,
                                        Services Excluded from Cap


          287 bmt   203 bmt   167 bmt   287 bmt   203 bmt   167 bmt
                                         SEC       SEC       SEC
 2015        18       41        53        14        31        41
 2020        22       50        65        17        37        50
 2025        26       61        79        20        45        61
 2030        32       74        96        25        55        74
 2035        39       90       117        30        67        90
 2040        47       109      142        37        82       109
 2045        57       133      172        44        99       133
 2050        70       161      210        54       121       161




Table 9. Welfare effects with small emitting sectors exempted, banking case

  Year         Economy-Wide Cap          Agricultural, Households,
                                        Services Excluded from Cap


          287 bmt   203 bmt   167 bmt   287 bmt   203 bmt   167 bmt
                                         SEC       SEC       SEC
 2015        0.01    -0.04     -0.07      0.01     -0.02     -0.04
 2020       -0.13    -0.32     -0.55     -0.10     -0.23     -0.32
 2025       -0.36    -0.69     -1.05     -0.34     -0.52     -0.74
 2030       -0.45    -1.08     -1.47     -0.33     -0.82     -1.19
 2035       -0.19    -0.77     -1.51     -0.14     -0.72     -1.11
 2040       -0.12    -0.92     -1.84     -0.10     -0.80     -1.42
 2045       -0.24    -1.28     -1.90     -0.17     -0.99     -1.41
 2050       -0.18    -1.45     -1.79     -0.27     -1.11     -1.30




                                        55
Table 10. US welfare effects of emissions trading in the no banking cases

           287 bmt    287      203 bmt        203         167 bmt   167 bmt    ROW only,    ROW
            No TR    bmt TR     No TR        bmt TR        No TR      TR        No TR      only, TR
 2015        0.01      0.00         0.01          0.00      0.01      0.00          0.00     0.01
 2020       -0.06      0.00        -0.13         -0.01     -0.20     -0.02         -0.01    -0.01
 2025       -0.22     -0.14        -0.43         -0.24     -0.64     -0.33          0.04     0.02
 2030       -0.31     -0.23        -0.76         -0.47     -1.08     -0.62          0.09     0.09
 2035       -0.23     -0.12        -0.93         -0.83     -1.48     -1.32          0.36     0.37
 2040       -0.30     -0.26        -1.28         -1.27     -1.91     -1.91          0.46     0.46
 2045       -0.39     -0.40        -1.54         -1.65     -2.62     -2.45          0.52     0.52
 2050       -0.46     -0.41        -1.68         -1.88     -4.86     -2.81          0.62     0.65


Table 11. Continental US hypothetical maximum biomass energy potential

  Continental US,     Hectares          Acres            Maximum     Maximum
 current land uses    (millions)      (millions)            dry      liquid fuel
                                                         biomass        (EJ)
                                                           (EJ)
 Cropland                176               442              53          21
 Grassland               235               587              70          28
 Forest                  260               651              78          31
 Parks, etc              119               297              NA          NA
 Urban                   24                60               NA          NA
 Desert, wetland,        91                228              NA          NA
 etc
 US Total                906               2265            202           81
 Source: Land area is from USDA (2006). Dry biomass production is based
 on production of 15 oven dry tons per hectare per year = 300 GJ/ha/yr
 (IPCC, 2001). Maximum assumes all land of that type is used for biomass
 production, and total assumes parks/preserves and urban land would not
 be used and that desert, wetland, etc. would not be used and/or would
 not be productive. Maximum liquid fuel assumes that 40% of the energy
 in the biomass is converted to liquid, and the remaining is used for
 process energy or remains in other by-products.




                                                 56
Table 12. Global and US Cumulative Emissions

                           Global        Global         US             US
       Policy/ Target    2012-2050,    2012-2100,    2012-2050,     2012-2100,
                         bmt CO2-e     bmt CO2-e     bmt CO2-e      bmt CO2-e

 Reference                 2,461          7,408           419          1,278
       Global and US emissions for a globally optimized time path to meet
                             stabilization targets*
 CO2           CO2-e**
 750           925          2,031         4,924          364           888
 650           812          1,842         4,082          344           741
 550           675          1,530         3,033          282           539
 450           523          1,145         2,168          229           399

    Global and US emissions in long-term scenarios simulated in this report
 Global participation     1,577         3,133          287             662
   287 bmt
 Global participation     1,494         2,834          203             363
   203 bmt
 Global participation     1,456         2,710          167             236
   167 bmt
 Developing
                          2,132         3,475          203             363
 Delayed***

 Developed only***          2,132         5,789          203           363

*From US CCSP (2006) as simulated by the MIT IGSM
**CO2-e levels are calculated by estimating the concentrations of CO2 that would
generate the same radiative forcing that comes from CO2, CH4, N2O, PFCs, HFCs, and
SF6 in the CCSP scenarios.
***Developing Delayed and Developed Only cases are based on the 203 bmt core case




                                           57
Table 13. Congressional Proposal Summary

 Allowance Path      Nearest Case         CO2-e Price,         Welfare cost           Comments
                                              $/T                   %
                                         2015      2050       2020     2050
Bingaman-          SV USA only             7        39        -0.06    -0.46    Gains in USA+ROW
Specter Draft      SV USA+ROW                                 -0.07    +0.45    stem from terms-of-
2007                                                                            trade effects
Udall-Petri 2006                                 Similar to Bingaman-Specter
Lieberman-         203 bmt SEC                                                 National emissions
McCain 2007                                31        121      -0.23    -1.11   allowed estimated at
                                                                               216 bmt, costs would
                                                                               thus be slightly lower.
Feinstein August   203 bmt                                                     National emissions
2006                                       41        161    -0.32     -1.45    allowed is 195bmt, costs
                                                                               would be slightly higher.
                                                                               Policies and measures
                                                                               rather than a pure cap
                                                                               and trade.
Kerry-Snowe        Between 203 and                                             Calculated as halfway
2007               167 bmt                ~47       ~141    ~-0.28   ~-1.62 between these two
                                                                               cases. Includes
                                                                               additional efficiency
                                                                               standards and other
                                                                               features.
Sanders-Boxer      167 bmt                                                     Many other features of
2007                                                                           the Bill—e.g. efficiency
                                           53        210    -0.55     -1.79
                                                                               standards, renewable
                                                                               portfolio requirements—
                                                                               are not included.
Waxman 2007        At 148 bmt, somewhat tighter than Sanders-Boxer, and so costs would be higher




                                            58
                                   Allowance Allocation: Congressional Bills and Core Cases
                        9,000

                        8,000

                        7,000
 Emissions, mmt CO2-e




                        6,000

                        5,000

                        4,000

                        3,000

                        2,000

                        1,000

                           0
                           1990           1995   2000   2005   2010      2015    2020      2025   2030   2035      2040     2045   2050

                                                                                Year

                                Bingaman-Specter Draft 2007           Lieberman-McCain 2007*             Udall-Petri 2006
                                Waxman 2007                           Sanders-Boxer 2007                 Kerry-Snow e 2007
                                Feinstein August 2006
                                287 bmt                               203 bmt                            167 bmt


* For Lieberman-McCain, this is the allowance path for covered sectors only.

Figure 1. Scenarios of allowance allocation over time




                                                                        59
                                     GHG Emissions and Allowance Allocation

                             14000


                             12000
     .




                             10000
     Total GHGs, mmt CO2-e




                             8000


                             6000


                             4000


                             2000


                                0
                                     2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                              Year

                                      167-A llo wances   167-Emissio ns        203-A llo wances
                                      203-Emissio ns     287-A llo wances      287-Emissio ns
                                      Reference




Figure 2. Total GHG emissions and associated allowance allocation path




                                                                          60
Panel a. CO2-e Prices

                                                     CO2-e Prices
                           250
                                        287 bmt
                           200
  Price, $/tCO2-e



                                        203 bmt
                           150          167 bmt

                           100

                           50

                            0
                            2015      2020    2025       2030     2035    2040    2045   2050

                                                            Year



Panel b. Welfare Effects

                                                   Welfare Changes
                            0.00
       Welfare Change, %




                           -0.50

                           -1.00
                                         287 bmt
                           -1.50
                                         203 bmt
                           -2.00         167 bmt

                           -2.50
                               2015    2020       2025    2030     2035    2040   2045   2050
                                                                Year


Figure 3. CO2-e prices and welfare effects in the core scenarios




                                                                          61
                                          Distribution of Reductions, 203 bmt Case
                         12000

                         10000
  Emissions, mmt CO2-e



                         8000

                         6000

                         4000

                         2000

                            0
                                 2005   2010   2015    2020    2025    2030    2035    2040   2045   2050

                                                                  Year
                                                      Non-CO2 Reductions   CO2 Reductions




Figure 4. Distribution of emissions reductions, 203 bmt case




                                                                  62
                                Panel a. Petroleum Product Prices                                                     Panel b. Natural Gas Prices

                                  Effects on Petroleum Prices                                                              Effects on Natural Gas Prices
                          2.5                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                3.5




                                                                                        Price Index, 2005=1.0
Price Index, 2005=1.0




                           2                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                2.5
                          1.5
                                                                                                                  2
                           1                     Ref                                                            1.5                                   Ref
                                                 287 bmt                                                                                              287 bmt
                                                                                                                  1
                          0.5                    203 bmt                                                                                              203 bmt
                                                 167 bmt                                                        0.5                                   167 bmt
                           0                                                                                      0
                           2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                                      2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                  Year                                                                                     Year



                                Panel c. Coal Prices                                                                  Panel d. Electricity Prices

                                     Effects on Coal Prices                                                                 Effects on Electricity Prices
                          1.4                                                                                   2.5
                          1.2
  Price Index, 2005=1.0




                                                                                    Price Index, 2005=1.0


                                                                                                                 2
                           1
                          0.8                                                                                   1.5

                          0.6                              Ref                                                   1                                  Ref
                          0.4                              287 bmt                                                                                  287 bmt
                                                           203 bmt                                              0.5                                 203 bmt
                          0.2                              167 bmt                                                                                  167 bmt
                           0                                                                                     0
                           2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                                     2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                 Year                                                                                      Year



                                Figure 5. Fuel prices in the reference and core scenarios




                                                                               63
                                   Panel a. Reference Case                                                                            Panel b. 287 bmt Case

                                      Primary Energy Use, Reference                                                                              Primary Energy Use, 287 Case
                       200
                                                                                                                                200
                                                                                 Biomass Liquids
                                                                                                                                                                                           Reduced Use
                       150                                                       Renew able Elec.
     Energy use (EJ)




                                                                                                                                150




                                                                                                         Energy Use (EJ)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Biomass Liquids
                                                                                 Hydro
                                                                                                                                                                                           Renew able Elec.
                       100                                                       Nuclear
                                                                                                                                100                                                        Hydro
                                                                                 Gas
                                                                                                                                                                                           Nuclear
                                                                                 Shale
                        50                                                                                                      50                                                         Gas
                                                                                 Petrol. Prod.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Shale
                                                                                 Coal
                                                                                                                                                                                           Petrol. Prod.
                         0                                                                                                       0
                             2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                                                        2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050    Coal

                                                   Year                                                                                                     Year



                                   Panel c. 203 bmt Case                                                                              Panel d. 167 bmt Case

                                        Primary Energy Use, 203 Case                                                                             Primary Energy Use, 167 Case
                       200                                                                                                      200
                                                                                 Reduced Use                                                                                               Reduced Use

                                                                                 Biomass Liquids                                                                                           Biomass Liquids
                       150                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                              Energy Use (EJ)
Energy Use (EJ)




                                                                                 Renew able Elec.                                                                                          Renew able Elec.

                                                                                 Hydro                                                                                                     Hydro
                       100                                                                                                      100                                                        Nuclear
                                                                                 Nuclear
                                                                                 Gas                                                                                                       Gas

                       50                                                        Shale                                           50                                                        Shale
                                                                                 Petrol. Prod.                                                                                             Petrol. Prod.
                                                                                 Coal                                                                                                      Coal
                        0                                                                                                         0
                             2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050                                                         2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                   Year                                                                                                      Year




                                   Figure 6. Primary energy use in the reference and core scenarios




                                                                                                    64
                                           CO2-e Prices
                    250
                             203 bmt
                    200      203 bmt US+DEV
  Price, $/tCO2-e




                             203 bmt US only
                    150


                    100


                    50


                     0
                     2015   2020    2025       2030        2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                  Year


Figure 7. Effects of alternative policies abroad on US CO2-e prices, no allowance
trading




                                                      65
                            Panel a. 287 bmt Case

                                                      Welfare Changes
                           0.00
                          -0.20
                          -0.40
  Welfare Change, %




                          -0.60
                          -0.80
                          -1.00
                          -1.20               287 bmt
                          -1.40               287 US+DEV
                          -1.60               287 bmt US only
                          -1.80
                          -2.00
                              2015   2020       2025       2030    2035      2040   2045   2050
                                                               Year



                            Panel b. 203 bmt Case

                                                      Welfare Changes
                           0.00
                          -0.20
                          -0.40
  Welfare Change, %




                          -0.60
                          -0.80
                          -1.00
                          -1.20
                                            203 bmt
                          -1.40
                                            203 bmt US+DEV
                          -1.60
                          -1.80             203 bmt US only
                          -2.00
                              2015   2020       2025          2030   2035    2040   2045   2050
                                                                 Year



                            Panel c. 167 bmt Case

                                                      Welfare Changes
                           0.00
                          -0.20
                          -0.40
      Welfare Change, %




                          -0.60
                          -0.80
                          -1.00
                          -1.20
                          -1.40             167 bmt
                          -1.60             167 US +DEV
                          -1.80             167 bmt US only
                          -2.00
                              2015   2020        2025         2030    2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                  Year



Figure 8. Effects of alternative policies abroad on US welfare, no trading



                                                                             66
                             Panel a. CO2-e Prices

                                                           CO2-e Prices
                           250

                                              287 bmt
                           200                203 bmt
  Price, $/tCO2-e




                                              167 bmt
                           150                287 bmt NB
                                              203 bmt NB
                           100                167 bmt NB


                           50


                            0
                            2010       2015     2020       2025    2030    2035   2040   2045   2050

                                                                   Year



                             Panel b. Welfare Changes

                                                       Welfare Changes
                             0.00

                            -1.00
       Welfare Change, %




                            -2.00                  287 bmt
                                                   203 bmt
                            -3.00                  167 bmt
                                                   287 bmt NB
                            -4.00                  203 bmt NB
                                                   167 bmt NB
                            -5.00

                            -6.00
                                2010     2015     2020      2025    2030   2035   2040   2045   2050

                                                                    Year



Figure 9. Effects of banking: no banking (NB) and core cases (dashed lines)




                                                                           67
                                            Economy-Wide Emissions
                         10000

                         9000

                         8000
  Emissions, mmt CO2-e




                         7000

                         6000
                                          287 bmt
                         5000
                                          203 bmt
                         4000
                                          167 bmt
                         3000             287 bmt SEC
                         2000             203 bmt SEC
                                          167 bmt SEC
                         1000

                            0
                            1997   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020   2025   2030   2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                                 Year


Figure 10. Economy-wide emissions with sectoral policies (SEC) compared with the
core scenarios with banking




                                                                      68
                                                 Panel a. Nuclear Generation
                                                              US Nuclear Production
                                        25
                                                    203 bmt
      Electricity Generation, EJ


                                        20          203 bmt Nuclear

                                        15

                                        10

                                         5

                                         0
                                                 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                                          Year

                                                 Panel b. Coal Generation with CCS
                                                     US Coal Electricity Generation with CCS
                                        25
                                                   203 bmt
 Electricity Generation, EJ




                                        20         203 bmt Nuclear

                                        15

                                        10

                                        5

                                        0
                                                 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                                          Year

                                                 Panel c. Coal Generation without CCS
                                                   US Coal Electricity Generation without CCS
                                         25
                                                    203 bmt
           Electricity Generation, EJ




                                         20         203 bmt Nuclear

                                         15

                                         10

                                             5

                                             0
                                                  2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                                           Year



Figure 11. US electricity generation in the expanded nuclear case and the core 203
bmt case




                                                                                      69
                               Panel a. Safety Valve Price Paths

                                               Safety Valve Price Paths
                          90
                          80            SV $6 to $39
                          70
                                        SV Revised 2030
Price, $/tCO2-e




                          60
                          50
                          40
                          30
                          20
                          10
                          0
                          2012       2017      2022      2027    2032        2037      2042     2047
                                                                Year


                               Panel b. Welfare effect

                                  Welfare Effects, $6 to $39/tCO2-e Safety Valve
                           0.80
                                            ROW only
                           0.60             SV US+ROW
      Welfare Change, %




                           0.40             SV US only
                                            SV Revised 2030
                           0.20

                           0.00

                          -0.20

                          -0.40

                          -0.60
                              2015      2020      2025      2030          2035      2040      2045     2050
                                                                   Year


                               Panel c. US Emissions

                                                       US Emissions
                          16000
                                            Ref
                          14000
 Emissions, mmt CO2-e




                                            ROW only
                          12000             SV US+ROW
                                            SV US only
                          10000             SV Revised 2030
                           8000
                           6000
                           4000
                           2000
                               0
                               1997 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
                                                           Year


Figure 12. Effects of a “safety valve” at $6 in 2012 rising to $39/tCO2-e in 2050



                                                                                 70
                       Panel a. Pre-trade prices, US and ROW, with trade among ROW regions

                                          Pre-trade CO2-e Prices
                      250
                                 203 bmt ROW TR
                      200        167 bmt ROW TR
  Price, $/tCO2-e




                                 ROW 203 bmt
                      150        ROW 167 bmt

                      100


                      50


                       0
                       2015    2020       2025      2030          2035   2040   2045    2050
                                                           Year




                       Panel b. World prices with US trading, ROW pre-trade

                               Trading and Pre-Trade Prices in ROW
                      160

                      140             203 bmt TR
                                      167 bmt TR
                      120
    Price, $/tCO2-e




                                      ROW 203 bmt
                      100
                                      ROW 167 bmt
                       80

                       60

                       40

                       20

                        0
                        2015   2020       2025      2030          2035   2040   2045   2050
                                                           Year




Figure 13. CO2-e prices and emissions trading




                                                                    71
               Panel a. US

                                       US Liquid Biofuels Use
              40.0

              35.0
                      203 bmt
              30.0    203 bmt NobioTR
              25.0    167 bmt
   Use (EJ)




                      167 bmt NobioTR
              20.0

              15.0

              10.0

               5.0

               0.0
                      2015      2020     2025     2030   2035     2040    2045    2050
                                                     Year



               Panel b. World Total

                                   World Liquid Biofuels Use
              140.0

              120.0      287 bmt
                         287 bmt NobioTR
              100.0
                         203 bmt
   Use (EJ)




               80.0      203 bmt NobioTR
                         167 bmt
               60.0
                         167 bmt NobioTR
               40.0

               20.0

                0.0
                      2015       2020      2025    2030    2035    2040    2045     2050
                                                       Year


Figure 14. Liquid biofuel use, with and without international trade in biofuels




                                                            72
                                                   Net Agricultural Exports
                                 40

                                 20
   Net Exports, billions of $



                                  0

                                -20

                                -40
                                                 Ref
                                -60
                                                 167 bmt
                                -80              167 bmt NobioTR

                                -100
                                   2005   2010   2015      2020    2025   2030    2035   2040   2045   2050

                                                                      Year


Figure 15. Net agricultural exports in the 167 bmt case, with and without biofuels
trading




                                                                             73
                       Reference

                       Developed only

                       Developing countries
                       delayed
                       Global participation
                       Global participation




                                                                               287 bmt

                                                                               203 bmt
                                                                               167 bmt




Figure 16. CO2 concentrations in six scenarios using MIT IGSM; see text for details




                                              74
                            Change of Annual Mean SAT (C)




                Reference                            Global participation, 203 bmt
                                                          upper          287 bmt
                Developed only
                                                          lower          167 bmt

                Developing countries
                delayed

Figure 17. Global mean surface temperature increase in six scenarios using MIT
IGSM



                                       75
