NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUSINESS GROUPS AND THE BIG PUSH:
MEIJI JAPAN'S MASS PRIVATIZATION AND SUBSEQUENT GROWTH
Randall Morck
Masao Nakamura
Working Paper 13171
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13171

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We are grateful for helpful comments and suggestions from participants in the Society for the Advancement
of Socio-Economics 2006 conference in Trier, Germany, from Caroline Fohlin, Juro Teranishi, Yupana
Wiwattanakantang and Bernard Yeung; and especially from Gary Herrigel Kenneth Lipartito, and
two anonymous referees. Support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Business Groups and the Big Push: Meiji Japan's Mass Privatization and Subsequent Growth
Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura
NBER Working Paper No. 13171
June 2007, Revised July 2007
JEL No. G3,L23,L25,N15,N25,O14,O16,O19,O2,O21,O25,O38,O53,P1,P11,P12
ABSTRACT
Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and others posit that rapid development requires a 'big push' -- the coordinated
rapid growth of diverse complementary industries, and suggests a role for government in providing
such coordination. We argue that Japan's zaibatsu, or pyramidal business groups, provided this coordination
after the Meiji government failed at the task. We propose that pyramidal business groups are private
sector mechanisms for coordinating and financing 'big push' growth, and that unique historical circumstances
aided their success in prewar Japan. Specifically, Japan uniquely marginalized its feudal elite; withdrew
its hand with a propitious mass privatization that rallied the private sector; marginalized an otherwise
entrenched first generation of wealthy industrialists; and remained open to foreign trade and capital.
Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Masao Nakamura
Faculty of Commerce and Business Admin.
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, B.C.CANADA V6T 1Z2
masao.nakamura@commerce.ubc.ca

1 Introduction
Over sixty years ago, Rosenstein-Rodan proposed a state-coordinated big push to kick-start sustained
growth.1 After decades off economists’ radar, the idea resurfaced in a 1989 model by Murphy, Shleifer,
and Vishny.2 Their intuition is cleaner: a car factory is scant use in a country without steel mills, oil
refineries, gas stations, mechanics, roads, or people with disposable income. Economic development
requires coordinated growth of demand and supply across multiple sectors, as firms in each exploit
increasing returns to scale – often with firms in one sector bearing losses as another develops. Without
coordination, growth falters because of a range of market failures.

With coordination, increasing

economies of scale in each growing industry spillover into growth opportunities in other sectors.3
A key problem is that first movers risk “hold-up” problems.4 “Hold up” occurs when one business’s
return depends on others’ actions. For example, digging a coal mine next to a planned steel mill exposes
the mine to a “hold-up” The steel company can demand cut price coal by threatening to walk away,
leaving the mine without a nearby customer. Each wants the other to move first.5 Information
asymmetries and adverse selection problems prevent the two parties from contracting their way out of the
impasse. At worst, nothing happens; at best, one or both operate on inefficient scales.
Vertical integration solves this problem under some circumstances, for if a single company digs the
mine and builds the steel mill, the problem evaporates.6

But the problem of coordinating rapid

development across an entire economy is much knottier.7 Some goods are complementary, so a creamery
does little business unless consumers have refrigerators. Other cross-industry dependencies take the form
1
Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South Eastern Europe,” Economic Journal 53
(1943).
2
Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Industrialization and the Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97
(1989): 1003-1026.
3
For a history of the development of these concepts, see Renee Prendergast “Marshallian External Economies,” Economic
Journal 103 (1993) 454-58.
4
See Oliver Williamson, “Markets and Hierarchies: Some Elementary Considerations,” American Economic Review (May
1973): 316-325 and Oliver Williamson, “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange,” American Economic
Review 73, no. 4 (1983): 519-40.
5
G. De Fraja, “After you sir. Hold-up, direct externalities, and sequential investment”, Games and Economic Behavior 26
(1999) 22—39.
6
Sanford Grossman and Oliver Hart, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration”
Journal of Political Economy 94 (1986) 691-719.
7
Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Industrialization and the Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97
(1989): 1003-1026.

2

of network externalities – for example, having a phone does a business little good if its suppliers and
customers lack phones.8 Financial, legal, and physical infrastructure development, all critical to an
economy’s ability to support entrepreneurship, share many characteristics of network externalities.9
Individuals investment in human capital also has such characteristics.10 Yet other coordination problems
turn on having enough consumer demand to achieve economies of scale in production.11 RosensteinRodan concludes that integrating all such interdependencies within a single entity is essentially a call for
central planning, and calls for the state to coordinate and subsidize a massive cross-industry surge of
capital investment – a big push.
Rostow defines economic takeoff as the transition from a low-income to a high income growth path;
and sees big push coordination lifting countries out of a poverty trap. 12 Kofi Annan’s UN Millennium
Project and Sachs’ shock therapy both echo Rosenstein-Rodan’s call for a big push to bring developing
countries to Rostow’s economic takeoff.13
But despite past big push efforts a growing income gap separates rich from poor countries.14 Easterly
despairs of big push plans because they provoke government failures.15 Bauer argues that development
depends on individual freedom, and that burdensome government causes poverty traps16. Hayek criticizes

8

See Shmuel S. Oren, Stephen A. Smith, and Robert B. Wilson, “Nonlinear Pricing in Markets with Interdependent
Demand,” Marketing Science 1 (1982) 287-313.
9
William Bygrave and Maria Minniti, “Social dynamics of entrepreneurship,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 24
(2000) 25-38.
10
Gary Becker, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura, “Human Capital, Fertility, and Economic Growth” Journal of
Political Economy 98 (1990) 512-37.
11
Kevin M. Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Income Distribution, Market Size And Industrialization,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (1989) 537-65.
12
W.W. Rostow, “The Takeoff into Self-Sustained Growth,” Economic Journal 66, no. 261 (1956): 25-48 envisions five
basic stages of development - traditional society, take-off preconditions, take-off, drive to maturity, and mass consumption.
13
The UN Millennium Project is described in Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium
Development Goals: Main Report (New York: United Nations, 2005); for Sach’s views, see Jeffrey D. Sachs, The End of
Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time (New York: Penguin Press, 2005).
14
For evidence on divergence, see Easterly, William, The Elusive Quest for Growth.(Cambridge, MIT Press, 2001); Danny
Quah, “Twin peaks: Growth and convergence in models of distribution dynamics,” Economic Journal 106, no. 437 (1996): 104556; Danny Quah, “Empirics for economic growth and convergence,” European Economic Review 40, no. 6 (1996a): 1353-60,
Lant Pritchett, “Divergence, Big Time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, no. 3 (1997): 3-17 and others. China and India
currently sustain historically high growth rates. Because of their large populations, the number of people emerging from poverty
is unprecedented, even though most low income countries seem mired in poverty traps. Nonetheless, both China and India remain
low income countries, challenged by high rates of rural poverty and illiteracy. See Prakash Loungani, “Inequality,” Finance &
Development 40, no. 3 (2003): 22.
15
William Easterly, “The Big Push Deja Vu: A Review of Jeffrey Sach's The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for
Our Time,” Journal of Economic Literature 44, no. 1 (2006): 1.
16
Peter Thomas Bauer, Dissent on Development: Studies and Debates in Development Economics (London: Weidenfeld &

3

Rosenstein-Rodan specifically, stressing that governments lack the detailed information needed to
coordinate a big push.17 Kornai adds that state subsidies distort investments by softening budget
constraints.18 Krueger argues that extensive government intervention magnifies returns to political rent
seeking, deepening poverty traps.19 Baumol and Murphy et al. explain how high political rent-seeking
returns divert entrepreneurs from the positive externality investments needed for a successful big push.20
Easterly’s growing gap highlights a deep inconsistency if the very state intervention needed to coordinate
a big push undermines it.
The only successful big push Easterly concedes is Meiji Japan.21 We therefore investigate this
success, and find it to be an informative anomaly. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Japan’s Meiji
government organized a big push, much like that advocated by the UN Millennium Project. In the late
19th century, the government capitalized and subsidized numerous state-owned enterprises (SOEs), but
government failure problems soon triggered a fiscal crisis. To restore public finances, Japan conducted a
mass privatization as the 19th century drew to a close. Wealthy families and entrepreneurs assembled
former SOEs into zaibatsu, large diversified pyramidal groups of listed firms. Japan then entered its high
growth era and Rostow estimates its economic takeoff as complete perhaps by 1900, 1914 at the latest.22
Highly industrially diversified business groups, of which zaibatsu are typical examples, are
ubiquitous in developing economies.23 We propose they are mechanisms for private sector coordination of

Nicolson, 1972) and Peter Thomas Bauer, Reality and Rhetoric: Studies in the Economics of Development (London: Weidenfeld
& Nicolson, 1984).
17
Friedrich Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American Economic Review 35, no. 4 (1945): 519-30.
18
Janos Kornai, The Economics of Shortage (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1980).
19
Anne Krueger, “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society” American Economic Review 64 (1974): 291-303.
20
William Baumol, “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive,” Journal of Political Economy 98
(1990): 893-921; Keven M. Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics (May 1991): 503-530; Kevin M. Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Why is Rentseeking Costly to Growth?” American Economic Review 82 (1993): 409-414.
21
Others, notably Jeffrey D. Sachs, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time (New York: Penguin Press,
2005), see ‘big push’ growth as critical in the economic histories of other developed economies too. Yet others stress Japan’s
mid 20th century growth as state directed; however this is the reconstruction of an industrial economy destroyed by war, not a big
push in the sense of Rosenstein-Rodan. Also, econometric evidence disputes positive role of state planning in postwar Japanese
reconstruction; see e.g. Richard Beason and David E. Weinstein, “Growth, Economies of Scale, and Targeting in Japan (19551990),” Review of Economics and Statistics 78, no. 2 (1996): 286-295.
22
W.W. Rostow, “The Takeoff into Self-Sustained Growth,” Economic Journal 66, no. 261 (1956): 25-48.
23
Tarun Khanna and Yishay Yafeh. “Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?” Journal of Economic
Literature (2007 forthcoming) document the extensive industrial diversification of typical business groups at length; Tarun
Khanna and J. Rivkin, “Estimating the Performance Effects of Business Groups in Emerging Markets,” Strategic Management

4

a big push growth via “tunneling” – transferring wealth from one group firm to another.24 With tunneling
coordinating growth across industries and a controlling shareholder preventing hold ups, business groups
provide an alternative to a state-orchestrated big push. 25 We concede that the generality of our arguments
remains speculative, and call for further research on Japan and other countries.
The article is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews relevant literature on business groups.
Section 3 describes Japan’s Meiji “shock therapy” marginalizing traditional elites. Section 4 describes the
state-initiated big push, fiscal crisis, and mass privatization. Section 5 describe zaibatsu-led big push and
the subsequent marginalization of their controlling shareholders. Section 6 concludes.

2. Previous Work on Business Groups
We are not proposing an alternative hypothesis to other economic explanations of business groups.
Rather, we seek to synthesize competing hypotheses into a single overarching explanation. Thus, rather
than test our thesis against alternative hypotheses, we draw on previous results to show that apparently
clashing explanations and evidence coalesce into our thesis, yet retain their individual validity.26 Thus,
much of what we say is not new.
Our thesis accords with Ohkawa and Rosovsky, who see zaibatsu as foreign technology importers.27
Their evidence matches our thesis, for a big push coordinates new technology investment across
complementary industries. Indeed, without specifically mentioning the big push literature, their wording
resonates: “[t]he most famous zaibatsu [were] based on the rapid industrialization that had occurred in the
Journal 22, no. 1 (2001): 45-74.
24
For detailed methodology, see M.P. Bertrand, P. Mehra and S. Mullainathan, “Ferreting out tunneling: an application to
Indian business groups.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2002): 121-148. For a survey, see Randall Morck, Daniel
Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature
43 (2005): 657-722 and others.
25
Masahiko Aoki, Information, Incentives, and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1988), 223 documents such coordination, writing that zaibatsu implement “centralized coordination” as “[t]he general
trading company acted as a sole trading agent for member firms and was in a position to manipulate the terms of transaction with
outsiders. The holding company pooled the profits of the operating firms.” He adds that “post-World War groups of companies those of zaibatsu origin or those clustered around the principal banks - do not operate under such centralized coordination.”
26
For recent surveys, see Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic
Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722 and Tarun Khanna and Yishay Yafeh,
“Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?” Journal of Economic Literature (2007.forthcoming).
27
Kazushi Ohkawa and Henry Rosovsky, Japanese Economic Growth: Trend Acceleration in the Twentieth Century
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1973)

5

first two decades of this century. Although it is difficult to generalize, perhaps, one can say that in the
nineteenth century commerce was the major activity of zaibatsu; around World War I it was industry with
particular emphasis on coal mining, shipbuilding, engineering, and glass; and in the 1920's, it became
sophisticated industries."28 Detailed industry-by-industry analysis of this shifting emphasis, though
beyond our present scope, might accord with a big push.
Khanna and Yafeh propose coinsurance as a major purpose of business groups.29 Using Japanese data,
they show zaibatsu firms sharing risks in 1932-1943, though not necessarily in earlier periods. Examining
data for 1921-1927 and 1933-37, Miyajima detects no such risk sharing, instead suggesting zaibatsu
controlling shareholders monitor group firms’ capital investment.30 Our argument accords with both,
clarifying the nature of key risks (hold up problems) and why a single controlling shareholder monitors
firms in diverse industries (big push coordination).
Khanna and Palepu and others argue that business groups substitute for corrupt capital, labor, and
product markets.31 They find group firms outperforming freestanding firms in corrupt economies,
explaining that group firms can safely deal with other firms in the same group while freestanding firms
risk being cheated at every turn. The market failures we stress are similar. Central coordination facilitates
a big push by sidestepping hold-up problems and coordinating growth across industries. Given an
efficient legal system, contracts between independent firms might substitute for a common controlling
shareholder under some circumstances.32 Certainly, a greater centralization of control is plausibly needed
28
Ibid. pp. 219-21. See also W.W. Lockwood, Economic Development of Japan (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1954), 227 and Shigeaki Yasuoka, Japanese zaibatsu (Nihonno zaibatsu) (Tokyo: Nikkei, 1976) who writes: “that diversified
businesses arise from the very beginning of the industrialization of under-developed countries when such countries contact with
advanced capitalism, because under-developed countries undertake modernization or industrialization of all industrial sectors.”
Note however, that pyramidal business groups are radically different from diversified single firms. Explaining the advantages of
diversification does not explain the ubiquity of pyramidal business groups.
29
Tarun Khanna and Yishay Yafeh, “Business Groups and Risk Sharing Around the World,” Journal of Business 78, no. 1
(2005): 301-340.
30
H. Miyajima, Economic history of industrial policy and corporate governance: micro analysis of Japanese economic
development (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Yuhikaku, 2004).
31
Tarun Khanna and Krishna Palepu, “Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign Investors, and Corporate Governance,”
in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), Tarun Khanna and J. Rivkin, “Estimating the Performance Effects of Business
Groups in Emerging Markets,” Strategic Management Journal 22, no. 1 (2001), Tarun Khanna and Raymond Fisman,
“Facilitating Development: The Role of Business Groups,” World Development 32, no. 4 (2004): 609-628.
32
On the importance of law to modern corporations, see La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer,
Robert W. Vishny. “Legal determinants of external finance.” Journal of Finance 52, no. 3 (1997a): 1131-1150.

6

to achieve a big push where corruption is rifer.
Yafeh captures part of our thesis, arguing that vertically integrated keiretsu in postwar Japan, wherein
a major firm like Toyota holds control blocks in listed supplier and customer firms, arose to limit hold-up
problems.33 We elevate Yafeh’s insight into a broader theory of pyramidal business groups as major
players in big push growth. Even closer to our argument, Khanna and Yafeh refer to zaibatsu helping the
government coordinate a big push. But ours differs fundamentally, for we see zaibatsu taking command
of a big push that was failing under state leadership.34
Much work stresses tunneling, the controlling shareholder siphoning wealth from listed group firms
to benefit himself, as a primary raison d’être for business groups.35 Our thesis accords with this too.
Coordinating a big push requires the massive tapping of national savings, so group firms need public
shareholders. It also requires group firms in some industries to subsidize those in other industries, and to
forsake hold-up opportunities. Their shareholders would understandably perceive this as tunneling and as
poor governance. An undisputed controlling shareholder is needed to overrule them so the big push can
proceed. Thus, evidence of tunneling between group firms accords with our thesis.
One objection to this reasoning is that extensive tunneling deters the public from buying group firms’
shares. However, this misapprehends agency theory. Rational shareholders forecast tunneling losses and
discount share prices accordingly. At low enough prices, they buy and earn equilibrium risk-adjusted
returns. Expected tunneling reduces insiders’ proceeds from floating a set fraction of a firm’s shares, and
its cost, like all expected agency costs, falls on the initial owners at the initial public offering (IPO).36
Expected tunneling raises firms’ costs of tapping public equity, but does not ‘exploit’ public shareholders.
But a large literature portrays a dark side to pyramidal groups. Berle and Means fear extreme

33

Yishay Yafeh, “Japan’s Corporate Groups: Some International and Historical Perspectives,” in M. Blomström, J. Corbett,
F. Hayashi and A. Kashyap (eds.) Structural Impediments to Growth in Japan (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2003).
34
Tarun Khanna and Yishay Yafeh. “Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?” Journal of Economic
Literature (2007 forthcoming) argue that K. Ohkawa. and H. Rosovsky, Japanese Economic Growth: Trend Acceleration in the
Twentieth Century (Stanford, Stanford University Press, 1973) advance this thesis..
35
Surveyed in Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment
and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.
36
Michael Jensen and William Meckling, “The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership
Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics. 3 (1976) 305-360.

7

governance abuses in pyramidal groups.37 This may explain why the United States forcibly dismantled its
business groups in the 1930s, the London Stock Exchange did likewise in the 1970s; and Korea seems
intent on curbing its chaebol.38 Haber argues that aging tycoons and the heirs to great business families
often undermine sustained growth.39 Once wealthy, they see a dynamic and consequently unstable
economy as threatening a status quo they enjoy.40 Others suggest untalented, but well-connected heirs to
old-money pyramids find political rent-seeking their highest value investment. 41 This could retard growth
as effectively as government failures in a state-run big push.42
This dark side to pyramidal groups seems initially to contradict our thesis. But the dark side
characterizes business groups controlled by geriatric tycoons or inadequate heirs; not the highly talented
controlling shareholders of the other discussions. Big pushes generally fail, and a natural progression
from entrepreneurial controlling shareholders to entrenched heirs might convert growth-promoting
37

Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property. (New York: Macmillan, 1932); Lucien
Bebchuk, Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis, “Stock Pyramids, Cross Ownership and Dual Class equity: The Mechanisms
and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash Flow Rights,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck
(National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000); Randall Morck,
David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, “Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease,”
in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
38
Re. the US, see Randall Morck, “How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The Double-Taxation of Intercorporate
Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, ed. James Poterba (Cambridge: MIT Press,
2005a); re. the UK see Julian Franks, Colin Mayer and Stefano Rossi, “Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of
Family Ownership in the United Kingdom,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups
to Professional Managers, ed. Randall Morck (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), and re. Korea see Phil-Sang Lee,
“Economic Crisis and Chaebol Reform in Korea,” discussion paper no. 14 (School of Business Administration, Korea University,
2000).
39
Stephen Haber, Political Institutions and Economic Growth in Latin America: Essays in Policy, History, and Political
Economy (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 2000); Stephen Haber, Crony Capitalism and Economic Growth in Latin America:
Theory and Evidence (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 2002).
40
Mancur Olson, Jr. “Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force,” Journal of Economic History 23, no. 4 (1963): 529-552;
Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal
of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.
41
Randall Morck, David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, “Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic Growth:
The Canadian Disease,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Volume. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000); Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, “Family Control and the
Rent-Seeking Society,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 19 (2004): 391-409; Kathy Fogel, “Oligarchic family control,
social economic outcomes, and the quality of government,” Journal of International Business Studies 37 (2006): 603–622;
Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, “The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the twentieth century,”
Journal of Financial Economics 69, no. 1 (2003): 5-50; Anne Krueger, “Why Crony Capitalism is Bad for Economic Growth,” in
Crony Capitalism and Economic Growth in Latin America: Theory and Evidence, ed. Stephen Haber (Hoover Institution Press,
2002); Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, “Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society,” Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice 19 (2004); Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, “Agency problems in large family business groups,” Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 27, no. 4 (2003). .
42
Kevin M. Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics (May 1991): 503-530; Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Why is Rent-seeking Costly
to Growth?” American Economic Review 82, no. 2 (1993): 409-414; Anne Krueger, “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking
Society.” American Economic Review 64 (1974): 291-303.

8

pyramids into growth-blocking artifacts.
If so, we must explain Japan’s oddly successful big push. To do this, we show this progression failing
in Japan because of uniquely sweeping early shock therapy marginalizing the feudal elite, a fiscal crisis
draining bureaucratic power, and military governments (Japanese and American) marginalizing zaibatsu
families. We also argue that Meiji Japan’s so-called “unequal treaties”, even when renegotiated, limited
trade and investment barriers. Openness checks elites’ power, and thus the downsides of pyramidal
groups.43 The unequal treaties gave foreign courts jurisdiction in concession enclaves, providing Japanese
unobstructed views of foreign jurisprudence, likely helping Japan implement an effective legal system –
which further limits these downsides.44 Openness also lets imports and exports, as well as foreign capital,
compensate for missing or misscaled parts of the domestic economy as a big push builds.45 Japan’s
propitious timing and persistent openness may thus highlight conditions for successful big pushes that
might be deliberately imposed elsewhere.
Finally, we reiterate that we in no way challenge the validity of other explanations of business groups.
Rather, we seek to reconcile them as consistent with business groups orchestrating big push growth. We
further acknowledge that our big push thesis need not fully subsume the above hypotheses, which may
well retain independent validity entirely independent of big push growth.

3. Shock Therapy
Before its big push, Japan underwent sweeping institutional renewal that uniquely marginalized
traditional elites. Unique in depth and scope, this ‘shock therapy’ may well explain Japan’s ultimately

43
Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, “The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the twentieth century,”
Journal of Financial Economics 69, no. 1 (2003): 5-50 show Japan relatively open in 1913 – see esp. Table 3. For more general
discussion of these points, see Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists (Princeton, Princeton
University Press, 2003).
44
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W Vishny, “Trust in large organizations,” American
Economic Review 87, no. 2 (1997), 333-338.
45
See e.g. Vitor Trindade, “The big push, industrialization and international trade: The role of exports” Journal of
Development Economics 78 (2005) 22– 48. *

9

successful ‘big push’ and the failures of analogous efforts elsewhere.46

3.1

The Shocking Truth

Prior to the arrival of Admiral Perry’s warships in 1854, Japan was remarkably isolated, with foreigners
subject to instant death outside a tiny enclave in Nagasaki. The Tokugawa Shoguns, who ruled Japan
from 1603 to 1868, preserved a rigidly stratified society. The elite were samurai – an hereditary caste of
warriors with the power of life and death over their inferiors. The lesser castes were peasants, tradesmen
below them, and merchants lowest of all. An intricate code of warrior ethics, bushido, forbade class
mobility and enshrined samurai rule. That foreigners sought the company of merchants was an affront.
The shogunate, nonetheless, needed merchants – for samurai need weapons and taxpayers. Two great
families, the Mitsui and Sumitomo, arose to such prominence as merchants might attain.
The Mitsui traded silk. Since money was not in general use, they ran a sophisticated barter operation
– a general trading business. This operation, spanning Japan, was recruited by the Shogunate for tax
farming, further enriching the Mitsui. The Sumitomo owned mines and supplied metal for weapons. Both
silk finery and metals also bought curiosities and weapons from the barbarians confined in Nagasaki.
Other Tokugawa merchant families were important in Japan, but only the Mitsui and Sumitomo survive
Japan’s transition to play important roles in its big push.
Both families managed without money and modern economic institutions, like corporation or contract
law. Consequently, both families developed house rules – constitutions dictating how business should be
done; profits calculated, allocated, and disbursed; and power passed from generation to generation. House
rules assigned key decisions to family councils – parliaments representing clans according to precise
voting formulae. Thus, in an environment without ambient business law, merchant houses formulated
their own laws and, as far as we can tell, adhered to them rigidly. Private legal systems served both
merchant houses well, making their behavior predictable and their promises credible. The Mitsui and

46

See William Easterly, “The Big Push Deja Vu: A Review of Jeffrey Sach's The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities
for Our Time,” Journal of Economic Literature 44, no. 1 (2006): 1, and cites therein.

10

Sumitomo became preferred business partners for economic actors of all kinds, including the Shogunate.
In 1853, the United States dispatched about one-fourth of its navy to Japan.47 Their humanitarian
goal, lifting the death penalty on foreigners shipwrecked off Japan, veiled a commercial mission –
opening Japan to American traders. The commander, Admiral Matthew Perry, sailed into Tokyo Bay in
violation of Japanese law, presented Tokugawa officials a draft trade treaty, and continued on to China.
The following year he returned with a larger fleet and, under American cannon, the Shogunate signed the
Convention of Kanagawa, which protected shipwrecked sailors, let U.S. ships buy coal, and opened
Shimoda and Hakodate to American traders.
Japan’s accession to the Victorian global economy was formalized with the 1858 Treaty of Amity and
Commerce. This U.S.-imposed treaty opened Tokyo, Kobe, Nagasaki, Niigata, and Yokohama to
American trade, fixed low tariffs, and gave consular courts extraterritorial jurisdiction over “concession”
areas in those ports. Similar treaties with the Britain and other Western powers soon followed.
Japan was thus suddenly flung open to free trade and foreign investment in the concessions. These
agreements were denigrated in Japan as unequal treaties because they enforced no similar concessions for
Japanese in foreign countries, and were renegotiated in 1899. Tariffs rose very slightly, but foreign
companies could now operate throughout Japan. General Electric, Western Electric, Vickers Armstrong,
and other major firms starred in a large-scale foreign direct investment inflow that continued until 1930.48
Japan remained open to foreign trade and investment openness until the Great Depression.

49

Japan’s

Tokugawa rulers realized that globalization required domestic reforms, and from 1899 on, taxed industry
more lightly than agriculture.50 But comprehensive liberalization proved beyond their abilities.

47

Edwin D. Reischauer, The Japanese Today: Change and Continuity (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1988) p. 78.
Hideaki Miyajima, Economic history of industrial policy and corporate governance: micro analysis of Japanese economic
development (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Yuhikaku, 2004); Takahusa Nakamura, Japanese Economy in Meiji and Taisho Era (Meiji
Taishokino keizai) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1985): 26, 54.
49
Although trade grew robustly, domestic capital investment and applying foreign technology appear more important to
Japan’s growth. Carl Mosk, “Japan, Industrialization and Economic Growth,” in EH.Net Encyclopedia, ed. Robert Whaples,
2004. eh.net/encyclopedia/article/mosk.japan.final (Jan. 19, 2004). Ryoshin Minami, Economic Development of Japan: A
Quantitative Study. [2nd ed. (Houndmills Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 1994). Kazushi Ohkawa and Henry Rosovsky. Japanese
Economic Growth: Trend Acceleration in the Twentieth Century (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1973.
50
In 1899, Japan enacted a flat 2.5% corporate income tax, though the rate rose to 6.25% for the 1904–5 Russo-Japanese
War. A permanent inheritance tax was enacted in 1905. Horiguchi, Kazuya, Outline of the 1898 Income Tax Legislation (Meiji
32nen no shotokuzeiho kaisei no rippoteki enkaku) (in Japanese), Zeimu Daigakko paper, 1997; Zeimu Daigakko, Tax law
48

11

3.2

Shock Therapy

This backdrop perhaps explains the subsequent political tsunami. In 1868, a band of young samurai
overthrew the craven Tokugawa shoguns. With the Meiji emperor, previously relegated to ceremonial
duties, as their figurehead; these zealous warriors launched the Meiji Restoration.51 Their coup triggered
perhaps the deepest transformation ever effected on a major economy.
The regime dispatched young Japanese abroad to study science, law, economics, engineering, and
every other field relevant to modernization – and then report home. The knowledge these emissaries
brought back frightened the Meiji rulers, who resolved to restore Japan its rightful place in the world. The
modernization they implemented was unparalleled until the post-socialist reconstructions of the 1990s in
Eastern Europe. The term shock therapy, coined in that context by Sachs seems appropriate here as well.52
Meiji shock therapy, like its late 20th century analogs, launched comprehensive reforms across all
aspects of the economy nearly simultaneously. Within a few years, Japan adopted parliamentary
democracy modeled on the German Diet, compulsory public education modeled on French and German
schools, universities and a modern military fashioned after those of Prussia, and a fleet modeled on the
Royal Navy. Religious freedom, social mobility, and land reform became official policy.
Most pertinently, the reformers imposed 19th century liberal capitalism. Finding hereditary casts and
warrior ethics hopelessly fusty; they abolished all feudal ranks and privileges in 1871.53 The feudal

references (Zeimu shiryo library) in Japanese, Zaimu Daigakko, Japanese Tax Agency, Tokyo, 2007, at
www.ntc.nta.go.jp/sozei/siryou/index.html.
51
The Meiji Restoration was a sequence of radical political, economic, military and cultural transformations. Beginning in
the late Tokugawa era, the Restoration is generally considered complete by 1877 when, a conscript army suppressed the Seinan
Uprising, the last in a series of rebellions by feudal warlords and other traditionalists. See also Samuels, Richard. Rich nation,
strong army – national security and the technological transformation of Japan. New York: Cornell University Press, 1994.
52
Shock therapy holds that institutional reform must be comprehensive, not piecemeal. Lipton and Sachs argue that Poland
cannot establish a market economy without simultaneously establishing supporting institutions: law, courts, regulators,
institutional investors, social insurance, and the like. Each, in turn, requires other supporting institutions. Shock therapy
advocates the total replacement of one set of institutions by another. Japan’s Meiji leaders drew similar conclusions for similar
reasons. Hence, the term, though not used then, aptly their policies. David Lipton and Jeffrey Sachs, “Creating a Market
Economy in Eastern Europe: The Case of Poland,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1990): 75-147.
53
Edwin O. Reischauer, The Japanese Today: Change and Continuity (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, Belknal Press,
1988): 81-83) explains “With the disappearance of the domains, the samurai lost their position as a hereditary bureaucratic class,
and in 1873 universal military conscription was substituted for the old class basis for military service. In 1876 the samurai were
even prohibited from wearing their swords, their badge of distinction. Samurai stipends were also drastically reduced and by

12

system bound society together, so new glue was needed. Modifying the German Civil Code in stages, and
with grafts from other legal models, Japan rapidly built a state-of-the-art late 19th century legal system.
Regulations permitting public bond trading arrived in the early 1870s, and an 1878 Stock Exchange
Ordinance opened the way for equity markets in Tokyo and Osaka. By 1888, Japan’s Civil Code was
fully as sophisticated as its German prototype.

3.3.

Aftershock

Under the new code, merchant houses were suddenly general partnerships subject to previously unknown
constellations of laws that overrode house rules and family councils. Adaptation proved beyond the
capabilities of some merchant houses, and severely strained others. Mitsui and Sumitomo survived, but
navigating the aftershocks was simple for neither. Both modernized by adopting Western technology –
textiles manufacture and mining technologies, respectively – and by supplementing general trading with
banking as money gained acceptance.
But institutional change proved harder than technological change. The legal system created
previously unheard of liabilities, so many merchant families incorporated to obtain limited liability. But
this created more problems, for they now found squabbling relatives claiming rights that never obtained
under the ancient house rules. Even worse, rewards traditionally bestowed on successful hired managers
turned out to be shares with voting rights. In short, new institutions undermined traditional norms,
creating uncertainty around previously clear business dealings.
Hired managers holding shares proved unbearable, and many old families went to great lengths to
rectify the situation. Mitsui Bank, founded in 1876, found itself with over 400 manager-shareholders and
reorganized in 1893 to buy them all out. Other merchant families also bared their coffers buying back
shares from hired managers. These buyouts alienated outsiders by underscoring their inferior status.

1876 were entirely commuted into relatively small lump-sum payments of cash or government bonds. Thus the samurai in a brief
nine-year period were deprived of all their privileges, and Japan was started on a great change that was to transform its society in
a mere generation or two from one in which status was determined primarily by heredity to one in which it depended largely
upon the education and achievements of the individual.”

13

Loyal hired managers holding shares were intolerable, but outside shareholders were unadulterated
outrage. A few merchant families, notably the Shimomura and Ohmura, financed growth with public
equity and lost control to outsiders. Others therefore remained unlisted and dependent on internal funds.
This curtailed their growth, and explains the eclipse of many Tokugawa merchant dynasties.
Into this void stepped a new generation of entrepreneurs without Tokugawa roots. Yataro Iwasaki
(1834-1885) organized Mitsubishi around a state-subsidized shipping monopoly. Mitsubishi probably had
a genuine business advantage, for Iwasaki instituted modern accounting before his rivals.54 But its main
advantage was government favors. The government wanted Japan to be a maritime power, and Iwasaki
stepped forward to help. From 1875 on, his Yubin Kisen Mitsubishi Kaisha shipping company received
¥250,000 annually for carrying government mail. This subsidy protected Mitsubishi from foreign
competition. Quickly acquiring 37 seafaring ships, Mitsubishi soon carried most of Japan’s foreign trade.
More subsidies flowed through the state-owned Nagasaki Shipyard, which lost money repairing and
maintaining Mitsubishi ships – probably at cut rates. Iwasaki plowed his rapidly rising earnings into
capital investment, and Mitsubishi grew rapidly to rival Mitsui and Sumitomo.

4. The State’s Big Push
Japan’s shock therapy aimed to build modern munitions plants, shipyards, and the like. Although Mitsui
and Sumitomo embraced new technology for spinning silk or refining copper, and supplemented their
trading operations with banking; they remained cool towards utterly new industries. This perhaps
reflected a realistic assessment of their expertise; but building new business plainly required outside
capital and neither family dared risk joining the Shimomura and Ohmura in economic oblivion. And

54
The government required a double entry bookkeeping account for its annual subsidies, which were of unprecedented size.
Yukichi Fukuzawa (1835 – 1901), the Meiji statesman, educator, author, philosopher and political theorist who founded Keio
Gijuko, later Keio University, introduced Western accounting to public finances (Yukichi Fukuzawa. Chuai no hou (Methods of
bookkeeping) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Keio University Press, 1873); Shinichiro Shimme, “Introduction of double-entry book
keeping into Japan,” Accounting Review, 12 (1937)) and to his students. Although the Mitsui and Sumitomo also hired Keio
graduates, Iwasaki, appreciated modern accounting and enthusiastically implemented it throughout his business operations. His
son Hisaya, his manager Heigoro Masuda (1847-1922), and many other Mitsuibishi executives were Fukuzawa students. See e.g.
Mitsubishi Public Affairs Committee (2006).

14

though Mitsubishi grew rapidly, it too lacked expertise outside shipping and related businesses.
Government prodding of merchant families to pool capital met determined resistance. The state
exhorted many families into jointly capitalizing banks in the 1870s, but interfamilial squabbling paralyzed
governance and each family soon established its own bank. The Mitsui thus abandoned the First National
Bank, co-founded with the Ono and other families, to establish Mitsui Bank in 1876. More prodding to
pool their capital and develop new industries seemed a poor plan.

4.1

State-Owned Enterprises

Instead, SOEs would build new industries essential to modernization. More SOEs would be needed to
provide inputs to the first set, and still more to build railroads and other infrastructure. The new strategy
quickly developed into a big push as SOEs materialized in one modern industry after another.55
This effort was massive. From 1868 to 1885, the Industry, Interior, and Agriculture Ministries
“special subsidy funds” of ¥52.9, ¥4.6, and ¥9.6 million total ¥69.3 million for SOE operating deficits,
frontier development initiatives, and targeted loans. Adding the ministries’ operating costs – ¥15.4, ¥3.1,
and ¥18.1 million, respectively – totals ¥42.4 million, bringing the grand total to ¥111.7 million per year.
Separate accounts for new SOEs, an investment capital trust fund, and other programs total ¥16.1 million.
Finally, prefecture industrial promotion grants total ¥1.6 million. All told, subsidies and their
administration cost ¥127.83 million from 1868 to 1885. Given Japan's national income – ¥397 million in

1878, the first year of data – these sums are huge for the era.56

55

The Ministries of Industry (kobusho) and the interior (naimusho) emerged from a spate of administrative restructuring in
the early Meiji era in 1871 and 1873, respectively.
56
The figures here are from Ishizuka (p. 131), Kobunkan (c. 4), and Umemura and Nakamura (p. 29). Kobayashi, using
slightly different years, concurs as to general magnitudes. On National Income, see Kazushi Okhawa, “Production Structure,” in
Patterns of Japanese Economic Development: A Quantitative Appraisal, eds. Kazushi Ohkawa and Miyohei Shinohara with
Larry Meissner (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979),34-58, Ishizuka, Hiromichi, Study of the Development of Japan's
Capitalism (Nihon shihonshugi seiritsushi kenkyu) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1973); M. Kobayashi, Japan's
industrialization and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo haraisage) (in Japanese), (Tokyo:
Toyo Keizai, 1977); Ohkawa’s estimates given in Japan Statistics Research Institute, Japan economic statistics data (Nihon
keizai tokei shu) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Japan Statistics Research Institute, 1958); Umemura, Mataji, and Nakamura, Takahusa
(eds), Matsukata Finance and Industrial Development Policies (Matsukara zaisei to shokusan kogyo seisaku), (in Japanese)
(Tokyo: United Nations University and University of Tokyo Press, 1983).

15

The Industry Ministry oversaw mining, railways, civil engineering, telegraphy, navigation,
shipbuilding, iron production, and manufacturing; and all SOEs therein. The greater parts of its
investment flowed into state-owned railways and mines – 47.9% and 31.5%, respectively. Lesser amounts
financed SOEs in telegraphy (12.3%) and manufacturing (8.3%).
The ministry expected its gold and silver mines to generate revenue. It operated ten large mines
directly, and leased the management of others to private contractors. But Japan’s only modern colliery,
the Takashima mine near Nagasaki, was Dutch-owned, albeit with Japanese partners.57 This

embarrassed the government, and the state bought the Takashima mine for $400,000 in 1874.
Many thought this ridiculously generous and accused the government variously of bribing
foreigners or bargaining ineptly.
Japan needed railroads to transport goods, but also to build Japan’s regions into a nation. The ministry
thus emphasized linking interior regions to ports. The same nation-building agenda charged the ministry
with modernizing Hokkaido, spotting the undeveloped territory with cotton and sugar mills, breweries,
creameries, canneries, and other SOEs.
The Interior Ministry oversaw commerce, vital statistics, the post, cartography, surveys, and policing.
It had budgets for civil engineering projects and SOEs. Its SOE subsidies went 29.0% to agricultural
products, 28.6% to dairy products, 28.2% to cotton textiles, 8.6% to silk, and 2.0% to experimental farms;
with lesser amounts to forestry, crafts and commerce, and maritime shipping.
Its control over policing and other regional matters brought direct involvement in local economies.
Thus, the ministry financed experimental farms, farm factories, and dairy farms – all on small local
scales. Its model silk, cotton and other textile, and paper mills, unlike the Industry Ministry’s gargantuan
SOEs, were not designed to force industrialization; but to introduce new technologies that would
eventually substitute domestic goods for imports. Its policies thus foreshadowed twentieth century

57

The Dutch merchant, T.B. Glover, held a controlling interest.

16

“import substitution” theories.58
The government also inherited state-owned mines and enterprises the Tokugawa established in their
final years. Many went to the military – the navy took Yokosuka ironworks, Yokohama ironworks, Uraga
shipbuilding, and Ishikawajima shipbuilding; and the army Sekiguchi manufacturing. The Sado gold mine
and Ikuno silver mine fell to the Industry Ministry. Industrial ventures by individual warlords, typically
with direct military objectives, were also seized when the feudal order was abolished in 1871. Of these,
the Shikine gun powder plant and Shuseikan manufacturing complex went to the navy; the Takinokami
gun powder plant and Ogi Chuzou metal casting plant went to the army, a raft of mines and Hyogo
shipbuilding went to the Ministry of Industry, and the Sakai textiles plant went to the Ministry of Finance.
However, the most important SOEs were established by the state anew. These include large ventures
in chemicals, machinery, mining, printing, railways, shipbuilding, telegraphy, and textiles. In mining, the
Aburato venture was notable. In machinery and chemicals, the government established Akabane
Seisakusho, Cement Seizosho, Shingawa Glass Seizosho, and Shirorengaishi Seizousho. In textiles, key
state-established ventures include Tomioka Seishisho, Shinmachi Bousekisho, Senju Seijusho, Aichi
Bosekisho, and Hiroshima Bosekisho. Although they also established new gold and silver mines, the
reformers’ hopes that mining revenues could fund modernization were unfulfilled.
Various branches of government apparently disputed control. Telegraphy and lighthouses ultimately
fell to the Communications Ministry. Railways ultimately ended up directly run by the Cabinet. The Navy
and Army controlled munitions and related enterprises. For example, the Navy ran Yokosuka Iron and
Steel, Yokohama Iron and Steel, Uraga Shipbuilding, and Ishikawajima Shipbuilding.59

4.2

Government Failure

To finance its big push, the government seized control of all taxation, abolishing the feudal rice tax and
58
See e.g. Kobayashi on the Interior Ministry, and Prebisch on import substitution. M. Kobayashi, Japan's industrialization
and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo haraisage) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 1977)
on the Interior Ministry; Raul Prebisch, The Economic Development of Latin America (New York: United Nations Press, 1950),
trans. of El desarrollo económico de América Latina y alguno de sus principales problemas (Santiago: CEPAL, 1949).
59
These weapon factories and some other SOEs were transferred from the Tokugawa state.

17

requiring payment in coin from 1873 on. This plus earnings from state-owned mines reduced the state’s
exposure to agricultural prices. From 1871 through 1875, the government's primary balance (tax revenues
less ordinary expenditures excluding interest) remained marginally positive.
But this could not finance thoroughgoing modernization. The state therefore borrowed. Its first bond
issue raised £1 million at 9% in London in 1870 to finance state railways, with duties and future railway
profits as collateral. A second London issue in 1873 raised a further £2.4 million at 7% due in 30 years for
warlords and samurai pensions. These were abruptly terminated in August 1876 – freeing up the funds.60
This issue was collateralized by general revenues plus up to 400,000 ton of rice, worth about $16 million
– slightly more than the annual interest. In total, these two issues netted ¥16 million.
Japan issued no more foreign debt until the Sino-Japanese War. But the government now appreciated
the advantages of debt markets over the private (and secret) debts the Tokugawa incurred from merchants.
From 1872 through 1883, a succession of domestic debt issues to raised ¥292 million – a huge amount.61
Their fiscal situation deteriorated sharply in 1877, when suppressing the Seinan Uprising – Japan’s
last feudal rebellion – cost ¥41.57 million, roughly 70% of the previous year’s budget. The government
managed the immediate crisis by borrowing ¥15 million and printing ¥27 million in inconvertible paper
currency.62 The soaring money supply fuelled inflation, which induced the National banks to quicken
their presses. Japan was now in an unsustainable inflationary spiral. The Finance Minister, Masayoshi
Matsukata, resolved to confront the crisis with a dual reform.
His monetary reform unified the currency. Previously only coinage was official, and private national
banks issued banknotes in currencies of their choice. Matsukata created the Bank of Japan in 1886 to

60

These cost ¥ 17.67M annually – a third to half the normal budget, and benefited about 1% of the population – 467 lords
and about 320,000 samurai. In lieu, the state granted them 30 year bonds, so it netted (allowances less interest) only ¥6M
annually. Subsequent inflation greatly eroded the real value of the obligation.
61
Domestic bond issues raised ¥23M in 1872, ¥22M in a sequenced issue from 1873 through 1875, ¥17M in 1874, ¥174M
in 1876, ¥12M in 1878, and ¥44M in a sequenced issue from 1880 through 1883. For comparison, the national budget for 1876
was about ¥60 million.
62
In the late 1860s and 1870s, government paper currency was not convertible to gold. The dajokansatsu, introduced in
1868, was the first government paper currency usable throughout Japan. A legal reform let numbered national Banks, modeled on
US national banks, issue paper money in their own currencies.

18

issue one official currency, the yen, backed by silver.63
His fiscal reform was a general belt tightening, slashing subsidies and raising money by privatizing
SOEs en masse. The SOEs hemorrhaged money, and Matsukata’s predecessor, Shigenobu Okuma, was
fired amid a political struggle after proposing a mass privatization in 1880.64 Matsusaka, finding virtually
every SOE, save a few mines, a looming fiscal disaster, recognized mass privatization as the only escape
from economic and political collapse.
Accepting economic liberalism was inescapable. Initially, this was grudging. Subsidies slowly fell for
many SOEs, but continued for maritime shipping, railways, and silk. But resistance faded as fiscal crisis
loomed, and ending all subsidies soon seemed imperative.
Matsukata initially merely slashed SOE subsidies and shelved plans for new SOEs. This hardened
SEO budget constraints. As in modern transition economies, this improved governance.65 From mid-1878
on, each SOE provided detailed income statements and balance sheets. Remarkably, the state previously
only tabulated aggregate expenditures and revenues of all SOEs! These reforms had three key effects.
First, modern accounting made SEO managers’ budgetary excesses visible to their superiors.66 This
instilled appreciation for economic reality, and undercut lobbying for expanded subsidies.
Second, the worst SEO money drains was evident, raising political pressure to privatize them. SEO
balance sheets also gave politicians book values, reflecting past subsidies to each. These were substantial,
and the prospect of recovering these amounts through privatizations seemed increasingly attractive.
Third, dissenting voices reiterated that SOEs were intended to pull the whole economy towards

63

Japan switched from silver to the gold standard in 1897.
M. Harada, Japan's Modernization and Economic Policies (Nihonno kindaikato keizai seisaku) (in Japanese), Tokyo:
Toyo Keizai (1972).
65
On government failures associated with SOEs, see Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Politicians and Firms,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109, no. 4 (1994): 995-1025. Matsukata’s reforms are described in detail byh Garrett Droppers, “Monetary
changes in Japan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 12, no. 2 (1898): 153-185; Ministry of Finance, History of public finance in
the Meiji period (Meiji zaiseishi), (in Japanese), in 14 volumes, Maruzen, Tokyo, 1904-5; and Muroyama, Yoshimasa,
“Mechanisms of the Matsukata deflation (Matsukata deflation no mechanism),” (in Japanese), in Umemura, Matatsugu, and
Nakamura, Takahusa, Matsukata finance and industriak development policies (Matsukata zaiseito shokusan kogyo seisaku),” (in
Japanese), University of Tokyo Press, 1983, 127-155.
66
See Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, The Grabbing Hand (Harvard University Press, 1998) for a general discussion of
the importance of transparency in limiting lobbying; and Andrei Shleifer and Daniel Treisman, Without a Map: Political Tactics
and Economic Reform in Russia (MIT Press, 1999) for a discussion of these issues in Russian reformers’ strategies.
64

19

comprehensive modernization, with gains in some offsetting losses in others.67 Some of this was likely
disingenuous, for at least some sectors should have posted gains. But the crisis made SOEs justify
benefits against realistic cost assessments, including opportunity costs recoverable via privatizations.
A few SOEs escaped the mass privatization – military suppliers, mints, government printing,
railways, postal services, and telegraphs. But military suppliers judged obsolete or unimportant were
privatized, and private railways and military suppliers displaced SOEs as subsidies ended and SEOs sold
off plant and equipment. With few exceptions, SOEs were on the block.

4.3

Mass Privatization

The state privatized twenty-six large SOEs by 1896. The model was the Takashima mine, nationalized in
1874, then sold to its manager, the merchant and Meiji politician Shojiro Goto, in 1875. Goto financed the
deal, essentially a management buy-out (MBO), with debt, including a loan from the British firm Jardine,
Matheson.68 Production rose, but earnings struggled to cover hefty interest costs. Still, the government
paid $400,000 to nationalize the mine and got ¥550,000 privatizing it less than a year later, netting
¥190,000 at prevailing exchange rates.69 Repeating this with other SOEs promised fiscal salvation.
The first mass privatization attempt was an 1880 law offering fourteen money-losing SOEs at gross
book value (book value with no depreciation allowance) to buyers screened by officials for financial
resources – though not ability or expertise! Unsurprisingly, virtually no buyers appeared.
Under escalating fiscal pressure, and reluctantly conceding that most SOEs were not worth their gross
book values, the government passed another privatization law in 1884, offering profitable state-owned
mines to the highest bidder.
Japan’s major private mining business remained aloof. The Sumitomo ran the Besshi copper mines

67

Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Industrialization and the Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97
(1989): 1003-1026.
68
See John McMaster, “The Takashima Mine: British Capital and Japanese Industrialization,” The Business History Review.
37, no. 3 (Autumn, 1963): 217-239 regarding Jardine, Matheson’s role in management.
69
An average market exchange rate for 1871-1873 was £1.00 = ¥ 4.5 yen = $5.00; or $1.00 = ¥0.90; see Kunitake Kume, ed.
Real experience of America and Europe (Beio kairan jikki) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Iwanami, 1996).

20

for the Tokugawa, and the Meiji government confiscated these as state property in 1868. Soon realizing
they needed Sumitomo expertise to operate the mines, the government reversed itself a month later. But
Sumitomo’s general manager, Saihei Hirose, distrusted the government and bid for no SOEs in this or
subsequent privatization rounds. His only reaction was to hire expert engineers away from former SOEs.
In contrast, Mitsui, bid enthusiastically in every major privatization round. Its major purchases were
the Shinmachi and Tomioka silk textiles mills, bought in 1887 and 1893, respectively.
The Iwasaki too entered the fray. Shojiro Goto was struggling to keep Japan’s first privatized SEO,
the Takashima mine, out of bankruptcy. Yataro Iwasaki once worked under Goto, but showed no interest
until an elaborate sales contract was drafted in 1881 by the Meiji statesman Yukichi Fukuzawa.70 The
contract imposed strict financial conditions on the departing Goto, but gave Mitsubishi clear title after a
one-time payment terminating the mine’s debts.71 Mitsubishi paid ¥859,636.45, ¥259,636.45 to the state
and ¥600,000 to Takashima’s creditors. Iwasaki saw the mine’s remaining reserves and salvage value as
marginal, but apparently sought political capital by rescuing Goto.72
He imposed modern accounting and management, radical changes after Goto’s chaotic governance. In
1882, he fired three miners for sleeping on the job, presaging sweeping layoffs at the overstaffed mine.
Iwasaki found a colliery useful, for Mitsubishi’s “national champion” status hinged on shipping,
which required coal. Mitsubishi could also export coal in otherwise empty freighters during low-volume
winter seasons and exploit supply shortfalls in Shanghai. Most importantly, Takashima gave Mitsubishi
expertise applicable in other mines.
Mitsubishi acquired twenty more coal mines from 1884 through 1911. Eleven were large-scale
operations that compensated for Takashima’s falling output. The expertise developed at Takashima
proved invaluable, for coal was essential to Japan’s rising chemical and heavy industries, positioning

70

Yukichi Fukuzawa (1835 - 1901) was a highly regarded Meiji leader – an educator, author and political theorist.
See M. Kobayashi, Japan's industrialization and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo
haraisage) (in Japanese) (Toyo Keizai, Tokyo, 1977).
72
Iwaskaki calculated that the mine contained 1,500,000 tons, implying eight more years of operation and earnings of
¥1,125,750. This fell short of his estimate of mine’s accumulated debt at that time by ¥128,250, but his estimate of the mine’s
salvage value in eight years was ¥200,000. His reserves estimate was excessively conservative, for the mine continued producing
until 1986.
71

21

Mitsubishi well to retain its “national champion” status and attendant political influence.
But, perhaps unsurprisingly, being a “national champion” ultimately became a liability. By the late
1870s, rival politicians took to attacking Mitsubishi for manipulating shipping and passenger fares. After
two major Mitsubishi supporters, Toshimichi Okubo and Shigenobu Okuma, retired, more politicians
attacked Mitsubishi for redirecting shipping subsidies to other businesses.73
In 1882, the government ordered Mitsubishi to restrict itself to shipping or forego further subsidies.
Sensing an opportunity, the Mitsui had organized a maritime shipping firm, Kyodo Unyu Kaisha, with
military personnel as CEO and vice-CEO. Generous subsidies let Kyodo Unyu cut sharply into
Mitsubishi's shipping revenues, which fell from ¥4.6 M in 1881 to only ¥2.3 M by 1883. Kyodo Unyu
had 29 ships with a 28,010 ton total capacity by 1881, rivaling Mitsubishi's 29 ships and 36,599 ton
capacity.74 Iwaskai and the Mitsui appreciated the merits of cooperation, and merged their shipping lines
in 1885 to form Nippon Yusen Kaisha, renamed Nippon Yusen Kabushiki Kaisha (NYK).75 The merger
also let Mitsubishi remain in mining and diversify further.
Mitsubishi developed ship maintenance, shipbuilding and iron production in Yokohama, its primary
port. These facilities were gargantuan, with 1882 sales revenue of ¥187,338, assets of ¥119, 986, and over
a hundred thousand employees.76 In 1887, Mitsubishi bought another major SOE, Nagasaki Shipyards,
which it operated at the government’s request since 1884. Citing the increasingly vociferous political
attacks on Mitsubishi, Kobayashi suggests the lease and subsequent purchase of the money-losing
Nagasaki Shipyard were forced upon Mitsubishi to weaken the Iwasaki.77 If so, they quickly turned the

73
Pyramidal group controlling families often have complex relationship with governments; see Tarun Khanna and Yishay
Yafeh. “Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?” Journal of Economic Literature (2007 forthcoming).
74
M. Kobayashi, Japan's industrialization and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo
haraisage) (in Japanese) (Toyo Keizai, Tokyo, 1977).
75
NYK was the first joint stock company registered under the 1893 Revised Commercial Code, which endowed listed
companies with many standard features, including limited liability. H. Mito, Katsube, N., and H. Ikeuchi, Corporations (in
Japanese) (Yuhikaku, Tokyo, 1999) and S. Tomooka. What is a stock company? (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Kodansha, 1998).
76
M. Kobayashi, Japan's industrialization and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo
haraisage) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 1977).
77
Contemporary rumors of Naval Ministry takeover or a lease to Kyodo Unyu, the former Mitsubishi shipping’s main
competitor, proved false. Other rumors viewed the initial lease as a plot to weaken Mitsubishi by ex-samurai bureaucrats.
Mitsubishi survived fierce competition from Kyodo Unyu, which struggled and failed to pay any dividends. Forcing the moneylosing shipyard on Mitsubishi would allegedly weaken it while helping the state and Kyodo Unyu. M. Kobayashi, Japan's

22

tables, massively expanding and modernizing the shipyard and restaffing it with graduates of Japan’s new
engineering universities and others with modern training. Mitsubishi transformed the money-losing SOE
into Japan’s premier ship building facility. By 1895, Nagasaki Shipyard was the undisputed industry
leader, having built Japan’s first government-standard rank 1,392-ton ocean liner, the Suma.

[Table 1 about here]

Table 1 provides details of the Meiji mass privatization, listing the most important SOEs divested,
details of the transactions, and both the immediate and ultimate buyers.

[Figure 1 about here]

For the most part, the Meiji government’s burnt fingers kept its hand out of the economy in
subsequent decades.78 After the mass privatization, Japan established only one new state-owned enterprise
– Yawata Steel – in 1901, and Figure 1 shows subsidies to business remaining small until World War II
blurred the lines between the military and industry. This fiscal probity let Japan return to bond markets
when necessary to sustain government spending and refinance old debts. The government raised ¥45M
from 1884 through 1889, and floated a ¥175M sequenced issue from 1886 through 1897.

5.

Zaibatsu Big Pushes

The Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and other wealthy families, despite ongoing earnings from traditional businesses,
lacked capital to buy more than a few SOEs. This handful whet their appetites for profit opportunities

industrialization and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo haraisage) (in Japanese) (Tokyo:
Toyo Keizai, 1977).
78
Hidemasa Morikawa, Zaibatsu: the rise and fall of family enterprise groups in Japan, (Tokyo, University of Tokyo Press,
1992) p. 57 writes “: "During the first twenty years of Meiji rule, the government had intervened to support industrialization in
the private sector by encouraging the spread of the company system and the accumulation of capital by entrepreneurs. By the
1890s, however, the state had cut back on its direct role in the economy, giving way to private corporations.”

23

further afield; but seizing these would require pooling capital with outsiders, risking the dishonor of the
Shimomura and Ohmura.

5.1

Pyramidal Business Groups

Fortunately, a solution presented itself – the “pyramidal business group”. This structure, apparently
devised earlier in the 19th century by British trading firms, let a wealthy family (or individual) use public
investor’ money to control corporate assets worth vastly more than its own wealth.79 By the late 19th
century, pyramids existed in the United States, Canada, Europe, and elsewhere. By the 1920s, they were a
preferred structure for big businesses throughout the world.80
The Japanese variant of the pyramidal business group is called a zaibatsu.81 As elsewhere, zaibatsu
were multi-tiered structures with a lead business at the apex. Figure 3 illustrates. The apex firm holds
equity control blocks in a first tier of listed companies. Each of these, in turn, holds control blocks in a
second tier of listed firms. Each of these, in turn, holds control blocks yet other listed firms. In each tier,
public investors own all remaining shares in each firm.

[Figure 3 about here]

Pyramids have several advantages.82 First, by controlling the apex firm, a wealthy family controls
essentially limitless tiers of listed firms. The apex firm controls 51% of the votes in every first tier firm,
and so appoints whomsoever it pleases, usually family members, to their boards. These firms control 51%
79
Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth,”
Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.
80
Randall Morck, A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
Managers (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
81
We define zaibatsu to include any large pyramidal group with listed firms controlling other listed firms. This distances the
term from issues of origin, control, monopoly power, and land rents; which some Japanese scholars hold as definitional. It also
distinguishes the pyramidal zaibatsu from the horizontal keiretsu business groups of postwar Japan, which lack apex firms and
pyramidal structures. Literally zaibatsu means “wealthy group”. Japanese economic and business historians debate the precise
definition of a zaibatsu. The literature generally dates zaibatsu to the period after World War I, the Mitsui, Sumitomo, and
Mitsubishi pyramidal groups predate that era by many decades and are the models for subsequent zaibatsu. Shigeaki Yasuoka,
Japanese zaibatsu (Nihonno zaibatsu) (Tokyo: Nikkei, 1976).
82
For further details regarding each advantage, see Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate
Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.

24

of each second tier firm, so the latter’s boards are appointed by the boards of the former, who are
appointed by the family. In this manner, the family controls every firm in the pyramidal group.
Second, the apex firm’s controlling shareholder needs only a modest fortune because the pyramidal
business group is mainly financed by public investors. The listed firms in the first tier are 49% financed
by outside shareholders. Those in the second are 49% directly financed by outside shareholders and 51%
financed by first tier firms, which are also 49% financed by outside shareholders. The net result is that
second tier firms are 74% financed by outside shareholders. Firms in the third tier are 85.25% financed by
outside shareholders, and those in the fourth tier are 92.25% financed by outside shareholders. Lower tier
firms are successively more thoroughly financed by public shareholders.83 Despite this, every firm is still
controlled by the apex firm’s controlling shareholder. Berle and Means stress this stark separation of
ownership from control in pyramids, and argue that it induces seriously suboptimal management.84
Third, pyramids magnify the political and economic clout of the controlling shareholder.85 Wealthy
families controlled most zaibatsu. A few, like the Nissan zaibatsu had widely held apex firms. But
Aikawa and his family controlled Nissan’s board, so here too pyramiding magnified a family’s power.
Fourth, existing firms’ earnings can finance control blocks in new firms. The controlling shareholder
needs no additional funds to control new firms created in existing or new lower tiers of the group.86
Finally, the family is protected from lawsuits. Each firm is separately incorporated and listed. Each
has distinct shareholders. And multiple layers of limited liability shield the controlling shareholder from
legal problems afflicting lower tier firms.
83

Continuing this example, listed firms in the nth tier are 1 – αn financed by external shareholders, where α, the
intercorporate control stake, is 51% in this example. A 51% stake is often unnecessary for effective control if most shareholders
fail to vote, the control stake shares have multiple votes, or debt and non-voting preferred shares are added to the mix. Crossholdings – shares held by firms not in the level immediately above, but elsewhere in the pyramid – further complicate the
arithmetic in real pyramidal groups. See Lucien Bebchuk, Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis, “Stock Pyramids, Cross
Ownership and Dual Class equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash Flow Rights,” in
Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume, University
of Chicago Press, 2000).
84
Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property. (New York: Macmillan, 1932).
85
Randall Morck, A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
Managers (University of Chicago Press, 2005) and Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate
Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722 discuss this immense
political influence in many countries – both historically and presently.
86
Heiter Almeida and Daniel Wolfenzon, “A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and Family Business Groups,” Journal of
Finance 61 (2006): 2637-81.

25

In most ways, zaibatsu resembled pyramidal groups in other countries, and Japanese academics call
pyramidal groups elsewhere zaibatsu. However, some peculiarities merit note. Most zaibatsu owned land
and mines, initially (Sumitomo) or following the mass privatization (Mitsui and Mitsubishi). Mines,
especially, were cash cows that financed control stakes in new subsidiaries. Also, zaibatsu had sogoshosha, or general trading companies. Through these, zaibatsu bought and sold all goods, gleaning market
information to guide entry into new industries. Sogo-shosha also served as de facto banks, with trade
credit replacing loans. This helps explain a third peculiarity, aversion to debt.
These characteristics combine to facilitate big push growth. One controlling shareholder controls all
group firms, can make customers and suppliers grow in tandem, and can siphon money between firms as
needed. National savings is tapped on a huge scale, since the group is predominantly financed with
public equity issues. The controlling shareholder has an interest in the profitability of the entire group,
and in laws and regulations that benefit the economy overall. And the group can finance ventures into
new industries using the retained earnings of existing group firms.

Thus, we propose that Japan’s

zaibatsu, its pyramidal business groups, decided to take over direction of Japan’s ‘big push’ – not because
the government asked them to, but because the government had withdrawn its hand and each zaibatsu
could now tunnel earnings from one industry into profitable investments in others. Each zaibatsu, quite
likely acting alone and for profit, thus did precisely what Rosenstein-Rodan ask of the State.87

5.2

The Mitsui Pyramid

The Mitsui constructed Japan’s first zaibatsu. Whether they devised pyramiding independently or
imitated foreign pyramids is unclear. The group began in 1876 when Mitsui Bank, then the Family
Council’s control center, divested Mitsui Bussan. Since the bank’s owners bore unlimited liability, it

87

Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South Eastern Europe,” Economic Journal 53
(1943). We find no evidence that the State directed the zaibatsu-led big push, that they coordinated it with each other, or indeed
that they coordinated production in any way. The Revised Commercial Code of 1890 allowed cartel contracts between
producers, but also let firms freely exempt themselves and freely withdraw. After Russo-Japanese War, cartels were organized in
a few industries, including sugar and oil. But most Japanese economic historians see industrial organization as competitive until
the late 1920s. In fact there is evidence that firms with large shareholders, such as Sumitomo zaibatsu firms, avoided cartel
contracts. On all these points, see Miyajima (2004), pp.49-50, and references therein.

26

avoided risky high return ventures. These Mitsui Bussan undertook. To protect the bank, Takenosuke and
Yonosuke Mitsui, representing two major Mitsui clans, legally renounced their birthrights and were
formally cast out by the family. Takenosuke and Yonosuke assumed ownership of Mitsui Bussan, which
funneled Mitsui money into various risky ventures, including maritime shipping.
This limited the family’s downside, absent formal limited liability. A contract specified Mitsui Bank’s
limited liability for Mitsui Bussan obligations, obligations of each to the family should the other fail,
salaries Mitsui Bank paid Takenosuke and Yonosuke, and that Mitsui Bank controlled Mitsui Bussan.
This finely crafted document let Mitsui Bussan take risks intolerable to other families, and earn fat
commissions shipping coal from the state-owned Miike mine to politically volatile China, gaining
political capital by fattening state coffers. The Mitsui repeated this separation of ownership from control
wherever a business grew risky. Thus, when Japanese clothing sales flagged in 1873, the silk clothing
store was transferred to the newly created Mitsukoshi, owned by distant relatives. Again, a contract
established Mitsui Bank’s control over Mitsukoshi and limited the bank’s liability. In each case, one
Mitsui firm controlled another without owning it. Thus, some date the formation of the Mitsui zaibatsu to
1876.88 The Sumitomo followed suit with similar structures shielding family wealth from downside risk.
After much trial and error, civil and commercial codes were announced in 1880, though implemented
much later. A Civil Code passed in 1888, and the Company Law Section of the first Commercial Code in
1893. These formalized limited liability, rendering controlled subsidiaries unnecessary to block liability.
Yonosuke and Takenosuke Mitsui quickly revised their birth certificates to restore their Mitsui lineage,
and Mitsui Bank assumed ownership of Mitsui Bussan and Mitsukoshi. But Japanese controlling
shareholders were now used to separating their businesses into distinct companies.
By the late 1890s, after several additional legal reforms, the Mitsui group began to tap public equity.
Although most Mitsui businesses remained unlisted, the Mitsui Partnership, the group’s apex firm,
through the Mitsui Bank, held control blocks in Oji Paper and Kanegafuchi Boseki (Kanebo) Textiles,

88

Shigeaki Yasuoka, Mitsui Zaibatsu (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Nikkei, 1982): 90).

27

with public shareholders owning the remaining shares.89
Mitsui mines were cash cows – producing earnings the Family Council could redirect into other
companies as they diversified from silk business into banking, which provided financial services to their
customers and suppliers; electrical equipment, which their modernized mills required; and then other
more diverse industries that became relevant as Japan’s growth accelerated. This succession reflects
precisely the industry complementarities envisioned in the big push.90
This developing pyramidal structure let Mitsui organize new joint stock companies to expand into
additional lines of business from the late 1890s through the early 1920s. Soon, most Mitsui firms were
listed, for promising investments outpaced the family’s wealth, necessitating public equity issues. But all
firms in the group remained under Mitsui Partnership control, directly or indirectly. The family’s actual
ownership, though, varied. Figure 3 depicts the zaibatsu in 1914.

[Figure 3 about here]

Mitsui Partnership retains full ownership of three of the four first tier firms through 1921, but reduces
its stake in the rapidly growing Mitsui Bank from 100% to 67.2%, even as the book value of its holdings
rises from ¥20M to almost ¥43.6 M. The expansion is thus predominantly financed with public shares.
Figure 3 groups remaining firms into affiliates, second tier firms, and related firms, located in lower
tiers. Again, substantial public equity infusions erode the family’s percentage stakes even as their value
rises. Thus, the book value of family holdings in Oji Paper rose from ¥4.35 M in 1914 to ¥5.23 in 1921,
while its ownership stake dropped from72.5% to 31.6%.
The increasingly complex pyramidal structure, with more tiers of controlled listed firms, let the
Mitsui reposition firms to their advantage. Morikawa argues that higher tier firms attracted greater family

89

The Mitsui Council functioned as a holding company, with various committees and departments but was not a corporation
and therefore could not own property. Actual operating businesses were owned directly by the family from 1898 to 1909.
90
Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Industrialization and the Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97
(1989): 1003-1026.

28

“concern”, and hence posted higher profitability and lower risk.91 But, key firms in low levels belie this.
Mitsukoshi, heir to the ancestral silk business, moved to a low tier after its 1904 transformation into a
department store chain. Oji Paper and Kanebo, firms of national prominence, also placed in low tiers; as
did Shibura Engineering Works, which merged with Tokyo Electric to form Tokyo Shibura (Toshiba)
Electric in 1939.92 General Electric confirmed Shibura’s importance when it bought a 25 to 30% stake in
1904 for technology licensing.
It seems plausible that firms were positioned to maximize the family’s returns, while minimizing its
risk. Putting highly profitable low risk firms in the top tier accomplishes this, Korean pyramidal group
restructurings in the late 20th rearranged firms at prices favorable to controlling families, so changes in
zaibatsu structures might be similarly motivated.93 However, firms might also be repositioned to facilitate
tunneling – to facilitate big push growth, to concentrate net profits in firms owned directly by the family,
or both. This too is consistent with superior performance of firms higher in the pyramid, and the location
of many clearly important firms in lower tiers.94
Records attest that Mitsui Partnership carefully considered which firms to place where, and what
stake each should hold in others. As the zaibatsu grew more complex from 1912 to 1930, lower tiers were
periodically restructured, but the upper tier changed little. Mitsui Bank, Mitsui Bussan, Mitsui Mining
91
Hidemasa Morikawa, Zaibatsuno keieishiteki kenkyu (Business history research of zaibatsu) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Toyo
Keizai, 1980), 46-57.
92
Hidemasa Morikawa, Zaibatsuno keieishiteki kenkyu (Business history research of zaibatsu) (in Japanese) (Toyo Keizai,
Tokyo, 1980) proposes some Mitsui managers and partners recognized the importance Shibaura’s operations without
understanding them. The Mitsui considered divesting Shibaura in 1902, but opposition from Mitsui Mining and others forestalled
this. Shibaura went public as a Mitsui company in 1904.
93
Kee-Hong Bae, Jun-Koo Kang and Jin-Mo Kim, “Tunnelling or value added? Evidence from mergers by Korean business
groups,” Journal of Finance 57, no. 6 (2002): 2695-2741.
94
On tunneling, see e.g. Stijn Claessens, Simeon Djankov, Larry H.P. Lang, “The separation of ownership and control in
East Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, no. 1-2 (2000): 81-112, Stjin Claessens, Simeon Djankov, Joseph
Fan, and Larry Lang, “Expropriation of minority shareholders in East Asia,” Journal of Finance 57 (2002): 2741-2771,Mara
Faccio and Larry H.P. Lang, “The Separation of Ownership and Control: An Analysis of Ultimate Ownership in Western
European Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics 65, no.3 (2003): 365-395, M.P. Bertrand, P. Mehra and S. Mullainathan,
“Ferreting out tunneling: an application to Indian business groups,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2002): 121-148 and
Simon Johnson, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Tunneling,” American Economic Review 90,
no. 2 (May 2000): 22-27. Recent work suggests that tunneling is more common in countries whose minority shareholders are
poorly protected, like Japan in this era. Even in the 1990s, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert
W. Vishny, “Trust in large organizations,” American Economic Review 87, no. 2 (1997): 333-338 assign Japan one out of six in
an international comparison of shareholder rights. Michael Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York: Free Press,
1990) argues that weak shareholder rights advantaged Japanese companies by freeing their managers from myopic shareholders;
but Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura, “Banks and Corporate Control in Japan,” Journal of Finance 54 (1999): 319-339
dispute this.

29

and Toshin Warehousing remained Mitsui Partnership direct subsidiaries.95 The only significant change
added Mitsui Life Insurance and Mitsui Trust Bank to the first tier after 1912.96
Mitsui’s intensive diversification began with Mitsui Mining’s entry into chemicals in the early 1910s.
The Mitsui textiles business needed dyes, and a Mitsui chemicals firm grew apace with the textiles
operation. Mitsui Bussan founded a shipbuilding firm in 1917 to complement its export business, bought
steel mill in 1924 to supply its ship building and electrical equipment operations, and established Toyo
Rayon to enter artificial fibers. This coordinated diversification wave occurred exclusively through new
subsidiaries of Mitsui Mining, Mitsui Bank and Mitsui Bussan, or new subsidiaries of subsidiaries.
The growth of the Mitsui zaibatsu seems consistent with a privately orchestrated big push enabled by
the increasingly active public equity markets. The state declared many of these industries priorities, but
subsidies were now checked by legislators’ reluctance to undermine public finances again.
Instead, the Mitsui turned to equity markets. Statutes precisely defining the nature of a business
corporation and the rights and liabilities of its shareholders made stocks and bonds viable ways for people
to save. The Mitsui responded to each such legal reform with more share issues, increasingly using public
equity issues as necessary to expand existing firms or enter new industries.97 By 1909, most Mitsui
subsidiaries were listed.
Older upper tier subsidiaries – Mitsui Bank, Mitsui Bussan, or Mitsui Mining – typically controlled
newer high-growth companies, which drew on public equity (and some debt). Thus, earnings from Mitsui
Mining and Mitsui Bussan helped capitalize high growth subsidiaries in chemicals, machinery,
shipbuilding and maritime shipping. These ventures fulfilled government development plans, but public
share issues, not subsidies, funded their growth. In contrast, Mitsui's ancestral silk business, now the
95
In a 1909 restructuring, the Mitsui Bank spun off its warehousing operations as Toshin Warehousing Co. Toshin's shares
were unlisted and held entirely by Mitsui companies and families.
96
See Hajime Tamaki, History of Japanese Zaibatsu (Nihon Zaibatsushi) (in Japanese) (Shakai Shisosha, Tokyo, 1976), 8486. W. Mark Fruin, The Japanese Enterprise System: Competitive Strategies and Cooperative Structures (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1992), 100-102 describes how the Mitsubishi pyramid was reorganized several times between 1916 and 1926,
and argues that this reflected evolving strategic considerations such as economies of scope and scale.
97
H. Miyajima, Economic history of industrial policy and corporate governance: micro analysis of Japanese economic
development (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Yuhikaku, 2004). This behavior validates arguments in La Porta, Rafael, Florencio LopezDe-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W. Vishny. “Legal determinants of external finance” Journal of Finance 52, no. 3 (1997a):
1131-1150 about the importance of law to public equity investors.

30

financially staid Mitsukoshi Department Stores, controlled no major subsidiaries and sat quietly in a
lower tier. Mitsui’s pyramidal structure seemed generally consistent with Mitsui Partnership channeling
earnings and public savings into high growth industries, consistent with a big push.

5.3

The Great Pyramids of Japan

The Mitsui zaibatsu was the first great Japanese pyramidal business group. The others, the Mitsubishi,
Sumitomo, and Nissan zaibatsu, grew similarly, and ended up with similar structures. These expansions
also accord with zaibatsu head offices supplanting the state in coordinating big push growth.

The Mitsubishi Pyramid
Mitsubishi, of course, kept the best double entry accounting records. These let us see big push
coordination in action. Each operating unit had to remit its annual profits less depreciation to the head
office, for reallocation.98 From 1897, two percent daily interest on excess working capital due the
partnership insured timely compliance.
The partnership distributed these profits across the group to cover losses at weaker firms and finance
expansions at firms with growth opportunities. The head office thus devolved management but controlled
operating and investment budgets at each location. This let it orchestrate the growth of each business so as
to maximize the Iwasaki family’s returns as the zaibatsu expanded. One exception to this, the Mitsubishi
Bank, acquired in 1895, remitted only one tenth of its profits, and so served as a second earnings reservoir
for the group. This rendered it more secure in depositors’ eyes, but still let the Iwasaki allocate lending by
dint of their controlling equity block.
Distant Iwasaki relatives held “income shares”, and enthusiastically used their dividends establish
new companies. This practice developed so the Iwasaki could operate other businesses while Mitsubishi
obeyed a one-time state edict to focus on shipping or forego subsides. The practice outlived the edict, and
98

We translate jigyobu as operating unit. The term describes a division in a conglomerate as well a firm’s operations
pertaining to a specific particular product line

31

Iwasaki relatives formed Meiji Life Insurance, Asahi Glass, Kirin Beer and other ventures that built up
the pyramid. These were managed independently, but remained dependent on head office capital.
The head office relied on operating unit managers for information about viable investment
opportunities.99 Devolving capital budgeting to these mangers therefore seemed reasonable. Thus, from
1909 on, the minerals mining operation followed the bank’s lead and retained 90% of its profits. Other
mining, shipbuilding, and sales operations followed in 1911; and the real estate operating unit went a step
further, remitting only 6% of its profits.
Earnings merely accumulated in many profitable operating units, so the head office soon widely
reinstituted full remission. Thus, the minerals mining operation, after retaining ¥1.65 million in 1911,
resumed full remissions in 1912. The coal mining unit's ¥1 million retention in 1913 likewise triggered
restoration of the old rule. These ventures served Mitsubishi better as profit centers, for growth
opportunities lay elsewhere. This failed experiment in investment devolution highlights the head office’s
coordinating function – the role of big push planners.
The shipbuilding operating unit, in contrast, continued retaining 90% of its earnings despite
accumulating over ¥1 million in a single year. Presumably the head office felt the operating unit had
viable growth opportunities.
Mitsubishi fully modernized accounting procedures throughout all operations at this time. Operating
units consolidated balance sheets and income statements for each location and passed the information to
Mitsubishi Limited Partnership. The head office then set retention levels, borrowing, and capital budgets
for each operating unit. This let the operating unit managers finance investments directly related to their
own operations, but also let the head office coordinate the growth of the different operating units and
finance diversification into new industries.
Thus, Mitsubishi’s growth, formerly financed with state subsidies, now drew mainly on retained
99

Hidemasa Morikawa, Zaibatsu: the rise and fall of family enterprise groups in Japan, (Tokyo, University of Tokyo Press,
1992) p. 105 notes that “the survey of salaried managers during the formative period of the zaibatsu leaves the strong impression
that such managers were highly oriented to national goals and relatively well educated. Graduates of Tokyo Imperial University
and Keio Gijuku University were especially enormous. Their education had prepared them to seek as businessman to enhance
their country's place in the world.” Such broadmindedness would perhaps help group firm managers accept decisions detrimental
to their firm, but beneficial to the overall group.

32

earnings. Profitable operating units with growth opportunities financed their own expansion. Growth
elsewhere depended on Mitsubishi Bank loans and earnings redeployed by the head office. After World
War I, coal mining and shipbuilding profits financed major expansions in iron works, shipbuilding and
banking. The highly profitable mining operating units, especially, had scant growth opportunities of their
own. Very occasionally, especially when head office profits were low, Iwasaki family money was also
plowed back into Mitsubishi.
But expansion was still financed internally, or with bank depositors’ money. Internal funds proved
insufficient to finance the burgeoning growth of the 1920s. Mitsubishi Mining was the first to list in 1920,
raising ¥14.84 at its initial public offering (IPO). One by one, other Mitsubishi operating units listed, and
started issuing more shares to fund growth. Mitsubishi share offerings raised a total of about ¥45 million
from1920 to 1931.100 Further offerings in the early 1940s brought in many times more. These offerings
often entailed an established firm listing, and then using the funds raised to finance new subsidiaries
rather than growth in its own operations. For example, the first major Mitsubishi listing, Mitsubishi
Mining, had more sufficient earnings to cover its own investment needs.
From the early 1920s on, these equity issues steadily diluted the Mitsubishi Limited Partnership’s
equity stakes in its listed operating subsidiaries – from an average of 85.5% in 1921 to only 69% by
1928.101 To stem this dilution, these subsidiaries took to financing growth by issuing shares in their own
subsidiaries, rather than issuing more of their own shares. Thus, by 1928, the Mitsubishi group had a
standard pyramidal structure.
Mitsubishi firms’ bank debts shrank rapidly, disappearing by 1928. Mitsubishi Bank’s 1929 IPO
raised ¥13.72 million, and a subsequent seasoned offering raised another ¥5.87 million. The Mitsubishi
Bank now lent mainly to unrelated firms, and thus held a highly diversified loans portfolio that helped it
survive the 1923 Great Kanto Earthquake and the Great Depression. A few Mitsubishi companies issued

100
101

Y. Mishima, The Mitsubishi Zaibatsu (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Nikkei, 1981).
Though a large part of this dilution involved equity sales to Iwasaki relatives.

33

bonds, though.102 Other groups, like the Suzuki zaibatsu, which relied mainly on their banks rather than
equity issues, generally did not survive those crises.103

The Sumitomo Pyramid
The Sumitomo eschewed the Meiji mass privatization, and diversified more slowly than the Mitsui or
Mitsubishi. Sumitomo accumulated profits from its Besshi copper mine, but its manager, Saihei Hirose,
opposed diversifying into banking. Sumitomo Bank was established only in 1895, after his departure.
Nevertheless, it grew rapidly through the early 1900s, soon eclipsing Mitsubishi Bank.
Sumitomo diversification likewise lagged, as did issuing shares. Sumitomo let the others test the
pyramidal group model first, and then moved quite quickly. Like the others, Sumitomo diversified first
into businesses complementary to mining, its core business, and then more broadly. Sumitomo acquired
several distressed firms during Japan’s deep post World War I recession.104 Some of this diversification
seems opportunistic. For example, the Sumitomo took over Japan-US Sheet Glass, a troubled Mitsubishi
joint venture, in 1922 and replaced all its managers. The rechristened Nippon Sheet Glass prospered and,
by 1930, essentially monopolized Japan's flat glass market along with Mitsubishi's Asahi Glass.
But the diversification’s thrust was entry into industries complementary to existing operations. The
Sumitomo expanded from copper mining to large-scale bulk copper and wire production; and from iron
and coal mining into large-scale iron and steel production. Increasingly sophisticated business dealings
required commensurate banking services, so the family established Sumitomo Trust Bank in 1926.
Shipping and storing valuable metals and metal products required insurance, so they acquired Hinode Life
in 1925 and Fuso Marine Fire and Casualty in 1930. Large-scale coal mines were better sustained if coal
had alternate uses, so Sumitomo Chemicals ventured into ammonia/nitrogen fertilizer production at new

102

Mitsubishi Shipbuilding issued ¥10 M in bonds in 1918, Mitsubishi Warehousing ¥5 M in 1928, Mitsubishisha ¥30 M in
1938, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries ¥30 M in 1938; and Mitsubishi Mining ¥75 M in 1942-43.
103
Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura, “A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of Corporate
Ownership in Japan,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
Managers, ed. Randall Morck (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 367-459.
104
H. Hatakeyama, Formation of Sumitomo Zaibatsu (Sumitomo zaibatsu seiritsushi no kenkyu) (in Japanese) (Tokyo:
Dobunkan Shuppan, 1988).

34

coal-based chemicals plants in 1928.
The Sumitomo’s inexhaustible cash cow, the Besshi Copper Mine, continued yielding healthy profits,
but Mitsui and Mitsubishi mining operations both generated nearly twice its profits by 1909. While
Sumitomo Bank grew to rival Mitsubishi Bank, Sumitomo’s overall diversification lagged, and its
businesses remained smaller in scale than their Mitsui and Mitsubishi peers through the early 1900s. The
first Sumitomo listing was Sumitomo Fertilizer in 1934, when the family finally came to terms with

the need to tap public equity markets to diversify further.105 From this point on, the Sumitomo
diversified more energetically with rapid-fire share issuances.106

The Nissan Pyramid
The fourth of Japan’s great zaibatsu, Nissan, has a different provenance. The Mitsui and Sumitomo
pyramids grew from old family wealth. Mitsubishi grew with the newly wealthy Iwasaki family. Nissan,
in contrast, was built entirely with public shareholder wealth virtually from its outset – perhaps because
the pyramidal model was already proved when Nissan, the youngest of the four, was conceived.
Nissan was formed by the initially impecunious Husanosuke Kuhara and his brother-in-law,
Yoshisuke Aikawa. By 1919, Kuhara controlled 30% of Japan’s copper mines, 40% of its gold mines, and
50% of its silver mines; all financed with a ¥2.4 million IPO to capitalize his Kuhara Mining. Japan
prospered during World War I, but subsequent downturns weakened Kuhara Mining and ultimately
bankrupted its subsidiary, Kuhara Trading. The ailing Kuhara retired, leaving Aikawa in charge. An
engineer with state-of-the-art iron US training, Aikawa successfully steered his much smaller Tobata Cast
Iron through the economic turmoil. To save Kuhara Mining, he pooled his money with that of relatives,
managers, and outsiders to inject over ¥25 million into that company. Against all expectations, he saved
Kuhara, became a director in 1926, and then became president. To restore the firm’s long-term health,

105
H. Miyajima, Economic history of industrial policy and corporate governance: micro analysis of Japanese economic
development (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Yuhikaku, 2004: 218-220).
106
Ibid.

35

Aikawa needed capital. In 1928 he issued shares in a new holding company, Nippon Sangyo (Nissan) and
used the proceeds to capitalize Nippon Mining, which he then merged with Kuhara Mining. Since Kuhara
was already listed, this left Nippon Mining publicly held, but controlled by the widely held Nissan.
The older zaibatsu families clearly understood the advantages of public equity, but balanced these
against privacy and undisputed control. This balance limited public shareholders’ participation, for it
required unambiguously dominant control blocks throughout the pyramid. The apex firm of the Nissan
group, in contrast, was widely held, and could issue shares to create new subsidiaries, like Nippon Metal,
or acquire control blocks in already listed companies.
Aikawa rapidly built Nissan into a large, diversified zaibatsu, though machinery remained its most
important business. His technical expertise, still rare in Japan, made him irreplaceable to the group’s core
profit centers, so Aikawa needed no control blocks.107 This let Nissan expand rapidly, since equityfinanced mergers and acquisitions (M&A) permitted faster growth than constructing new facilities.108
Aikawa preserved Nissan’s technology focus, for its major diversification was into heavy industries,
chemicals, and electric power. Unafraid of public equity, but averse to debt because of Kuhara’s near
bankruptcy, Aikawa saw no need for Nissan to control a bank, and kept Nissan firms’ leverage moderate.
The big push logic underlying the expansion of the Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and Sumitomo zaibatsu relies
on circumstantial evidence. But Aikawa makes the logic explicit for Nissan in Figure 3, taken directly
from his autobiography. Here, Aikawa models Nissan and its directly owned subsidiaries to a plumbing
system, in which water represents capital.

[Figure 3 about here]

Nissan was listed and Aikawa had to keep its shareholders satisfied. He accomplished this with a

107

This sort of situation is also thought to lock in control in some US firms. Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny,
“Management Entrenchment: The Case of Manager-Specific Investments,” Journal of Financial Economics 25 (1989): 123-139.
108
M. Udagawa, “New Zaibatsu (Shinko Zaibatsu),” in Japanese Zaibatsu, ed. S. Yasuoka (Nihonno Zaibatsu) (Tokyo:
Nikkei, 1976), 107-144).

36

slowly rising dividend, flowing through the central pipe of the five extending downwards from his ‘public
holding company tub’ representing Nissan, the pyramid’s apex firm. The valve in that pipe is turned so as
to drain the central compartment of that tub, Nissan’s retained earnings, slowly enough that fluctuations
in its water level never alter its dividend flow into the public capital tub at the bottom of the diagram.
Nissan’s other two compartments are filled with capital from securities issues (left) and the sale of
treasury securities (right).
Nissan’s many operating subsidiaries are represented by the smaller capital tanks across the top of the
diagram. The level of water in these is kept constant across the subsidiaries by their drainage into a
common pipeline to Nissan and their own public investors. Note especially the prominent bidirectional
values on a pipe linking their primary inflow and outflow pipes. By adjusting these, as well as the flow
directly out of the top of the holding company tub, Aikawa can raise or lower the common level in all the
subsidiaries. By carefully adjusting the one-way values on the inflow pipes to each, he can prevent
profitable ones from accumulating capital and less profitable ones from draining empty. A parallel system
of debt financing pipes tapping water from a financial institutions tub completes the picture.
Morck and Nakamura correctly note that Figure 3 describes tunneling.109 But closer inspection
suggests tunneling to sustain a big push. The plumbing is arranged to keep a constant level of water
across subsidiary tanks – so those with large investment needs do not run dry and so those with few
investment needs do not overflow. Aikawa specifically justifies using overall profits to subsidize losses
in key firms, and investing in “a few new business lines” that would lose money, but were nonetheless
“important to the nation” and likely to augment Nissan’s long run financial health.110 These ventures
included an auto manufacturing firm, subsequently named Nissan Motor, an Antarctic whaling business,
and a broadcasting company.111 This cross-industry and intertemporal subsidization, financed by current
earnings from a constellation of industries, is precisely what big push development strategists envision.
109
Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura, “A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of Corporate
Ownership in Japan,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
Managers, ed. Randall Morck (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
110
Yoshisuke Aikawa, New Capitalism and Holding Companies (Tokyo, Bankers Association, 1934) p. 13.
111
Udagawa, M. “New Zaibatsu” in Japanese Zaibatsu ed. S. Yasuoka (Tokyo: Nikkei, 1976) pp.134 and 142.

37

As Nissan grew, Aikawa carefully structured voting blocks and crossholdings so every listed
subsidiary was unambiguously controlled by other group firms. This was presumably necessary because
big push growth requires firms in some industries at subsidize those in other industries. While this might
optimize overall gains for the group, as reflected in Nissan’s own share price, shareholders of subsidiaries
conscripted to provide subsidies might ‘hold up’ the transaction to seize the group’s economic profits.112
Wielding a control block let Aikawa marginalize tetchy shareholders under such circumstances.113
Nissan’s share price rose steadily through the Great Depression, allowing repeated equity issues to
finance opportunistic M&A in the bear market of the 1930s. His broad strategy was to buy promising
firms, develop them as fully owned subsidiaries, and then refloat them via partial IPOs. In creating these
spin-offs, or bunshin kaisha, Nissan resembled modern US private equity firms.114 However, the latter
usually sell all their shares to the public to raise funds for the next venture, while Nissan always retained a
control block, using further IPOs to extend the pyramid. This let Aikawa channel earnings from across the
widely diversified group back to Nissan, and thence to other group firms.
Aikawa constantly recognized his duty to keep Nissan’s dividends on track, so other listed group
firms were managed to benefit the apex firm.115 To Aikawa, this mandated broad group diversification to
provide Nissan low-risk cash inflows. Subsidiaries in many industries meant a downturn in one was likely
to be offset by an upturn in another. When the government began accumulating gold in 1932, Nissan sold
Nippon Mining shares and used the proceeds to diversify further. By 1937, the group included Nippon
Mining, Hitachi, Ltd., Hitachi Power, Nissan Motor and numerous other large manufacturers and utilities.
Nissan grew rapidly, surpassing Sumitomo as the third largest zaibatsu by the 1930s; and its apex
holding company grew successively more widely held. Its shareholder base rose from 20,000 in 1934 to

112

Oliver Williamson, “Transactions-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations,” Journal of Law and
Economics 22, no. 2 (1979): 233-62 and Oliver Williamson, “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange,”
American Economic Review 73, no. 4 (1983): 519-40.
113
An alternative strategy, of combining all Nissan operations into a single widely held company could also have prevented
such shareholder hold up problems. One possible advantage of the pyramidal structure might have been that Aikawa could tunnel
earnings into Nissan give its shareholders a generous return at the expense of selected subsidiary shareholders even during
downturns.
114
Paul Gompers and Josh Lerner, The Venture Capital Cycle (MIT Press, 2002).
115
Yoshisuke Aikawa, New Capitalism and Holding Companies (Tokyo, Bankers Association, 1934).

38

51,804 in May 1937. Although 98% of the latter held fewer than 500 shares, these small investors
collectively owned over 50% of the Nissan’s equity. Only 33 shareholders owned over 10,000 shares, and
the Aikawa family’s combined stake totaled only 5.2% in 1937.116
Nissan's listed subsidiaries prospered on average, further enriching both Nissan’s shareholders and
their own. Listed subsidiaries formed or acquired more lower tier subsidiaries, and the pyramid expanded.
Nissan's own paid-in capital, ¥5.25 million in 1933, rose to ¥198.37 million in 1937, as its total assets
soared from ¥91.08 to ¥383.10 million. This mainly reflected the rising value of its direct subsidiaries, for
Nissan’s stock portfolio rose in value from ¥53.38 to ¥269.92 million over the period.

Lesser Pyramids and Other Structures
The top four zaibatsu were widely imitated by other families and entrepreneurs. 117 The chemistry experts
Shitagu Noguchi, Tomonori Nakano, and Nobuteru Mori modeled their widely held Nichitsu, Nisso, and
Mori zaibatsu on Nissan. Masatoshi Okochi, an expert in machinery manufacture, constructed the Riken
zaibatsu, again with a widely held firm at the apex.
Of prominent merchant families from the Tokugawa era, only the Yasuda clan ultimately joined the
Mitsui and Sumitomo in constructing significant pyramidal groups. The Yasuda kept to finance, and
never gained the prominence accorded the other two. Other zaibatsu, imitating Mitsubishi, arose as
wealthy entrepreneurs sought to establish dynasties. Again, none grew to anything approaching the scale
and scope of the top four. Finally, zaibatsu were not coextensive with Japan’s business sector. By the
1920s, Japan’s stock markets were large by world standards.118 Numerous freestanding firms also traded,
and professional managers played important roles in many.119

116

M. Udagawa, “New Zaibatsu (Shinko zaibatsu),” in Japanese Zaibatsu, ed. S. Yasuoka (Nihonno Zaibatsu) (Tokyo:
Nikkei, 1976), 107-144).
117
This section draws from Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura, “A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A
History of Corporate Ownership in Japan,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to
Professional Managers, ed. Randall Morck (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 367-459.
118
Yasushi Hamao, Takeo Hoshi, and Tetsuji Okazaki, “The Genesis and Development of Capital Markets in Prewar
Japan,” University of Tokyo working paper (2005).
119
Takeo Hoshi and Anil K. Kashyap, Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The Road to the Future (MIT Press,
2001). Gary Herrigel, “Corporate Governance: History without Historians,” in Handbook of Business History, eds. Geoffrey

39

[Figures 5 and 6 about here]

5.4

Pyramid Power

Japan transformed itself from a feudal barter economy into a modern industrial state in one lifetime.
Figure 5 shows real living standards doubling from 1885 to 1920, and tripling by World War II. Figure 6
shows a labor force only slightly more concentrated in primary sectors than in Canada or France.
The Japan that achieved this economic miracle is quite different from the Japan of today. Its financial
system was market-centered, for equity finance predominated. It entrusted corporate governance to
powerful families and tycoons, who organized listed firms into pyramidal groups; and likely maximized
of their own wealth, concentrated in the pyramids’ apex firms. Apex firm value maximization is unlikely
to coincide with shareholder value maximization in any individual lower tier firm.120
But, at least for a time, it perhaps aligned the wealthy families’ and tycoons’ interests with the social
welfare goal of a successful big push, which requires that industries grow in tandem, with suppliers and
customers eschewing opportunities to hold each other up and expanding in tandem. This sometimes
requires one industry to lose money temporarily so another can exploit profitable growth opportunities.
Pyramidal business groups give the apex firm undisputable control over a large constellation of listed
subsidiaries, and subsidiaries of subsidiaries, populating many industries. The party in control of the apex
firm can prevent firms from holding each other up and can coordinate cross-subsidized growth where it
makes overall financial sense for the group. Whether the controlling shareholder’s interest align precisely
with those of a central planner selflessly coordinating a big push is a knotty problem. But a degree of
alignment seems plausible.

Jones and Jonathan Zeitlin (Oxford University Press. 2006).
120
Randall Morck, David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, “Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic Growth:
The Canadian Disease,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Volume, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).

40

5.5 The Pyramids’ Curse
Why did Japan’s big push succeed, while similar programs in Latin America, South Asia, and Africa
repeatedly fail?121 We propose that Japan’s unique success occurred because its feudal elite, then its
reformist government, and finally its zaibatsu families, propitiously bowed out.
First, Japan’s feudal elite was uniquely marginalized by early Meiji shock therapy. Elsewhere,
traditional elites, intent on preserving their social and economic dominance, are thought to stifle
growth.122 After the failed 1877 Seinan Uprising, Japan’s feudal elite was a spent force.
The Meiji state too was propitiously marginalized. It began a classic big push, subsidizing SOEs in
all major industries. Standard government failure problems forced a mass privatization to restore
government finances. Thus burned, the state avoided subsidizing industry or establishing SOEs for
several decades. This left business largely to itself. Elsewhere, big push programs remain state-directed
indefinitely, magnifying political rent seeking returns. Rampant government failure, unsurprisingly,
strangles growth after an initial spurt.123
Japan’s zaibatsu took over the big push, brought it to completion, and then were also abruptly
marginalized. Economic development stalls when a old money families manipulate the state to entrench
their status.124 This could not happen in Japan, for the zaibatsu families were fortuitously sidelined after a

121

Easterly, William. “The Big Push Deja Vu: A Review of Jeffrey Sach’s The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for
Our Time.” Journal of Economic Literature 44, no. 1 (2006): 1.
122
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making
of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no. 4 (2002): 1231-1294 describe nonwestern
elites blocking growth to preserve traditional extractive economic systems. René Stulz and Rohan Williamson, “Culture,
Openness, and Finance.” Journal of Financial Economics 70, no. 3 (2003): 313-349 describe hierarchical traditions impeding
financial development and hence growth. Olson, Mancur, Jr. “Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force,” Journal of Economic
History 23, no. 4 (1963): 529-552, models elites blocking growth to protect the favorable (to them) status quo.
123
Anne Krueger, “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,” American Economic Review 64 (1974): 291-303,
Kevin M. Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics (May 1991): 503-530 and Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Why is Rent-seeking Costly to
Growth?” American Economic Review 82, no. 2 (1993): 409-414, and William Easterly, The Elusive Quest for Growth (MIT
Press, 2001) and William Easterly, The White Man's Burden: Why the West's efforts to aid the rest have done so much ill and so
little good (New York: Penguin, 2006a).
124
David Landes, “French Entrepreneurship and Industrial Growth in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Economic History
9, (1949): 45-61, Randall Morck, David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, “Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic
Growth: The Canadian Disease,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference Volume, University of Chicago Press, 2000), Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, “Agency problems in
large family business groups,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 27, no. 4 (2003) and Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung,
“Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 19 (2004), Raghuram Rajan and Luigi
Zingales, “The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the twentieth century,” Journal of Financial Economics

41

couple of decades of rapid growth.
The military government, which seized power in the 1930s through assassination, blackmail, and
intimidation, had a surprisingly populist – in some respects, almost socialist – ideology for a fascist
dictatorship.125 Coining an expression that echoes through financial history, the military condemned
zaibatsu families for an unpatriotic “short term focus” on the current earnings and dividends of their apex
firms.126 Acting on these “concerns”, the military de facto took control of the investment policies and
strategic decisions of the country’s great corporations. Whether zaibatsu families were coöpted or
conscripted is debated, but the military substantially sidelined them. 127
The US occupation’s zaibatsu dissolution program completed their marginalization. Justified on
antitrust grounds, but probably to diffuse zaibatsu families’ political power, the program confiscated the
families’ shares and intercorporate equity blocks, and sold these into the open market.128
Thus, Japan’s zaibatsu families did not become an old-money elite of the sort Haber portrays in Latin
America.129 Instead, postwar Japan entrusted the governance of its largest corporations to professional
managers. The zaibatsu families added momentum to the big push, but then lost their hold.
Finally, Japan’s unequal treaties kept trade barriers low and precluded foreign investment barriers.
Much work links elite entrenchment to financial insularity.130 These treaties empowered foreign courts to

69, no. 1 (2003): 5-50, Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment
and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005), and Kathy Fogel, Oligarchic family control, social economic
outcomes, and the quality of government. Journal of International Business Studies 37 (2006): 603–622.
125
Hatate p.56 and Udagawa pp. 107-44; see also Kobayashi. M. Kobayashi, Japan's industrialization and privatization of
government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka to kangyo haraisage) (in Japanese) (Toyo Keizai, Tokyo, 1977); M. Udagawa, New
Zaibatsu (Shinko zaibatsu) in Japanese zaibatsu (Nihonno zaibatsu) ed. S. Yasuoka (Tokyo: Nikkei, 1976); Isao Hatate,
Japanese Zaibatsu and Mitsubishi (Nihonno zaibatsu to Mitsubishi) (in Japanese) (Tokyo: Rakuyu Shobo, 1978).
126
Takahashi, Kamekichi. Analysis of Japanese Zaibatsu (Nihon zaibatsu no kaibo) (in Japanese). Tokyo: Chuokoronsha,
1930. Also Takahashi, Kamekichi. The Stock Company – A Cause of National Decay (Kabushiki Gaisha Bokokuron), 1930.
127
Randall Morck and Masao Nakamura, “A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of Corporate
Ownership in Japan,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
Managers, ed. Randall Morck (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 367-459.
128
Ibid.
129
For general arguments and evidence that openness checks elites, see Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales. Saving
Capitalism from the Capitalists (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2003). For Latin American evidence, see Stephen Haber,
Political Institutions and Economic Growth in Latin America: Essays in Policy, History, and Political Economy (Stanford:
Hoover Institution Press, 2000) and Stephen Haber, Crony Capitalism and Economic Growth in Latin America: Theory and
Evidence (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 2002). For a survey, see Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung,
“Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.
130
Surveyed in Randall Morck, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment
and Growth,” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.

42

apply foreign law to disputes in treaty concession enclaves, demonstrating a spectrum of foreign legal
systems in action. These working examples let Meiji Japan devise and rapidly implement a modern legal
system. The structure of a country’s legal system correlated with its financial development and growth.131
Japan’s stock markets were large by contemporary standards in the early twentieth century.132 Openness
also lets imports and exports, as well as foreign capital, substitute for missing pieces of the domestic
economy in a big push.133

6. Conclusion
Easterly concedes Japan as exemplifying a successful big push, a government-coordinated expansion of
interdependent industries that sidesteps hold-up problems.134 That Japan joined the modern world
remarkably quickly is clear. The Meiji Restoration took place in 1868, and by the end of World War I
Japan was an industrial economy on par with much of Europe. But most of its big push was likely not
government coordinated.
Rather, Japan’s economic history suggests a big push can succeed under certain circumstances despite
gloomy evidence to the contrary.135 Specifically,
1. The state gives an initial shove, marginalizing traditional elites, reforming basic institutions, perhaps
even subsidizing technology imports, and then withdraws its hand. This withdrawal checks
government failure problems.
2. Pyramidal business groups emerge to propel the big push. An undisputed controlling shareholder
focusing on the apex firm’s value, prevents hold up problems and coordinates cross-industry
subsidies, as group member firms tap public equity markets to capitalize cascades of subsidiaries
131

Jeffrey Wurgler, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial Economics 58 (2000): 187-214.
Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, “The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the twentieth century”
Journal of Financial Economics 69(1) (2003) 5–50, in Table 3, show Japan’s stock markets to be relatively open in 1913
compared to those in Canada, the U.S., and Western Europe; and their other tables accord with this.
133
See e.g. Vitor Trindade, “The big push, industrialization and international trade: The role of exports” Journal of
Development Economics 78 (2005) 22– 48. *
134
William Easterly, “The Big Push Deja Vu: A Review of Jeffrey Sach's The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for
Our Time,” Journal of Economic Literature 44, no. 1 (2006): 1.
135
Ibid.
132

43

spanning all relevant industries. At least to some extent, this echoes what a selfless central planner
coordinating a big push would do
3. The controlling shareholders are marginalized as the big push nears completion. This prevents
entrenched oligarchy problems from reversing the big push.
4. All this is done with limited trade barriers and no barriers against foreign investment.
If this thesis is valid, Japan offers an alternative big push prescription for today’s emerging economies.
That Japan’s experience is replicable is unclear. Inefficient SOEs became a political liability in Meiji
Japan – perhaps because of Confucian expectations that bureaucrats should be honest.136 Japan’s feudal
elite, central planners, and zaibatsu families were auspiciously discredited in circumstances difficult to
replicate elsewhere. Elites, once established, are usually hard to dislodge.137
Our big push theory of pyramidal business groups differs from other explanations of pyramidal
business groups. Business group firms may well let firms coinsure each other to spread risk.138 Group
firms may well trust each other to do business in economies where corruption stymies arm’s length
dealing.139 Without denying such possibilities, we suggest a broader argument that subsumes them. The
highly industrially diversified pyramidal structure common to business groups throughout the world
permits a controlling shareholder to stem hold-up problems and coordinate growth across diverse
complementary industries, permitting very rapid growth financed by public equity – a big push.
Further research is clearly needed to test these ideas.
136

If our thesis is valid, diversification in

Edwin O. Reischauer, The Japanese Today: Change and Continuity (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, Belknal
Press, 1988): 85. Ronald Dore, Taking Japan seriously: A Confucian perspective on leading economic issues (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1987).
137
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An
Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91, no. 5 (2001): 1369-1401, Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James
Robinson. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions In The Making Of The Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no. 4 (2002): 1231-1294 and Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. “The
Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth,” American Economic Review 95, no. 3 (2005): 546579.
138
Takeo Hoshi, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein, “The role of banks in reducing the costs of financial distress in
Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics 27 (1990): 67 88 and Takeo Hoshi, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, “Corporate
Structure, Liquidity, and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (1991):
33-60.
139
Tarun Khanna and Krishna Palepu, “Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign Investors, and Corporate Governance,”
in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck (National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001); Tarun Khanna and J. Rivkin, “Estimating the Performance Effects of Business
Groups in Emerging Markets,” Strategic Management Journal 22, no. 1 (2001); Tarun Khanna and Raymond Fisman,
“Facilitating Development: The Role of Business Groups,” World Development 32, no. 4 (2004): 609-628..

44

pyramidal business groups, at least in rapidly growing economies, should do more than spread risks.
These groups should disproportionately contain firms that would risk hold up problems were they
freestanding. Cross-subsidization should also balance growth across complementary industries, not just
enrich controlling shareholders. In contrast, pure risk sharing implies that groups should contain firms
whose returns are as little correlated as possible. We welcome further work exploring these issues more
thoroughly, and hope to pursue them ourselves in subsequent studies.

Bibliography of Works Cited
Books and Book Chapters
Aikawa, Yoshisuke. New Capitalism and Holding Companies. Tokyo Bankers Association, 1934.
Aoki, Masahiko. Information, Incentives, and Bargaining in the Japanese Economy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Bauer, Peter Thomas. Dissent on Development: Studies and Debates in Development Economics. London:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1972.
Bauer, Peter Thomas. Reality and Rhetoric: Studies in the Economics of Development. London:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1984.
Bebchuk, Lucien, Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis. “Stock Pyramids, Cross Ownership and Dual
Class equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash Flow Rights,” in
Randall Morck ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Volume, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Berle, Adolf, and Gardiner Means. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York:
Macmillan, 1932.
Dore, Ronald. Taking Japan seriously: A Confucian perspective on leading economic issues. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1987.
Easterly, William. The Elusive Quest for Growth. MIT Press, 2001.
Easterly, William. The White Man's Burden: Why the West's efforts to aid the rest have done so much ill

45

and so little good. New York: Penguin, 2006.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. “Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of
Family Ownership in the United Kingdom,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the
World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers, ed. Randall Morck. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2005.
Fruin, W. Mark. The Japanese Enterprise System: Competitive Strategies and Cooperative Structures.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Fukuzawa, Yukichi. Chuai no hou (Methods of bookkeeping) (in Japanese). Tokyo: Keio University
Press, 1873. (Published in four volumes in 1873 and 1874.)
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner. The Venture Capital Cycle. MIT Press, 2002.
Haber, Stephen. Political Institutions and Economic Growth in Latin America: Essays in Policy, History,
and Political Economy. Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 2000.
Haber, Stephen. Crony Capitalism and Economic Growth in Latin America: Theory and Evidence.
Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 2002.
Harada, M. Japan's Modernization and Economic Policies (Nihonno kindaikato keizai seisaku), (in
Japanese). Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 1972.
Hatakeyama, H. Formation of Sumitomo Zaibatsu (Sumitomo zaibatsu seiritsushi no kenkyu) (in
Japanese). Tokyo: Dobunkan Shuppan, 1988.
Herrigel, Gary. “Corporate Governance: History without Historians,” in Handbook of Business History,
eds. Geoffrey Jones and Jonathan Zeitlin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Hoshi, Takeo, and Anil K. Kashyap. Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The Road to the
Future. MIT Press, 2001.
Japan Statistics Research Institute. Japan economic statistics data (Nihon keizai tokei shu) (in Japanese).
Tokyo: Japan Statistics Research Institute, 1958.
Khanna, Tarun, and Krishna Palepu. “Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign Investors, and
Corporate Governance,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall Morck. National Bureau

46

of Economic Research Conference Volume. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Kobayashi, M., Japan's industrialization and privatization of government enterprises (Nihon no kogyoka
to kangyo haraisage) (in Japanese). Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 1977.
Kornai, Janos. The Economics of Shortage. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1980.
Krueger, Anne. “Why Crony Capitalism is Bad for Economic Growth,” in Crony Capitalism and
Economic Growth in Latin America: Theory and Evidence, ed. Stephen Haber. Stanford: Hoover
Institution Press, 2002.
Kume, Kunitake, ed. Real experience of America and Europe (Beio kairan jikki) (in Japanese), Tokyo:
Iwanami, 1996.
Lockwood, W.W. Economic Development of Japan. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954.
Minami, Ryoshin. Economic Development of Japan: A Quantitative Study. [Second edition] Houndmills
Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan Press, 1994.
Ministry of Finance, History of public finance in the Meiji period (Meiji zaiseishi), (in Japanese), in 14
volumes, Maruzen, Tokyo, 1904-5.
Mishima, Y. (ed.). The Mitsubishi Zaibatsu (in Japanese). Tokyo: Nikkei, 1981.
Mitchell, Brian. International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia and Oceania, 1750-2000, 4th ed.
Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Mitchell, Brian. International Historical Statistics: Americas, 1750-2000, 4th ed. Basingstoke and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003a.
Mitchell, Brian. International Historical Statistics: Europe, 1750-2000, 4th ed. Basingstoke and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003b.
Mito, H., Katsube, N., and H. Ikeuchi. Corporations (in Japanese). Yuhikaku, Tokyo, 1999.
Mitsubishi Public Affairs Committee. People of Mitsubishi. www.mitsubishi.or.jp/e/h/hism.html, 2006.
Miyajima, H. Economic history of industrial policy and corporate governance: micro analysis of
Japanese economic development (in Japanese). Tokyo: Yuhikaku, 2004.
Morck, Randall, and Masao Nakamura. “A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of

47

Corporate Ownership in Japan,” in A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family
Business Groups to Professional Managers, ed. Randall Morck. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2005.
Morck, Randall, David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung. “Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and
Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, ed. Randall
Morck. National Bureau of Economic Research Conference, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2000.
Morck, Randall. A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to
Professional Managers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Morck, Randall. “How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The Double-Taxation of Intercorporate
Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, ed. James
Poterba. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005a.
Morikawa, Hidemasa. Zaibatsuno keieishiteki kenkyu (Business history research of zaibatsu) (in
Japanese). Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 1980.
Mosk, Carl. “Japan, Industrialization and Economic Growth,” in EH.Net Encyclopedia, ed. Robert
Whaples, 2004. http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/mosk.japan.final (January 19, 2004).
Muroyama, Yoshimasa, “Mechanisms of the Matsukata deflation (Matsukata deflation no mechanism),”
(in Japanese), in Umemura, Matatsugu, and Nakamura, Takahusa (Eds.), Matsukata finance and
industriak development policies (Matsukata zaiseito shokusan kogyo seisaku),” (in Japanese),
University of Tokyo Press, 1983, 127-155.
Nakamura, Takahusa. Japanese Economy in Meiji and Taisho Era (Meiji Taishokino keizai) (in
Japanese), Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1985.

Ohkawa, Kazushi. “Production Structure,” in Patterns of Japanese Economic Development: A
Quantitative Appraisal, eds. Kazushi Ohkawa and Miyohei Shinohara with Larry Meissner,
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1979.

48

Ohkawa, Kazushi, and Henry Rosovsky. Japanese Economic Growth: Trend Acceleration in the
Twentieth Century. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1973.
Porter, Michael. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: Free Press, 1990.
Prebisch, Raul. The Economic Development of Latin America. New York: United Nations Press, 1950;
originally in Spanish as El desarrollo económico de América Latina y alguno de sus principales
problemas. Santiago: CEPAL, 1949.
Rajan Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2003.
Reischauer, Edwin O. The Japanese Today: Change and Continuity. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1988.
Sachs, Jeffrey. Understanding Shock Therapy. London: Social Market Foundation, 1994.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New York: Penguin Press,
2005.
Samuels, Richard. Rich nation, strong army – national security and the technological transformation of
Japan. New York: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Treisman. Without a Map: Political Tactics and Economic Reform in Russia.
MIT Press, 1999.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. The Grabbing Hand. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998.
Takahashi, Kamekichi. Analysis of Japanese Zaibatsu (Nihon zaibatsu no kaibo) (in Japanese). Tokyo:
Chuokoronsha, 1930.
Takahashi, Kamekichi. The Stock Company – A Cause of National Decay (Kabushiki Gaisha Bokokuron),
1930.
Tamaki, Hajime. History of Japanese Zaibatsu (Nihon Zaibatsushi) (in Japanese). Tokyo: Shakai
Shisosha, 1976.
Tomooka, S. What is a stock company? (in Japanese). Tokyo: Kodansha, 1998.
Udagawa, M. “New Zaibatsu (Shinko zaibatsu),” in Japanese zaibatsu ed. S. Yasuoka (Nihonno

49

zaibatsu). Tokyo: Nikkei, 1976.
UN Millennium Project. Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium
Development Goals: Main Report. New York: United Nations, 2005.
Yafeh, Yishay, “Japan’s Corporate Groups: Some International and Historical Perspectives,” in M.
Blomström, J. Corbett, F. Hayashi and A. Kashyap (eds.) Structural Impediments to Growth in Japan
(Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2003).
Yasuoka, Shigeaki. Japanese zaibatsu (Nihonno zaibatsu). Tokyo: Nikkei, 1976.
Yasuoka, Shigeaki. Mitsui Zaibatsu (in Japanese). Tokyo: Nikkei, 1982.

Articles and Essays
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91, no. 5 (2001): 1369-1401
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and
Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, no. 4 (2002): 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
Institutional Change, and Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 95, no. 3 (2005): 546-579.
Almeida, Heitor, and Daniel Wolfenzon. “A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and Family Business
Groups.” Journal of Finance 61 (2006): 2637-81.
Bae, Kee-Hong, Jun-Koo Kang and Jin-Mo Kim. “Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers by
Korean business groups.” Journal of Finance 57, no. 6 (2002): 2695-2741.
Baumol, William J. “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive.” Journal of Political
Economy 98 (1990): 893-921.
Beason, Richard, and David E. Weinstein. “Growth, Economies of Scale, and Targeting in Japan (19551990).” Review of Economics and Statistics 78, no. 2 (1996): 286-295.
Bertrand, M.P., P. Mehra, and S. Mullainathan. “Ferreting out tunneling: an application to Indian business

50

groups.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2002): 121-148.
Claessens Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang. “The separation of ownership and control in East
Asian Corporations.” Journal of Financial Economics 58, no. 1-2 (2000): 81-112.
Claessens, Stjin, Simeon Djankov, Joseph Fan, and Larry Lang. “Expropriation of minority shareholders
in East Asia.” Journal of Finance 57 (2002): 2741-2771.
Droppers, Garrett, “Monetary changes in Japan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 12, no. 2 (1898): 153185.
Easterly, William. “The Big Push Deja Vu: A Review of Jeffrey Sach’s The End of Poverty: Economic
Possibilities for Our Time.” Journal of Economic Literature 44, no. 1 (2006): 1.
Faccio, Mara, and Larry H.P. Lang. “The Separation of Ownership and Control: An Analysis of Ultimate
Ownership in Western European Countries.” Journal of Financial Economics 65, no.3 (2003): 365395.
Fogel, Kathy. “Oligarchic family control, social economic outcomes, and the quality of government.”
Journal of International Business Studies 37 (2006): 603–622.
Goto, Akira. “Business Groups in a Market Economy.” European Economic Review 19 (1982): 53-70.
Hamao, Yasushi, Takeo Hoshi, and Tetsuji Okazaki. “The Genesis and development of Capital Markets
in Prewar Japan.” University of Tokyo working paper (2005).
Hayek, Friedrich. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” American Economic Review. 35, no. 4 (1945):
519-30.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. “The role of banks in reducing the costs of financial
distress in Japan.” Journal of Financial Economics 27 (1990): 67 88.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. “Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and Investment:
Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (1991): 33-60.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling. “The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics. 3 (1976) 305-360.

51

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. “Tunneling.”
American Economic Review 90, no. 2 (May 2000): 22-27.
Khanna, Tarun, and J. Rivkin. “Estimating the Performance Effects of Business Groups in Emerging
Markets.” Strategic Management Journal 22, no. 1 (2001): 45-74.
Khanna, Tarun, and Raymond Fisman. “Facilitating Development: The Role of Business Groups.” World
Development 32, no. 4 (2004): 609-628.
Khanna, Tarun and Yishay Yafeh. “Business Groups and Risk Sharing Around the World.” Journal of
Business 78, no. 1 (2005): 301-340.
Khanna, Tarun and Yishay Yafeh. “Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?”
Journal of Economic Literature (2007 forthcoming).
Krueger, Anne. “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society.” American Economic Review 64
(1974): 291-303.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W. Vishny. “Trust in large
organizations.” American Economic Review 87, no. 2 (1997): 333-338.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W. Vishny. “Legal determinants of
external finance.” Journal of Finance 52, no. 3 (1997a): 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999. “Corporate
Ownership Around the World.” Journal of Finance 54, no. 2 (April 1999): 471-520.
Landes, David. “French Entrepreneurship and Industrial Growth in the Nineteenth Century.” Journal of
Economic History 9, (1949): 45-61.
Lee, Phil-Sang. “Economic Crisis and Chaebol Reform in Korea.” Discussion Paper No. 14 School of
Business Administration, Korea University, 2000.
Lipton, David, and Jeffrey Sachs. “Creating a Market Economy in Eastern Europe: The Case of Poland,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1990): 75-147.
Loungani, Prakash. “Inequality.” Finance & Development 40, no. 3 (2003): 22.

McMaster, John. “The Takashima Mine: British Capital and Japanese Industrialization,” The
52

Business History Review 37, no. 3 (Autumn, 1963): 217-239.
Morck, Randall, and Bernard Yeung. “Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society.” Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 19 (2004): 391-409.
Morck, Randall, and Bernard Yeung. “Agency problems in large family business groups.”
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 27, no. 4 (2003): 367.
Morck, Randall, and Masao Nakamura. “Banks and Corporate Control in Japan.” Journal of Finance 54
(1999): 319-339.
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung. “Corporate Governance, Economic
Entrenchment and Growth.” Journal of Economics Literature 43 (2005): 657-722.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “The Allocation of Talent: Implications for
Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics (May 1991): 503-530.
Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “Why is Rent-seeking Costly to Growth?” American
Economic Review 82, no. 2 (1993): 409-414.
Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “Industrialization and the Big Push.” Journal of
Political Economy 97 (1989), 1003-1026.
Olson, Mancur, Jr. “Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force,” Journal of Economic History 23, no. 4
(1963): 529-552.
Pritchett, Lant. “Divergence, Big Time.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, no. 3 (1997): 3-17.
Quah, Danny. “Twin peaks: Growth and convergence in models of distribution dynamics.” Economic
Journal, 106, no. 437 (1996): 1045-56.
Quah, Danny. “Empirics for economic growth and convergence.” European Economic Review, 40, no. 6
(1996a): 1353-60.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. “The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the
twentieth century.” Journal of Financial Economics 69, no. 1 (2003): 5-50.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul. “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South Eastern Europe.” Economic
Journal 53 (1943).

53

Rostow, Walt Whitman. “The Takeoff into Self-Sustained Growth.” Economic Journal 66, 261 (1956):
25-48.
Shimme, Shinichiro. “Introduction of double-entry book keeping into Japan.” Accounting Review, 12
(1937): 290-295.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. “Management Entrenchment: The Case of Manager-Specific
Investments.” Journal of Financial Economics 25 (1989): 123-139.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. “Politicians and Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 4
(1994): 995-1025.
Stulz, René, and Rohan Williamson. 2003. “Culture, Openness, and Finance.” Journal of Financial
Economics 70, no. 3 (2003): 313-349.
Williamson, Oliver. “Markets and Hierarchies: Some Elementary Considerations.” American Economic
Review (May 1973): 316-325.
Williamson, Oliver. “Transactions-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual Relations.” Journal
of Law and Economics 22, no. 2 (1979): 233-62.
Williamson, Oliver. “Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange.” American
Economic Review 73, no. 4 (1983): 519-40.
Wurgler, Jeffrey. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital.” Journal of Financial Economics 58
(2000): 187-214.

54

Figure 1. Business Subsidies, 1890 to 1936
Average government subventions to business as fractions of average total government spending
1921 to 1936
1914 to 1920
1904 to 1913
1890 to 1903
0.00%

0.50%

1.00%

Miyajima (2004).

55

1.50%

2.00%

Figure 2. Archetypal Pyramidal Business Group
An apex firm holds control blocks in a first tier of listed firms, each of which holds control blocks
in other listed firms, each of which holds control blocks in yet more listed firms. A pyramidal
structure of this sort can leverage family wealth sufficient to control one firm into effectively
unconstrained control over an arbitrarily large constellation of firms worth vastly more.
Apex Firm
Controlled by
wealthy family

1st tier subsidiary
#1
Apex firms holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

2nd tier subsidiary
#1
1st tier firm holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

3rd tier subsidiary
#1
2nd tier firm holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

1st tier subsidiary
#2
Apex firms holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

2nd tier subsidiary
#2
1st tier firm holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

2nd tier subsidiary
#3
1st tier firm holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

2nd tier subsidiary
#4
1st tier firm holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

3rd tier subsidiary
#2
2nd tier firm holds
control block,
public holds rest
of shares

For details, see Morck, Stangeland and Yeung (2000), Bebchuk, Kraakman and Triantis (2000), and others.

56

Figure 3. The Mitsui Pyramidal Group, 1914
Controlling corporate shareholder’s control stake is indicated where available. In some cases,
control is clear but the precise size of the control block is unknown. Related firms were likely
influenced, but were not unambiguously controlled, by the Mitsui Partnership.

Mitsui Partnership
100% owned by
Mitsui family

Related Firms
Bank of Japan
n/a
Toa Kogyo
8.0% by Mitsui Partnership
Chunichi Jitsugyo 3.0% by Mitsui Partnership
Nichiei Hydro
n/a
Teikoku Theaters 6.3 by Mitsui Partnership
Inawashiro Hydro
n/a

Affiliated Firms
Oji Paper
72.5% by Mitsui Partnership
Shibaura Seisakusho 55.4% by Mitsui Partnership
Sakai Celluloid
75.1% by Mitsui Partnership

Mitsui Bussan
100% owned by
Mitsui Partnership

Mitsui Mining
100% owned by
Mitsui Partnership

Firms controlled by Mitsui Bussan
Taito Sugar
6.0% stake
Nippon Match
25.0% stake
Mitsubishi Yubo
60.0% stake
Shanghai Textile
9.9% stake
Kanebo
0.9% stake
Toyodashiki Looming
n/a
Osaka Textile
n/a
Hukui Seiren
n/a
Hibino Anzen Fertilizer
n/a
Ryoto Shipping
100% stake
Wakamatsu Chikuho
n/a

Mitsui Bank
100% owned by
Mitsui Partnership

Toshin Warehouses
36% by Mitsui Partnership
15% by Mitsui Bussan

Firms controlled by Mitsui Bank
Hokkaido Tanko Kisen
Tokyo Marine Fire Insurance
Kanebo
Toshin Warehousing
Nippon Yusen Kaisha
Teikoku Hotel
(stakes unknown)

Firms controlled by Mitsui Partnership & Mitsui Mining
Hokkaido Tanko Kisen 6.3% by Mitsui Mining
18.2% by Mitsui Partnership
24.5% total

Firms controlled by Mitsui Bussan and Mitsui Mining
Matsushima Coal Mine 33.3% by Mitsui Mining
30.0% by Mitsui Bussan
63.3% total
Onoda Cement
1.4% total

Source. Constructed using data Yasuoka (1982, pp. 222-223) gathered from the Mitsui Archive.

57

Figure 4. Aikawa’s Diagram of the Nissan Pyramidal Group
Capital is pumped from the public capital tub at the bottom up to the operating subsidiaries at the
top – directly, through the Nissan holding company tub in the center, or through the financial
institutions tub at the lower right. By turning one-way and bidirectional values, Aikawa could
adjust the level of capital in each operating subsidiary to its needs, subsidizing weak but
necessary units with the overall profits of the industrially diversified group.

Source. Aikawa, Y. New Capitalism and Holding Companies. Tokyo Bankers Association, 1934. English translation
by the authors.

58

Figure 5. Japanese Long Term Economic Growth, 1895 to 1943
Only real per capita Gross National Product (GNP) is available up to 1930, after which real per
capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is reported. The difference is that GDP includes economic
activity by foreign firms within Japan, but excludes activity by Japanese firms abroad. GDP is now
generally preferred as a measure of economy performance, but was not introduced in most
countries until well into the 20th century.
325
Real GDP per capita

300

Real GNP per capita

275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25

Source: Mitchell (2003).

59

1943

1941

1939

1937

1935

1933

1931

1929

1927

1925

1923

1921

1919

1917

1915

1913

1911

1909

1907

1905

1903

1901

1899

1897

1895

1893

1891

1889

1887

1885

0

Figure 6. Industrial Structure of the Japanese Economy, 1921
The fraction of the labor force of the Japanese economy employed in each industrial sector is
indicated by the shadings in the first bar. For comparison, similar breakdowns are provided for
Canada, France, Germany, the United States and England (including Wales).

Japan
Canada*
France*
Germany**
United States
England & Wales
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

Agriculture, forestry, & fisheries

Extractive industries

Manufacturing

Construction

Commerce & finance

Transportation & Communication

Services

Other

Notes
* 1931 census.
** 1925 census.
Source: Mitchell (2003, 2003a, 2003b).

60

100%

Table 1. The Meiji Mass Privatization Program
Details of important state-owned enterprises privatized between 1874 and 1896.
Sale date

State-owned enterprise

Nov.1874

Takashima Coal Mine

Book value
(Dec. 1885)
¥393,848

140

Est. value
(June 1885)

Sale price

Initial buyer,

Subsequent buyer,
sale date

Current status
(successor firm)

–

¥550,000

Shojiro Goto

Mitsubishi, 1881

Closed, 1986.
(Mitsubishi Material)

Phase I privatization
June 1882

Hiroshima Cotton Spinning

54,205141

–

12,570

Hiroshima Menshi Boseki
Co.

Kaizuka Boseki, 1902

Jan. 1883

Aburato Coal Mine

48,608

17,192

27,943

Nariteru Shirase

Mitsubishi, 1896*

Closed, 1956
(Mitsubishi Material)

Phase II privatization
July 1884

Nakakosaka Iron Ore

85,507

24,300

28,575

Yahachi Sakamoto, others

Closed

July 1884

Cement Manufacturing &
Fukagawa Shirorengaishi

101,559
(combined)

67,965
(combined)

61,741
12,121

Soichiro Asano
Katsuzo Nichimura

Nihon Cement
Shinagawa Shirorenga

Closed
(Taiheiyo Cement)

Oct. 1884 Nashimotomura Shirorengaishi
Aug, 1884
Kosaka Silver Mine

–
547,476

–
192,000

101
273,659

Raizo Inaba
Shosaburo Kuhara

–
–

Dec. 1884

Innai Silver Mine

703,093

72,993

108,977

Ichibei Furukawa

Furukawa Kogyo

Mar. 1885

Ani Copper Mine

1,673,211

240,772

337,766

Furukawa Kogyo

–
(Dowa Kogyo)
Closed, 1953
(Furukawa Kogyo)
Ani Kozan, 1973

May 1885

Shinagawa Glass

294,168

66,305

79,950

–

Closed, 1892

149,546

98,902

117,142

Ichibei Furukawa
Katsuzo Nishimura,
Eiichi Isobe
Sen Abe

Mitsubishi, 1888

Okosawa Kozan, 1972

Nov. 1886

Aichi Cotton Spinning

58,000

?

?

Naoto Shinoda

–

Burned down, 1896

Dec. 1886

Sapporo Brewry

?

?

27,672

Kihachiro Okura

Sapporo Beer, 1887
Yasushi Asaba,
Kanebo, 1911
Mitsubishi Heavy Ind.
Kawasaki Heavy Ind.
Kamaishi Kozan, 1924
Tokyo Kikai Mfg.

Sapporo Beer

June 1885 Daikatsu Makiyama Gold Mine

May 1887

Shinmachi Textile (Silk)

138,984

?

June 1887
July 1887
Dec. 1887
Jan. 1888
Mar. 1888

Nagasaki Shipbuilding
Hyogo Shipbuilding
Kamaishi Iron Ore
Mita Agricultural Tools Mfg.
Banshu Vineyard

1,130,949
816,139
2,376,625
?
143
8,000

459,000
320,196
733,122
?
?

141,000

142

459,000
188,029
12,600
33,795
5,477

140

Nov.1874.
June 1882.
142
¥72,000 for factory; ¥69,000 for intangibles.
141

61

Mitsui
Mitsubishi
Shozo Kawasaki
Chobei Tanaka
Shun Koyasu
Shomei Maeda

Kanebo Co.
Mitsubishi Heavy Ind.
Kawasaki Heavy Ind.
Nippon Steel
Tokyo Kikai Mfg.

Phase III privatization
Aug. 1888

Miike Coal Mine

757,060

448,549

144

352,318

Nov. 1889 Hornai Coal Mine & Railway 2,291,500
Mar. 1890
Sept. 1893
Sept. 1896
Sept. 1896

Monbetsu Sugar Beats
Tomioka Textiles (Silk)
Sado Gold Mine
Ikuno Silver Mine

145

258,492
310,000146
1,419,244
1,760,866

4,590,439

105,000147
445,250
966,752

994
121,460
1,600,000148

143

Mitsui Coal,
closed, 1997
Hokkaido Tanko
Hokkaido Tanko Tetsudo
Mitsui, 1889
Kisen, closed, 1989
Kuninari Date
Sapporo Seito, 1895
Closed, 1896
Mitsui
Katakura Kogyo, 1939
Closed, 1987
Hachiro Sasaki

Mitsui, 1889

Mitsubishi

Mitsubishi Materials

March 1888.
Nov. 1889.
145
Mar. 1890.
146
Sept. 1893.
147
¥25,000 for the factory plus ¥80,000 for contracted raw silk worms.
148
Mitsubishi acquired Sado and Ikuno in a package deal worth ¥2,560,926, which also included Osaka Metal Smelting and the Aburato Coal Mine.
Source. Kobayashi (1977, Table 5-1).
144

62

Closed, 1973

