NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT, BREASTFEEDING, AND HEALTH:
EVIDENCE FROM MATERNITY LEAVE MANDATES
Michael Baker
Kevin S. Milligan
Working Paper 13188
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13188

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We thank Byron Lee for excellent research assistance. We received many helpful comments from
presentations at the NBER Summer Institute, the AEA meetings, the CEPA and UBC empirical lunches,
the Human Early Learning Partnership workshop, McMaster University, Rand, and UC Davis. We
also gratefully acknowledge the research support of SSHRC (Baker Grant , #410-2005-0486, Milligan
Grant #410-2006-0928). Finally, we thank the staffs of the Toronto and B.C. Research Data Centres
for their technical support. This paper represents the views of the authors and does not necessarily
reflect the views of Statistics Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Michael Baker and Kevin S. Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Maternal employment, breastfeeding, and health: Evidence from maternity leave mandates
Michael Baker and Kevin S. Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 13188
June 2007
JEL No. I18,J13
ABSTRACT
Public health agencies around the world have renewed efforts to increase the incidence and duration
of breastfeeding. Maternity leave mandates present an economic policy that could help achieve these
goals. We study their efficacy focusing on a significant increase in maternity leave mandates in Canada.
We find very large increases in mothers' time away from work post-birth and in the attainment of critical
breastfeeding duration thresholds. However, we find little impact on the self-reported indicators of
maternal and child health captured in our data.
Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7 CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca
Kevin S. Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T1Z1
and NBER
kevin.milligan@ubc.ca

1.0 Introduction
Public health agencies around the world have renewed efforts to increase the incidence
and duration of breastfeeding. For example, in recent years the World Health Organization, the
US Department of Health and Human Services, and Health Canada have extended exclusive
breastfeeding advisories to six months, and recommendations for continued feeding up to 2
years. 1 These revised targets are supported by public health campaigns such as the U.S. Healthy
People 2010 initiative, which promote population benchmark breastfeeding rates that well
exceed current behavior. 2 In short, the push behind these initiatives is determined and the goals
are ambitious.
Public policy must recognize that the obstacles to achieving these aggressive public
health goals are varied. 3 In the first weeks after birth there is clearly a rationale for educational
interventions. Mothers who do not breastfeed by choice may simply not know the benefits of
breastfeeding. Often, those who stop early report difficulty with technique, or worry that their
child is not getting enough food. Counseling, support and training might best address these
problems. The separate challenge of prolonging breastfeeding duration past the initial weeks
brings up a different set of issues. Mothers report that the need to return to work is the leading
reason to stop breastfeeding at longer durations. Labor market policies, including job-protected

1

The World Health Organization recommends six months of exclusive feeding (World Health Organization 2001).
The US Department of Health and Human Services recommends six months of exclusive feeding, with continued
feeding to one year (Department of Health and Human Services 2000). Health Canada recommends six months of
exclusive feeding with continued feeding up to age 2 and beyond (Health Canada 2004).
2
In the US, the 2010 “Healthy People Goal” is to reach a level of 75 percent feeding in the early postpartum period,
50% at six months, and 25% at one year (Centers for Disease Control 2006). According to the Centers for Disease
Control as of 2005, 72% of new mothers breastfeed but fewer than 40% are still breastfeeding at 6 months. In
Canada, an initiative to set out public health goals for Canada was set up in 2005, but has not yet followed through
with recommendations. In a controversial example of the force of the public health campaign, an advertisement in
the United States suggested that not breastfeeding was as bad for one’s child as riding a mechanical bull while
pregnant. See Rabin (2006) for details.
3
See the discussion of the role of policy in attaining breastfeeding goals in Galtry (2003).

1

leaves from employment after birth and labor standards that facilitate breastfeeding or the
expression of breast milk at work, might be the more appropriate response to these challenges.
Underlying these public health campaigns are the benefits attributed to breastfeeding.
These benefits are widely believed to be extensive—ranging from higher intelligence for
children to reduced risks of breast cancer for mothers—but the supporting research is in some
ways problematic. The problem stems from the identification strategy used in most studies.
Experimental evidence of the benefits of breastfeeding is rare due to ethical concerns. Therefore,
most studies rely on observed variation in breastfeeding behavior across mothers. 4 However,
there is good reason to believe that this observed variation is correlated with important
unobserved determinants of child outcomes, leading to biased estimates of the impact of
breastfeeding on health and development. There are important examples where the estimated
benefits of breastfeeding vary with the number of confounding factors accounted for in the
analysis (e.g., Der, Batty, and Deary 2006).
Therefore, despite the rising profile of public health goals for breastfeeding, the answers
to two fundamental questions remain uncertain. First, what public policies will best attain these
goals? Second, what would be the impact of achieving these goals on the health and welfare of
children and their mothers? We provide new answers to these questions, focusing on labor
market policies that provide mothers job-protected, paid leave post-birth. This is a significant
departure from the existing, primarily public health, literature that focuses on educational
interventions.
Our contribution is rooted in a large increase in maternity/parental (henceforth
“maternity”) leave entitlements in Canada. Mothers giving birth before December 31, 2000 were

4

Two recent exceptions to this criticism are Kramer et al. (2001) and Der et al. (2006). We discuss these studies
later in the paper.

2

entitled to a maximum of approximately six months of job-protected, compensated maternity
leave. For children born after that date, both benefit entitlement and job protection were
extended to about one year in most provinces. Previous evidence (Baker and Milligan 2005;
Hanratty and Trzcinski 2006) indicates that this reform led to a very large increase in the amount
of time before mothers returned to work post-birth. We pursue the impact of this reform on time
spent away from work through to breastfeeding decisions, and finally child and mother health.
One advantage of our policy-based identification strategy is the plausible orthogonality of
the increase in the maternity leave entitlements to unobserved maternal and child characteristics.
This provides variation in the period of time before mothers return to work post-birth, and
correspondingly in breastfeeding incidence and duration, which is less likely to be correlated
with these unobservables. This is a clear advance in a literature that primarily offers
observation-based inference. Also, the labor market policy we evaluate speaks directly to the
high proportion of mothers who cite work as an obstacle to breastfeeding. Finally, the specific
leave extension we examine affects an age range (six to twelve months) that previous research
indicates to be critically important, and also spans important public health goals for
breastfeeding.
Our results confirm the previous evidence that extended maternity leave mandates
increase the period of time before mothers return to work post-birth. Within the child’s first year
of life we estimate an increase of 3-3.5 months among those eligible for the leave. 5 This led to a
significant increase in the duration of breastfeeding in the first year – over 1 month for eligible
mothers—and in the duration of exclusive breastfeeding—over one-half month. Importantly, we
find that the proportion of women attaining six months of exclusive breastfeeding increased by
5

For this and other results reported in this paragraph, we have scaled our estimated coefficients by a factor to correct
for the proportion of women in our sample who were (unobservably to us) not eligible for the leave. We explain
later in the paper how we derive these ‘treatment on the treated’ estimates from our reported regression coefficients.

3

between 7.7 and 9.1 percentage points; over 39 percent of the pre-reform mean. Connecting the
labor supply and breastfeeding results, we provide an instrumental variables estimate of the
relationship of time away from work post-birth in the first year of life and the corresponding
period breastfeeding. Breastfeeding increases a third of a month with every additional month not
at work, which implies an elasticity of 0.458. We are not aware of other estimates of this
elasticity in the literature.
We then trace this increase in breastfeeding (and contemporaneous decrease in nonparental care) through to a set of self-reported health outcomes that previous research has linked
to breastfeeding. For no outcome do we find robust evidence that the increase in breastfeeding
had a beneficial effect. While this conclusion may originate in some unobserved deficiency in
the self-reported measures of health, it does not differ greatly from the more modest benefits of
breastfeeding found in studies that exploit a randomized design.

2.0 Previous research on breastfeeding
In the large literature on the determinants and characteristics of breastfeeding durations,
the relationship of breastfeeding to work figures prominently. We briefly review this evidence
below. Following that, we discuss the voluminous evidence on the consequences of
breastfeeding for infant, child, and maternal health.
2.1

Breastfeeding and labor supply

Data on breastfeeding behavior consistently identify return to work as an important
reason both for stopping breastfeeding or never starting (e.g., Bick et al. 1998, Lansinoh
Laboratories 2005). This reason grows in importance starting at about 6 weeks and emerges as
the top reason for stopping at longer durations (Hamlyn et al 2002, Schwartz et al. 2002).

4

There are few theoretical models of the decision to breastfeed in the economic literature.
Roe et al. (1999) and Chatterji and Frick (2005) point out that opportunity cost of time spent
breastfeeding will rise significantly with the return to work, predicting a clustering of
breastfeeding termination just prior. Furthermore, if the expected duration of breastfeeding is
short because of planned cessation on return to work, the fixed costs in equipment and learning
may not exceed the short flow of benefits, leading to decreased breastfeeding initiation. Implicit
here is an assumption that the decision to breastfeed is secondary to the choice of how long to
stay away from work, which is also a common assumption in most empirical studies of this topic.
Empirically, the relationship between breastfeeding durations and the return to work is
studied in (among many others) Kurinij et al. (1989), Geilen et al. (1991), Lindberg (1996),
Visness and Kennedy (1997), Fein and Roe (1998), and surveyed in Dennis (2002). All of these
papers provide evidence that maternal employment post-birth is associated with shorter
breastfeeding duration, although not with decreased initiation of breastfeeding. Roe et al. (1999)
use an instrumental variables strategy to sort out the direction of causality between employment
and breastfeeding, reporting that causality flows from return to work to breastfeeding, and not
the other way. 6 Chatterji and Frick (2005) use a family fixed effects framework to control for
unobserved family background factors, and find that women returning to work earlier have lower
breastfeeding durations as well as lower rates of initiation.
Finally, Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2005) evaluates the same
change in maternity leave that we analyze. They use Employment Insurance administrative data
on maternity leave beneficiaries combined with follow-up surveys, comparing children born in
the year immediately preceding the reform to those born in the year following. Of some concern
is high levels of sample attrition in one follow-up survey (>40%) and a low response rate in
6

See a critique of this IV strategy in Chatterji and Frick (2005).

5

another (<45%). With these shortcomings in mind, the cross-tabulations in this study report a 10
week increase in the time away from work post-birth and a 3.5 week increase in breastfeeding
duration.
2.2 Breastfeeding and health
In 1997, the American Academy of Pediatrics summarized the benefits of breastfeeding,
citing 111 research articles, in support of a new set of breastfeeding guidelines (American
Academy of Pediatrics 1997). The reported benefits for children include decreases in diarrhea,
otitis media (ear infections), gastro-intestinal diseases, asthma, lower respiratory infections,
sudden infant death syndrome, lymphoma, and chronic digestive diseases. For mothers the
benefits include an earlier return to prepregnant weight, improved bone remineralization, and a
reduced risk of ovarian and premenopausal breast cancer. 7
This evidence, while impressive in volume, may leave a cautious researcher less than
fully convinced. The inference in the great majority of the research comes from observation:
comparisons of mothers who breastfeed with those who do not; or who breastfeed for shorter or
longer periods. Observable maternal characteristics are controlled for in the hope that they span
all confounding factors. Kramer et al (2001, p. 414) claim that “All of the scientific evidence
regarding breastfeeding and morbidity in healthy full-term infants is based on observational
studies.” (emphasis added.) Therefore, it is possible that unobservable characteristics drive both
the health outcomes and the decision of when and how long to breastfeed.
This concern over causality is not pedantic. Two recent studies that more carefully
address the question of causality find that some results from the literature survive a more
rigorous test while others do not. Kramer et al. (2001) use an intention-to-treat research design,
7

In the extreme, Ruhm (2000) and Tanaka (2005) speculate that breastfeeding may be the channel through which
maternity leave mandates and infant mortality are linked in their cross-country time series studies.

6

randomly assigning post-birth lactation support across maternity hospitals and clinics in Belarus.
This treatment resulted in very substantial increases in breastfeeding durations, significant
reductions in the risks of gastrointestinal tract infections and atopic eczema, but importantly not
in the incidence of a variety of respiratory ailments. Der, Batty, and Deary (2006) use matched
sibling pairs from the NLSY to revisit the relationship between breastfeeding and cognitive
ability. They find that family background confounding variables can explain the previouslydocumented correlation between breastfeeding and intelligence in children. A further metaanalysis of the literature suggests that previous studies that show stronger relationships between
breastfeeding and intelligence control for fewer family background variables.
Another important focus in the literature is the role of threshold effects—the duration of
breastfeeding has effects separate to those of incidence. Chantry et al. (2006) find large increases
in the odds of contracting pneumonia or otitis media among those breastfed exclusively for only
4 to 5 months rather than six or more. Kramer et al. (2003) find significantly higher rates of
gastrointestinal illness for those breastfed exclusively 3 months compared to those breastfed
exclusively for at least 6 months (although they find no difference in respiratory diseases or
rashes). 8

3.0 Policy Environment
Income replacement for maternity leaves in Canada is governed by the Employment
Insurance (EI) program. Most other terms of the leave, including job protection, are determined
by provincial labor market standards. We describe in this section the parameters of maternity
leaves, as well as other family policies that changed over the period of interest.

8

See also Kramer and Kakuma (2002).

7

3.1 Maternity leave benefits
Maternity leave benefits have been part of the EI program since 1971. Eligibility and
benefit entitlement are determined by the same formulas used to calculate unemployment
benefits. Qualification depends on having 600 hours of paid employment over the twelve
months prior to the date of the claim. Benefits are based on earnings over the 6 months prior to
the cessation of work, with a replacement rate of 55% up to a cap of $39,000. This delivers a
maximum weekly benefit of $412.50 per week. However, a two week waiting period with zero
benefits lowers the effective replacement rate over the full span of the leave.
The policy change we study affected children born on December 31, 2000 or later. Leave
entitlement pre-reform was 15 weeks of paid benefits for mothers, plus a further 10 weeks of
benefits that could be split between the mother and the father, yielding a total of 25 weeks of
benefits. For children born on December 31, 2000 or later, another 25 weeks was added, making
35 weeks that could be split between the mother and the father—and yielding a total potential
entitlement of 50 weeks to new mothers. The reform also included a reduction of the required
hours of employment for eligibility from 700 to 600.
Because eligibility depends on attachment to the labor force before the birth of a child,
not all mothers are eligible. Data from the Survey of Employment Insurance Coverage
(Statistics Canada 2006) show that the proportion of mothers with children aged less than one
year who had insured employment in the 12 months preceding childbirth was 70 percent in 2000,
and has fluctuated between 74 and 75 percent from 2001 through 2005. 9 The proportion of

9

This suggests that the reform led to an increase in the pre-birth employment of mothers, but the match is not exact
because each survey runs from April though January of the following year and the reference period is for
employment in the 12 months preceding the birth of a child who can be up to 12 months old. Unfortunately there are
no data on maternity benefits preceding the 2000 survey.

8

mothers with insurable employment who are eligible for and claim benefits rises from 80 percent
in 2000 and 2001 to roughly 85 percent in 2002-2005.

3.2

Job protection for maternity leave
Uncompensated, job-protected maternity leave is provided through provincial labor

standards legislation. 10 The standards set thresholds for pre-birth employment to determine
eligibility, ban dismissal due to pregnancy, mandate a minimum duration for leave, ensure a
return to the same or a similar job upon return, and specify which terms of employment are
preserved during the leave.
Contemporaneous with the changes in EI maternity leave benefit entitlements, many
provinces increased the mandated duration of job-protected leave to around 52 weeks. We
summarize these changes in Table 1. Three differences across jurisdictions are clear. First,
Quebec did not change its standards, having extended leave to 70 weeks in March 1997. Second,
among the other provinces there is some heterogeneity in starting points, which range from 18
weeks in Alberta to 35 weeks in Ontario. Third, almost all provinces moved on the same date—
December 31, 2000—with only Alberta and Saskatchewan having slightly delayed their
extensions. We account for each of these aspects of the reform in our empirical strategy.

3.3

Other policy changes
Because our inferences will lean heavily on differences across time, it is important to

account for other changes to the social and economic environments facing families with young
children over the period. There are two key developments. The first is a universal, heavily

10

Workers in some industries are covered by federal labor standards legislation rather than provincial. These
industries include federal civil servants, banking, transportation, and communications. Employment in federally
regulated industries amounts to around five percent of the labor force.

9

subsidized, childcare program in Quebec. Introduced in 1997, it was extended to children aged 0
to 1 in September 2000. Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2005) report that the program induced
large changes in the use of non-parental care in Quebec, and was associated with substantial
changes in measures of family wellbeing. The second change was continued increases to the
federal National Child Benefit, with the one-child rate moving from $605 in 1998 to $1,293 by
2002. Milligan and Stabile (2007) report that this benefit had a substantial impact on the
employment of single mothers. Because the benefit is targeted to low income families, it had
much less impact on the incomes of two-parent families. 11

4.0 Predicted Effects
In Klerman and Leibowitz’s (1997) model of maternity leave mandates the effect of an
increase in a leave mandate is ambiguous. Some women will stay away longer from work postbirth while others will return earlier. 12 If mothers do spend more time away from work postbirth, then a simple model of breastfeeding featuring fixed ‘startup’ costs and a marginal cost of
breastfeeding that increases upon the return to work would predict more breastfeeding. There
would be higher incidence as more women find the flow of benefits exceed the fixed costs of
starting, and longer duration due to the increase in the period of time before women face the
higher marginal cost of breastfeeding while working.
More time away from work may affect health through increased breastfeeding, but also
through other channels. For example, it may crowd out non-parental childcare. If this
substitution affects health, then the channel leading from the mandates to health outcomes may

11

In 1998, the National Child Benefit was reduced to zero for family incomes above $25,921. By 2002, this
threshold had reached $32,960.
12
Some of those mothers who took the full mandated leave before the leave extension will stay away longer. Those
who pre-reform quit their jobs to take a leave in excess of the mandate, may now take the new longer mandated
leave and thus return earlier.

10

not be clear. We attempt to separate the effects of breastfeeding and parental care through our
choice of outcomes and the age groups we use for analysis, but the intrinsic duality of the
treatment remains a qualification for this part of the analysis.
Finally, family incomes may differ before and after the reform. If so, the change in
incomes may present another mechanism through which health outcomes change. In
simulations, however, we found that the effective replacement rate changed very little with the
reform—although lower earning women with substantial childcare costs did show higher
incomes, after tax and childcare costs. 13

5.0 Data
We use the National Longitudinal Study of Children and Youth (NLSCY) to analyze the
effect of the increase in maternity leave mandates on the time mothers stay away from work
post-birth and mothers’ and children’s health. The NLSCY is a national survey of children,
excluding only residents of the scarcely populated northern territories, institutions, Indian
reserves, and members of the Canadian Forces. It is conducted biannually, and 6 waves of data
are currently available: 1994-95, 1996-97,…, 2004-05. The first wave covered a cohort aged 011, which has been followed longitudinally in subsequent waves. New cohorts of young (aged 0
and 1) children have been added in each wave, but are not always followed continuously in
subsequent waves. The survey content is deep on questions of parental labor supply, childcare,

13

We calculated replacement rates taking into account taxes and childcare costs, comparing income if on leave and
income if at work. For women earning under the median, childcare costs and taxes take a substantial share of
earnings, meaning that a paid leave would increase family income if the alternative were work and paid childcare.
On the other hand, for women earning at the median, we find replacement rates around 1.0, meaning that the
maternity benefit is approximately the same as the after-tax, after childcare wage. At the 90th percentile of earnings,
the replacement rate drops to around 60 percent. Importantly, the reform changes the replacement rates very little –
the only impact is that the two week initial waiting period for benefits becomes relatively less important when the
leave is 50 weeks long, which gives a small (on the order of 0.05) boost to the replacement rates in 2001.

11

parenting, health and school performance, although at the ages we examine only some of these
variables are available.
We start with the sample of all children born in a six year window around the policy
reform; those with a year of birth between 1998 and 2003. The NLSCY does not allow us to
observe maternal hours worked in the year before the birth, so we cannot condition our sample
on eligibility for job protected maternity leave and/or EI benefits. Instead, we simply keep all
children—including those born to the roughly 25 percent of mothers who were not eligible.
There are three notable omissions from our sample. First, we exclude children from
single-parent families; about 10 percent of births over this time period. We are concerned that
other policy changes such as the enhancements of the National Child Benefit may influence their
behavior. In addition, given the smaller financial resources of single parents, we might expect
them to respond to changes in leave mandates differently than their partnered counterparts, but
we lack the sample sizes to conduct a separate analysis of this group. This said, we present
estimates of our key results from a sample including single parents in the appendix Table A5.
Second, we omit children from Quebec. Not only did Quebec’s job protected leave
mandate stay constant at 70 weeks through our sample period, but also the expansion of
subsidized childcare further confuses the economic environment. These factors render Quebec
families unsuitable as either a treatment or a control group for our analysis. 14
The final excision removes observations when the survey respondent is not the mother,
since fathers may have systematically worse knowledge about the breastfeeding habits of mother
and child. This decision matches the survey respondents in our breastfeeding data from the
Canadian Community Health Survey.

14

We also exclude the very small number of children born in Alberta and Saskatchewan in the months between
December 2000 and the point when the provincial maternity leave mandate changes a few months later.

12

For the analysis of the time away from work post-birth our focus is the first year of life.
We therefore sample children starting at age 13 months, meaning that complete information on
the first year is available. We stop our sample at age 29 months, which allows us to maintain a
common age span for each birth cohort while maximizing sample size. Our key variable is the
number of months in the first year of the child’s life that the mother is not at work. This is welldefined for all mothers, including those who have not yet returned to work by the end of the first
year. We also examine the proportion of mothers who have not returned to work by 1, 3, 6, 9
and 12 months.
For the analysis of health outcomes we draw two samples, children aged 7-12 and 13-24
months respectively. This allows us to investigate any health impacts contemporaneous with the
increase in maternity leave from 6 to 12 months, as well as any persistent affects in the older age
group. Available measures of health include birth outcomes (gestation, birth height and length,
complications), the mother-reported current health status of the child (and mother), the incidence
of specific ailments (nose and ear infections, asthma, allergies, chronic conditions), and injuries.
For mothers, we observe depression, post-partum depression, and related post-partum problems.
Note that the strength of the NLSCY for children’s health is respiratory ailments.
Our analysis of breastfeeding uses the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), a
survey of individuals aged 12 years or older. Women who have given birth within five years of
the survey date are asked a series of questions about breastfeeding. These questions provide
detail on the incidence and duration of breastfeeding, the timing of the introduction of foods, and
the reasons breastfeeding was not initiated and why it ended. We use data from the second
(2003) and third (2005) cycles of the survey. 15 We sample the same birth cohorts as in the

15

Data from the first cycle has a different coding of the breastfeeding duration variable and no information on the
introduction of food or exclusive breastfeeding.

13

NLSCY, drawing data on the 1998-2001 cohorts from the second cycle and the 2000-2003
cohorts from the third cycle to ensure breastfeeding activity in the first year of life is fully
observable. We again focus on children in two-parent families and exclude observations from
Quebec. 16
Our CCHS variables are chosen to conform to conventions in the breastfeeding literature
and to complement the NLSCY variables. They include the proportions of mothers still
breastfeeding and still exclusively breastfeeding 1, 3, 4, 6, 9 and 12 months post-birth, the
months in the first year of life the child was breastfed, as well as 0/1 indicators for the different
reasons breastfeeding ended. Again the duration measures are well defined for all mothers,
including those who breastfeed more than one year or who are currently breastfeeding.

6.0 Empirical Approach
Our empirical strategy compares the outcomes of children born before and after the
increase in the maternity leave mandate. We do this through the use of a two-step procedure that
respects the fact that our policy variation is not at the level of the individual. To motivate our
approach consider the estimating equation
(1)

y i = X i β + φPOSTi + ε i

where y is the outcome of interest for individual i, X are conditioning variables and POST equals
1 for cohorts born after the reform (2001 or later). Conditional on the X’s, POST will capture
average differences in y between children born in pre-and post-reform birth cohorts. While we
wish to interpret the estimate of POST as only capturing the impact of the policy reform, it is
clear it will also capture any unobservable, systematic differences across birth cohorts related to
16

Because we see only year and not month of birth, we cannot implement the partial exclusion of observations from
Alberta and Saskatchewan as we did for the NLSCY. However, in checks with the NLSCY including and excluding
these observations makes little difference to the results.

14

y and correlated with POST. These could be due to other changes in the environment or secular
changes in the types of mothers who give birth—it is just these concerns that led us to delete
observations on single parents and from the province of Quebec. Because the change in
maternity leave was country-wide, there are no obvious control groups within Canada to account
for these confounding factors. Also, because past data collection on breastfeeding has been
sporadic in the U.S., we cannot construct a U.S. control group.
We address this challenge in three ways. The first is to carefully examine inter-cohort
changes in outcomes before and after the reform. We can unpack the POST dummy into cohort
specific indicators leading to the estimating equation
(2)

y i = X i β + ∑ γ t YOBti + u i
t

where YOB denotes year of birth. The γ t (t=1999-2003) provide birth cohort specific estimates
of the conditional mean of y, and therefore can reveal any secular trends in y that might
undermine the inference. Ideally we would want these estimates to be relatively similar across
cohorts before and after the reform. Alternatively, by comparing estimates of γ for adjacent birth
cohorts we can construct counterfactual estimates of POST assuming the policy reform occurred
in 1999/2000, for example, rather than 2000/2001.
Figure 1 demonstrates these points. We graph the estimates of γ when y is the number
of months the mother is away from work in the child’s first year of life. The 1998 cohort is the
excluded category, so the estimates are relative to the time at home for mothers of that birth
cohort. While there are some differences in the estimates between birth cohorts, the change
between the 2000 and 2001 cohorts corresponding to the maternity leave reform is dominant.
There is no change of similar scale if we think of counterfactual policy reforms across any other

15

pair of adjacent cohorts. We report estimates of the γ for all outcome variables in the appendix,
and draw on this evidence in our interpretation of the estimates of POST.
The second approach separates mothers into those who were likely eligible for the leave
and those who were not. The NLSCY has only occasionally collected information on pre-birth
employment, but has good information on post-birth work. We can use this information to
restrict the sample based on post-birth characteristics that should be highly correlated with prebirth eligibility, such as work post-birth. By comparing our results in this subsample to the
results from the full sample, which includes potentially ineligible mothers, we can observe
whether the ineligibles are contributing to a result or whether it is the eligibles who drive the
estimates in the full sample. Because post-birth work patterns are potentially affected by the
reform, this approach can act only as an informal check on our main results.
Finally, a third approach is to construct control groups of older children from pre-reform
cohorts. This is feasible for the health outcomes for which we have contemporaneous
observations for both our analysis sample and the older age group. The observations on the older
children will control for any year-specific environmental factors affecting the health of children
of all the ages, or any systematic survey instrument effects: subtle changes in the wording or
delivery of the survey across waves that affect the responses to the health questions. We select
children aged 25-36 months to serve as a control group for the analysis sample aged 13-24
months. 17 We drop data from the 6th wave of the survey because there are no observations on
the pre-reform cohorts in the 25-36 month interval. The estimating equation corresponding to
(1) for the analysis is
(3)

y i = X iβ + αYNGi + λPOSTW i + ηYNGi POSTW i + μi`

17

For some outcomes the older children span a smaller age interval because some health questions are only asked of
specific age groups.

16

where YNGiw=1 if the observation is for a child aged 13-24 months, and POSTW=1 for
observations from post-reform survey years (i.e., wave 5 of the data).
Following Donald and Lang (2007), we recognize that our policy effects are effectively
identified by variation in the conditional mean of our dependent variables across (typically) six
birth cohorts, and so the estimation procedure that we use respects this fact. We first estimate
equation (2) with no constant, which provides direct estimates of all the YOBt effects. The
numbers of observations for these first-stage regressions are reported in the appendix tables. We
next use these estimates as the dependent variable in a six observation regression analogous to
equation (1), but with only a constant and POST as explanatory variables and weighting by the
sum of the individual weights by year of birth. Because there will be four degrees of freedom in
these regressions, the critical value for statistical significance is 2.78 at the five percent level. It
is important to note that all the substantial inferences of the paper are robust to different methods
of calculating the standard errors. 18
The control variables for these regressions include dummy variables for male children,
single month of child’s age, province, city size, mothers’ and fathers’ education (4 categories),
age (6 categories) and immigrant status, and the presence of up to 2 older or younger siblings. 19
We also report a specification that adds the year of birth provincial unemployment rate as a

18

We also directly estimated equations (1) and (2) comparing robust standard errors to estimates clustering on the
year of birth. The latter standard errors were implausibly small for some parameters of interest. Another approach
involved a first step of estimating equation (1) with a full set of province/year of birth interactions. The estimates of
POST were then estimated from a 54 observation (9 provinces, 6 years of birth) second step regression using the
province/year of birth interactions as the dependent variable. A third approach substituted a full set of
province/POST interactions in the first step resulting in a 18 observation second stage (9 provinces, 2 values of
POST). This last method potentially has the advantage of addressing the effects of any autocorrelation in the error
term following the advice of Bertrand et al. (2004).
19
For the CCHS regressions the control variables are dummy variables for province, city residence, mothers’
education (4 categories), age (single year) and immigrant status. The other controls are not available in the CCHS.

17

control for local labor market conditions. 20

7.0 Results
Most of the estimates are for samples that include mothers who were not eligible for jobprotected maternity leave or Employment Insurance benefits. We can translate these intention-totreat estimates to an impact of the treatment on the treated using information from the Survey of
Employment Insurance Coverage discussed earlier. If we assume that all mothers with pre-birth
insurable employment were eligible (75 percent), then we should scale our estimates by (1/0.75)
1.33. However, only 85 percent of these mothers actually qualified and applied for benefits,
suggesting a scale factor of [1/(0.75*(0.85)] = 1.57. We use these two scale factors as bounds to
translate our intention-to-treat estimates to estimates of treatment on the treated in the discussion
of results that follows.
7.1

Time at home

Estimates of the impact of the maternity leave expansion on mothers’ time not at work in
the first year of life are presented in Table 2. In the first row are the results for the summary
measure “total months away from work.” There is a significant increase of almost 2.3 months,
which represents a 28 percent increase over the pre-reform average of 8.2 months. As already
seen in Figure 1, the estimates of the individual year of birth (YOB) effects, reported in Table A1
of the appendix, are consistent with a causal interpretation of this result. Adjusted to an estimate
of treatment on the treated, the intention-to-treat coefficient of 2.3 months is scaled up to
between 3.05 and 3.59 months.

20

Because interviews process spans several months, we use the average unemployment rate for the months
September through May in the relevant years.

18

In the next column is the estimate from a specification that excludes all explanatory
variables except the YOB effects from the first-stage regression. This estimate provides a simple
check on our implicit assumption that births are randomly distributed across birth years. While
this specification does not guard against possible correlation of unobserved mother or child
characteristics with the POST dummy, it would certainly be harder to maintain this assumption
if we found significant correlation of observable characteristics with POST. As it turns out this
estimate is very similar to its predecessor, indicating a 2.16 increase in months away from work
in the first year.
The third column adds the provincial unemployment rate as an additional control in the
first-stage regression. It is natural to suspect that labor market conditions might affect the time
before a mother returns to work post-birth. The estimate, however, is almost identical to the one
in the first column.
In the next rows of Table 2 we map out the distribution of the impact of the reform by
presenting separate estimates for the proportion of mothers still away from work at 1, 3, 6, 9 and
12 months. A comparison of the estimates across columns reveals that in each case the
specification of the conditioning variables matters little to the inference. As a result we can
efficiently summarize both the estimates of POST and the individual YOB effects (Table A1) for
these variables in Figure 2 where we graph the empirical survival function by year of birth at 1,
3, 6, 9 and 12 months from the data. 21
In Figure 2, pre-reform cohorts are denoted with broken lines; post-reform with smooth
lines. There are two important conclusions. First, the estimates are relatively stable within the
pre- and post-reform birth cohort groupings. While there is some variation across cohorts at
longer durations pre-reform, this does not represent a secular trend upwards: the highest line is
21

These are simple weighted means of the proportions still not at work at the indicated month by birth cohort.

19

for the 1999 cohort and the function drops back down with the 2000 cohort. The overall pattern
of the lines across the reform supports a causal interpretation of the POST estimates. Second,
largest impact of the reform is exactly where we expect: at durations between the old and new
mandates. The effect here is substantial. As reported in Table 2 (first column) the increase at 9
months is 79 percent of the pre-reform mean, and at 12 months is 71 percent. It is clear that the
reform led to significant increase in the length of time mothers were away from work.
We obtain an alternative summary of these results by directly estimating the relationship
between months not at work in the first year and the provincial job-protected leave mandates
presented in Table 1. This specification takes account of differences in the pre-reform mandates
across provinces. We estimate this relationship in one step, substituting the legislated leave
mandate (in weeks) for POST in (1), and estimating the standard errors clustering on
province/POST (18 groups). In the base specification of the conditioning variables the estimate
is 0.092 (0.016), or approximately (0.092*4.333) 0.4 of a week at home for each additional week
of mandated leave. After scaling for treatment, the estimate is between 0.123 and 0.143.
As a final check, we compare these results to those from the restricted sample of ‘likely
eligibles’: mothers who return to work in their child’s first year of life. 22 In this sample, the
estimate of POST is 3.22 (0.196), which sits at the midpoint of the estimated bounds from the
scaling method. This suggests that our estimates in the full sample are driven by the eligibles,
with the ineligibles implicitly taking the role of control group. The mean time away from work
for this sample 5.9 months, which is less than the 8,2 months in the full sample. It then follows
that the estimated percentage increase in time not at work for the treated from this sample at 55
per cent (3.22/5.9) is much higher than our previous estimate of 28 percent from the full sample.
22

As mentioned earlier, this selection is potentially endogenous to the reform. In unreported results, we estimate a
modest decrease in the proportion of mothers returning in the first year as a result of the reform which is not
statistically significant. Moreover, the individual YOB effects do not clearly indicate a causal effect.

20

We can also use this sample to directly estimate an elasticity of time away from work with
respect to weeks of provincially-varying job-protected leave for the treated, evaluated at the
sample means, which is 0.742.
7.2

Breastfeeding

In Table 3 we present the breastfeeding results based on data from the CCHS. We begin
with incidence and duration of breastfeeding, and close with an investigation of why
breastfeeding stopped. The incidence question in the CCHS asks women if they breastfed or
even tried breastfeeding their baby. 23 In the first row of the table, the reform seems to have had
relatively little effect on incidence. The results are not large relative to the mean, and only in one
specification does the coefficient attain statistical significance. This is largely consistent with the
literature, which has found little impact of return to work on incidence.
The next 7 rows of Table 3 contain the results for months of breastfeeding in the child’s
first year. Months of breastfeeding is estimated to have increased by 0.75, which is 14 percent of
the pre-reform mean of 5.34 months. A check across columns reveals this result does not depend
on the specification of the explanatory variables, and the individual’s year of birth effect
estimates in Table A2 support a causal interpretation. We summarize the results at specific
duration thresholds by graphing the empirical survival functions by year of birth in Figure 3.
Again the functions are relatively stable within the pre- and post-reform cohorts, especially
between 3 and 9 months. It is also at these months where we see the main impact of the reform
in a significant shift upwards in the functions. Finally, scaling the results to obtain a treatment
on the treated, we estimate an increase in months in the first year ranging from 0.995 to 1.17.

23

The exact wording is “(For your last baby,) did you breastfeed or try to breastfeed your baby, even if only for a
short time?”

21

We have no information on employment pre- or post-birth in the CHHS, so we cannot attempt to
estimate a treatment on the treated through a restricted sample as we did for the NLSCY.
Recommendations for breastfeeding in US and Canada range from one to two years.
While breastfeeding rates at long durations remain modest post-reform, the proportional
increases over the pre-reform means resulting from the increase in the mandate are impressive.
Scaling the estimates for treatment (1.33) they range from 23 percent at 6 months to 32 percent at
12 months. Furthermore, these estimates are lower bounds, as the pre-reform means for the
treated are likely lower than for the full sample. 24
We also estimate the relationship between months of breastfeeding in the first year and
weeks of mandated leave. The estimated parameter is 0.031 (0.008). For the treated using the
1.33 scale factor the estimate is 0.041 months, or 0.18 of a week with each week of mandated
leave. To calculate an elasticity, we need the sample averages of months of breastfeeding in the
first year and weeks of mandated leave for the treated. While we cannot directly estimate these
means in the CCHS, we can do so using information from the NLSCY. 25 The resulting elasticity
for eligible women is 0.318.
In the next 4 rows are results for exclusive breastfeeding. 26 Total months of exclusive
breastfeeding are estimated to increase 0.38 in the full sample, or over 12 percent of the prereform average of 3 months. After scaling up, the estimate for the treated is between 0.51 and
24

The NLSCY also contains some limited information on breastfeeding. We do not use these data due to reported
problems in the application of this part of the survey in wave 5, which, importantly, spans the reform we analyze.
Deleting the wave 5 data (which still leaves some pre- and post-reform observations), however, we can calculate the
ratios of means of breastfeeding variables between the sample of births to mothers who returned to work in the first
year (our sample of the “likely treated”) and the full sample of births. For example, in the NLSCY the mean
proportion of mothers, who return to work in the first year and are still breastfeeding at 6 months is 92 percent of the
full sample mean. Applying this proportion to the CCHS full sample mean we obtain a 25 percent increase in the
proportion still breastfeeding at 6 months for the treated as a result of the reform.
25
See footnote 24. Using the NLSCY we calculate the ratios of the mean months breastfeeding in the first year and
weeks of mandated leave between the full sample of births and the sample of births to mothers who returned to work
in the first year. We then apply these ratios to the full sample means in the CCHS to obtain a mean for the treated.
26
The CCHS questionnaire asks, “How old was your (last) baby when you first added any other liquids (e.g. milk,
formula, water, teas, herbal mixtures) or solid foods to the baby’s feeds?”

22

0.59 months. Looking at the attainment of thresholds, the primary effect is between 3 and 6
months, with the estimated change increasing as a percent of the pre-reform mean. At six
months exclusive breastfeeding—the public health target—the estimated impact of the reform is
5.8 percentage points in the full sample. Scaling for treatment, we get 7.7 to 9.1 percentage
points or 38.7 to 45.5 percent of the pre-reform full sample mean of 0.20. These proportional
increases are likely lower bounds as the pre-reform mean for the treated is likely smaller.27
The final rows of Table 3 investigate the reasons mothers report ending breastfeeding.
There is a relatively large impact on the proportion that reports introducing food due to work
relative to the pre-reform mean. There is also a significant and quite large impact on stopping
due to work, approaching 50 percent of the pre-reform mean. As work falls in importance, the
proportions reporting other reasons must necessarily rise. The largest increase comes from
mothers reporting that the baby was ready for solid food. In the final row of the table we report a
significant effect on the proportion who never initiated due to work that is large relative to the
pre-reform mean.
We close the breastfeeding analysis with a two-sample instrumental variables (Angrist
and Krueger 1992) estimate of the impact of months away from work on months breastfeeding.
Informally, one can use ratios of results from Tables 2 and 3 to obtain TSIV estimates – they are
informal because the conditioning variables differ in the NLSCY and CCHS. For example, the
ratio of the estimated reduced form relationship between POST and months breastfeeding in the
first year to the estimated first-stage relationship between POST and months not at work, is

27

We cannot use the NLSCY here to estimate the pre-reform means for the treated because this survey does not
collect information on exclusive breastfeeding.

23

(0.746/2.284) 0.327. Alternatively we could use the ratio of estimated relationships of these
outcomes to weeks of mandated leave: (0.031/0.092) 0.337. 28
In Table 4 we present a formal TSIV estimate using conditioning variables that are
common to the two data sets, and using weeks of mandated leave rather than POST as the
instrument. 29 The estimated first-stage and reduced form relationships are very similar to those
reported in the discussion of Tables 2 and 3; further evidence that the conditioning variables are
not important to the inference. The TSIV estimate of 0.334 is very similar to its informal
counterparts calculated above. Using our estimates of the sample means of the two variables for
the treated, the TSIV result implies an elasticity of months of breastfeeding in the first year with
respect to months not at work in the same period of 0.458. We are not aware of another estimate
of this elasticity in the literature, and it indicates that breastfeeding is fairly responsive to time
not at work, at least among women whose behavior is responsive to maternity leave mandates.
7.3

Health

Few previous studies of the health benefits of breastfeeding are based on clearly
exogenous variation in breastfeeding behavior. The changes in breastfeeding induced by the
expansion of maternity leave, therefore, lead us to extend our analysis to the health and
wellbeing variables available in the NLSCY. While the NLSCY is not designed specifically as a
health survey, it does ask a series of questions on birth outcomes and infant and mother’s health.
Importantly the questions span many of the outcomes that have been linked to breastfeeding
behavior, including the incidence of respiratory ailments (asthma, allergies and ear infections).

28

Using our scaled results for the treated yields the same TSIV estimate, as the scale factor simply divides out.
The conditioning variables are province, mother’s age (single year), mother’s education (4 categories) urban
residence and mother’s immigration status.
29

24

Before discussing the results, two important qualifications should be mentioned. First, we
cannot separate the impact of increased breastfeeding on these health outcomes from any impact
of the increase in maternal care, since both happened simultaneously. We attempt to address this
issue by choosing health indicators that are more plausibly related to breastfeeding and also by
examining health outcomes in the child’s second year of life when parental care is not very
different pre- and post-reform. 30 Also, in most cases, any effects of the estimated changes in
breastfeeding and parental care should reinforce each other. This would make findings of an
absence of an effect more decisive. Second, the impact of the increase in maternity leave on
breastfeeding was much stronger at longer breastfeeding durations and almost non-existent for
breastfeeding initiation. This implies that our results will not be informative about the health
impact of the decision to breastfeed or breastfeeding over the first one to three months.
However, given the already high rates of breastfeeding initiation and the medical and policy
focus on attaining durations of six months or more, the results should still prove illuminating.
The estimates are presented in Table 5. On the left side of the table are results for
children aged 7-12 months, with results for children aged 13-24 months on the right. For both
age groups, we implement the same two-stage estimation method as previously, looking for an
impact of the reform on health outcomes. 31 For the 13-24 month age group, we can also
implement a difference-in-differences estimator using children age 25-36 months as the control
group. The results for the 13-24 age group allow us to distinguish whether results for the age 712 month group are prophylactic or persistent. As well, they can help to distinguish between the
30

The impact of the parental leave reforms on parental and non-parental care is studied in detail in Baker and
Milligan (2007). They find a large substitution away from unlicensed non-parental care in someone else’s home
toward parental care in their own home for ages 7-12 months.
31
We also ran some two-sample IV regressions, using the provincially-varying weeks of mandated leave as an
instrument for breastfeeding, with health outcomes as the dependent variable. The results were very similar to the
reduced form approach we report. The IV regressions effectively force the maternity leave reform to affect health
only through breastfeeding and not other potential channels. Because we have no a priori reason to assume other
channels are not operative, we choose to focus on the reduced form results in the paper.

25

impact of breastfeeding and of direct maternal care, because there is very little change in care
arrangements of children aged more than 12 months after the reform. 32
The first set of results is for the mothers. There are four variables—a 5 level indicator of
mothers self-reported health, an index of depression, a 0/1 indicator of no post-partum
depression, and a count of post-partum problems. 33 In none of the three specifications across the
table do any of the mother’s health variables indicate an impact of the reform. All estimates are
statistically insignificant and small relative to the pre-reform mean.
The remaining rows in Table 5 contain the results for child’s health. There is no
evidence of an impact on current weight, either during the time of expanded leave from months 7
to 12 or following the leave in months 13 to 24. The 95 percent confidence interval around our
point estimate precludes large effects. This is a potentially important result because while
formula feeding is sometimes linked with obesity, there are also concerns that campaigns for
longer breastfeeding—especially exclusive breastfeeding—might compromise the early growth
of infants. There is also no impact on the child’s overall health, as self-reported by the mother
on a five point scale. Nor is there any suggested impact on the number of injuries or the
incidence of nose/throat infections, both of which may have been expected to fall with the
increased in maternal care.
We now turn to the results for ear infections, which have been linked to breastfeeding in
past research. The estimated reduction in the incidence of ear infections for the younger children
is 0.07. which while sizeable relative to the mean, does not quite meet our heightened bar for
32

See Baker and Milligan (2007) for details on the effect of the maternity leave expansions on the mode of
childcare.
33
The self-reported health index ranges from 1 (excellent) to 5 (poor). The depression index is based on a 0 to 3
score for twelve separate questions, giving a range from 0 to 36. Higher numbers indicate more depression. Postpartum problems include post-partum haemorrhage, post-partum infection, post-partum depression for more than 14
days and post-partum hypertension.

26

statistical significance at the five percent level. The estimated reduction for the 13-24 month
olds, however, is both sizable and statistically significant. In the next row, the effect on the
number of infections is negative, large and statistically significant for both age groups. The
individual estimates of YOB in Tables A3 and A4 of the appendix suggest a causal interpretation
is possible, although not as clear cut as we observed for the measures of labor supply and
breastfeeding. Also, it is possible that the decrease in ear infections comes not from
breastfeeding but from the substitution from non-parental to maternal care. For example, in nonparental care there may be higher exposure to viruses and bacteria from other children.
However, we did not find a similar impact for nose and throat infections, which we might expect
if this non-parental care channel were operative. This may lend some support for breastfeeding
as the causal mechanism.
However, the difference-in-differences results for ear infections in the last column are
small and insignificant. This points to some environmental factor that lowered the incidence of
this ailment for all children aged 13-36 months in wave 5 of the data. To further investigate this
hypothesis we estimated POST separately for children from the samples of mothers who returned
to work within one year of birth (our sample of the “likely treated” based on post-birth
employment) and of mothers who didn’t. The estimated reductions in the incidence and number
of ear infections from these different samples (not reported) are very similar: negative, large and
statistically significant. This is further evidence that the effect is related to environmental factors
rather than increased breastfeeding or maternal care.
For the remaining health indicators, there are some significant estimates, but none
appears to be robust. Moreover, the standard errors for some of the estimates are small enough to
rule out (at the 95 percent level of confidence) large effects. The impacts on asthma and

27

allergies, which have been linked to breastfeeding in past research, are large and significant for
children aged 7 to 12 months. In these cases, however, the YOB estimates in Table A3 vary
substantially across cohorts, especially for asthma. The estimates for children age 13-24 do not
indicate any persistence of these effects. Bronchitis shows a significant difference-in-difference
estimate, but the YOB estimates for this variable suggest this is being driven by variation in the
outcome in the control group. The estimate for chronic conditions is also statistically significant
for 7 to 12 month olds, and the YOB estimates suggest a more systematic relationship to the
reform. While the NLSCY tracks a number of specific chronic conditions, the subcategory of
“other” chronic conditions seems to be driving the observed result, rendering this finding
opaque. Again, this result does not appear to persist.
Our choice of health variables from the NLSCY has been guided by the links between
breastfeeding and health reported in past research. The experimental study of Kramer et al.
(2001) finds no effects on respiratory ailments; nor do we in the NLSCY. In (unreported)
falsification tests we find no impact for outcomes such as birth weight, gestation, c-sections that
no previous research has linked to breastfeeding. Finally, our data do not allow us to investigate
effects on gastrointestinal problems or skin rashes – two ailments commonly linked to
breastfeeding. 34 Overall, we find little evidence that the extra breastfeeding induced by the
expanded parental leave policies led to improvements in the health outcomes captured by the
NLSCY for children aged up to 24 months.

34

The NLSCY does ask about any overnight hospital admissions due to gastrointestinal illness. The pre-reform
incidence of this ailment is less that two percent in the 7-12 month age group. The estimated impact of the reform
on this variable, while negative, is statistically insignificant.

28

8.0 Conclusions
We have studied the impact of a large increase in maternity leave entitlements on
mothers’ time away from work, breastfeeding, and mothers’ and children’s health. We uncover
several interesting and relevant findings. First, there was a substantial increase in the number of
months mothers were away from work post-birth; more than three months for those eligible for
leave. Second, breastfeeding duration increased sharply, with significant increases in the
proportion of mothers attaining public health breastfeeding benchmarks including six months
exclusive breastfeeding. Finally, we find little effect of the increase in breastfeeding (and
parental care) on self-reported indicators of the mother and child (in the first 24 months) health
captured in the NLSCY.
These findings should be of interest to two groups of policymakers. For public health
officials aiming to increase breastfeeding duration it appears the labor market policy may prove
an effective way of achieving breastfeeding goals. More generally, the findings should prove
useful for those interested in the impacts of compensated maternity leaves, such as the paid
family leave program introduced in California in 2004 and similar programs being considered in
Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey, and Washington. 35
In the future, more research on these cohorts of Canadian children may prove fruitful.
Data and age constraints limited our study to children up to a few years of age in the present
study, but as time unfolds longer-run health outcomes may be observed. Rigorous study of the
data as it becomes available will allow a more complete picture of the health impacts of parental
leave and breastfeeding to be formed.

35

See Progressive States Network (2006) for details on legislative initiatives.

29

References

American Academy of Pediatrics (1997), “Breastfeeding and the use of human milk,”
Pediatrics, Vol. 100, No. 6, pp. 1035–1039.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1992), “The effect of age at school entry on
educational attainment: An application of instrumental variables with moments from two
samples,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 87, No. 418, pp. 328-336.
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2005), “How does job-protected maternity leave affect
mothers’ employment and infant health?” NBER Working Paper 11135.
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2005), “Universal Childcare, Maternal
Labor Supply, and Family Well-being,” NBER Working Paper No. 11832.
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2007), “Some early developmental impacts of maternal
care: Evidence from maternity leave mandates.” Manuscript, University of Toronto and
University of British Columbia.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004), “How Much Should We
Trust Difference in Difference Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp.
249-275.
Bick, D. E., Macarthur, C., & Lancashire, R. J.(1988) “What influences the uptake and early
cessation of breast feeding,” Midwifery, Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 242–247.
Centers for Disease Control (2006), “Steps to a healthier US,” DATA2010 ...the Healthy
People 2010 Database. Available online at [http://wonder.cdc.gov/data2010/focus.htm]
Chantry, Caroline J, Cynthia R. Howard, and Peggy Auinger (2006), “Full Breastfeeding
Duration and Associated Decrease in Respiratory Tract Infection in US Children,” Pediatrics,
Vol. 117, No. 2, pp. 425-432.
Chatterji, Pinka and Kevin D. Frick (2005), “Does Returning to Work After Childbirth Affect
Breastfeeding Practices?” Review of Economics of the Household, Volume 3, No. 3, pp. 315 –
335.
Dennis, Cindy-Lee (2002), “Breastfeeding Initiation and Duration: A 1990-2000 Literature
Review,” Journal of Obstetric Gynecologic and Neonatal Nursing, Vol. 31, No. 1, pp.12-32.
Der, Geoff, G. David Batty, and Ian J. Deary (2006), “Effect of breast feeding on intelligence in
children: prospective study, sibling pairs analysis, and meta-analysis,” British Medical Journal,
October 4th.

30

Department of Health and Human Services (2000), “HHS Blueprint for Action on
Breastfeeding,” Office on Women’s Health. Washington DC.
Donald, Stephen G. and Kevin Lang (2007), “Inference with Difference in Differences and Other
Panel Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 89, No. 2.
Fein, Sara B. and Brian Roe (1998), “The effect of work status on initiation and duration of
breast-feeding,” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 88, No. 7, pp. 1042–1046.
Galtry , Judith (2003), “The impact on breastfeeding of labor market policy and practice in
Ireland, Sweden, and the USA”, Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 57, No. 1, pp. 167-177.
Gielen AC, Faden RR, O’Campo P, Brown CH, Paige DM (1991), “Maternal employment
during the early postpartum period: effects on initiation and continuation of
breastfeeding,” Pediatrics, Vol. 87, No. 3, pp. 298–305.
Hamlyn, Becky, Sue Brooker, Karin Oleinikova, and Sarah Wands (2002), Infant Feeding 2000,
Norwich: The Stationery Office.
Hanratty, Maria and Eileen Trzcinski (2006), “Who benefits from expanded paid parental leave?
Impact of parental benefit expansions in Canada on mothers’ employment after birth,”
manuscript, University of Minnesota and Wayne State University.
Health Canada (2004), Exclusive Breastfeeding Recommendation 2004 Health Canada
Recommendation, Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada.
Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (2005), “Summative evaluation of EI parental
benefits,” Strategic Policy and Planning, Ottawa.
Jappelli T., J.S. Pischke and N.S. Souleles (1998), “Testing For Liquidity Constraints In Euler
Equations With Complementary Data Sources,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
80, No. 2, pp. 251-262.
Klerman, Jacob Alex and Arleen Leibowitz (1997), “Labor supply effects of state maternity
leave legislation,” in Francine D. Blau and Ronald G. Ehrenberg (eds.) Gender and Family
Issues in the Workplace. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Kramer, Michael S. Beverley Chalmers, Ellen D. Hodnett, Zinaida Sevkovskaya, Irina
Dzikovich, , Stanley Shapiro, Jean-Paul Collet, Irina Vanilovich, Irina Mezen, Thierry Ducruet,
George Shishko, Vyacheslav Zubovich, Dimitri Mknuik, Elena Gluchanina, Viktor
Dombrovskiy, Anatoly Ustinovitch, Tamara Kot, Natalia Bogdanovich, Lydia Ovchinikova,
Elisabet Helsing for the PROBIT Study Group (2001), “Promotion of Breastfeeding
Intervention Trial (PROBIT): A Randomized Trial in the Republic of Belarus” Journal of
American Medical Association, January 24/31—Vol 285, No. 4, pp. 413-420.

31

Kramer, Michael S., Tong Guo, Robert W. Platt, Zinaida Sevkovskaya, Irina Dzikovich, JeanPaul Collet, Stanley Shapiro, Beverley Chalmers, Ellen Hodnett, Irina Vanilovich, Irina Mezen,
Thierry Ducruet, George Shishko, and Natalia Bogdanovich (2003), “Infant growth and health
outcomes associated with 3 compared with 6 months of exclusive breastfeeding,” The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, Vol. 78, pp. 291-295.
Kramer, Michael S., and Ritsuko Kakuma (2002), The optimal Duration of Exclusive
Breastfeeding A Systematic Review, World Health Organization.
Kurinij N, Shiono PH, Ezrine SF, Rhoads GG (1989), “Does maternal employment affect breastfeeding?” American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 79, pp.1247–50.
Lansinoh Laboratories (2003), “Lansinoh National Breastfeeding Survey Results,” Press
Release. Available online: http://www.corporatenews.net/cgibin/pc201v3.php?source=pc200v3.php&pr=11&pccl=24610 [March 22, 2007].
Lindberg L.D. (1996), “Women’s decisions about breastfeeding and maternal employment,”
Journal of Marriage and the Family, Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 239-251.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile (2007), “The integration of child tax credits and welfare:
Evidence from the Canadian National Child Benefit program,” Journal of Public Economics,
Vol. 91, No. 1-2, pp. 305-326.
Progressive States Network (2006), “State Legislative Models for Building a Family-Friendly
America.” Available online at www.progressivestates.org/momrising.
Rabin, Roni (2006), “Breast-Feed or Else,” New York Times, June 13th.
Roe, B., Whittington, L. A., Fein, S. B., & Teisl, M. F. (1999), “Is there competition between
breast-feeding and maternal employment?” Demography, Vol. 36, pp. 157–171.
Ruhm, Christopher (2000). ‘Parental leave and child health’, Journal of Health Economics,
vol. 19(6), pp. 931–60.
Schwartz, Kendra, Hannah J.S. D’Arcy, Brenda Gillespie, Janet Bobo, Marylou Longeway,
Betsy Foxman (2002), “Factors associated with weaning in the first 3 months postpartum”
Journal of Family Practice, Vol. 51, No. 5.
Statistics Canada (2006), “Employment Insurance Coverage Survey,” The Daily, November
1st.
Tanaka, Sakiko (2005), “Parental leave and child health across OECD countries”, Economic
Journal, Vol. 115, pp. F7–28.

32

Visness, C. M., & Kennedy, K. I.(1997), “Maternal employment and breast-feeding: Findings
from the 1988 national maternal and infant health study,” American Journal of Public Health,
Vol. 87, No. 6, pp. 945–950.
World Health Organization (2001), “Report of the Expert Consultation on the Optimal Duration
of Exclusive Breastfeeding,” Department of Nutrition for Health and Development and
Department of Child and Adolescent Health and Development, Geneva.

33

Table 1: The Extension of Mandated Parental Leave by Jurisdiction

Weeks of
leave in 2000

Date of
Extension

Weeks of
leave postreform

Newfoundland

29

31-Dec-00

52

Prince Edward Island

34

31-Dec-00

52

Nova Scotia

34

31-Dec-00

52

New Brunswick

29

31-Dec-00

54

Quebec

70

no reform

70

Ontario

35

31-Dec-00

52

Manitoba

34

31-Dec-00

54

Saskatchewan

30

14-Jun-01

52

Alberta

18

7-Feb-01

52

British Columbia

30

31-Dec-00

52

Federal

41

31-Dec-00

54

Employment Insurance

25

31-Dec-00

50

Notes: The source is provincial statutes and federal labor standards publications.

34

Table 2: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on time spent not at work
post-birth (NLSCY data)

Months not at work in the first
year

PreReform
Mean
8.23

POST

2.284*
(0.299)

POST
No
Controls
2.158*
(0.258)

POST
UR
Control
2.273*
(0.331)

Months not at work ≥ one month

0.96

0.022
(0.009)

0.019*
(0.006)

0.021
(0.013)

Months not at work ≥ three
months

0.92

0.039*
(0.012)

0.035*
(0.011)

0.038*
(0.015)

Months not at work ≥ six months

0.81

0.091*
(0.024)

0.079*
(0.018)

0.090*
(0.025)

Months not at work ≥ nine
months

0.47

0.371*
(0.040)

0.353*
(0.035)

0.369*
(0.046)

Months not at work ≥ twelve
months

0.41

0.291*
(0.041)

0.277*
(0.040)

0.291*
(0.041)

Notes: N=6. Standard errors in parentheses. *~statistically significant at the 5% level.
UR~conditional on month of birth unemployment rate. The column labeled ‘POST’ contains
regression coefficients for the ‘POST’ variable in the second stage of our two-stage procedure.
The column labeled ‘POST No Controls’ contains regression coefficients for the ‘POST’
variable in the second stage when the first-stage contained only year dummies an no other
control variables. The column labeled ‘POST UR Control’ reports the regression coefficient for
the ‘POST’ variable in the second stage when the first-stage included a province-year varying
unemployment rate.

35

Table 3: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on breastfeeding in the
(CCHS data)

Incidence of breastfeeding

PreReform
Mean
0.86

POST

0.026
(0.011)

POST
No
Controls
0.034*
(0.011)

POST
UR
Control
0.027
(0.012)

Months of breastfeeding in first
year

5.34

0.746*
(0.107)

0.781*
(0.138)

0.735*
(0.127)

Months of breastfeeding ≥ one
month

0.72

0.051*
(0.015)

0.059*
(0.014)

0.051*
(0.014)

Months of breastfeeding ≥ three
months

0.63

0.067*
(0.008)

0.074*
(0.009)

0.064*
(0.009)

Months of breastfeeding ≥ four
months

0.57

0.056*
(0.008)

0.060*
(0.007)

0.055*
(0.010)

Months of breastfeeding ≥ six
months

0.47

0.081*
(0.013)

0.084*
(0.016)

0.080*
(0.015)

Months of breastfeeding ≥ nine
months

0.26

0.060*
(0.019)

0.058*
(0.021)

0.058*
(0.022)

Months of breastfeeding ≥
twelve months

0.14

0.034
(0.012)

0.028
(0.015)

0.033
(0.013)

Months of exclusive
breastfeeding in first year

3.07

0.379*
(0.074)

0.371*
(0.084)

0.370*
(0.085)

Months of exclusive
breastfeeding ≥ three months

0.54

0.055*
(0.012)

0.056*
(0.012)

0.054*
(0.014)

Months of exclusive
breastfeeding ≥ four months

0.43

0.058
(0.022)

0.053
(0.020)

0.058
(0.022)

Months of exclusive
breastfeeding ≥ six months

0.20

0.058*
(0.014)

0.051*
(0.015)

0.057*
(0.018)

Introduced food due to work

0.06

-0.036*
(0.010)

-0.033*
(0.008)

-0.037*
(0.010)

Stopped breastfeeding due to
work

0.17

-0.082*
(0.022)

-0.079*
(0.021)

-0.084*
(0.022)

Stopped breastfeeding baby ready
for solid food

0.04

0.106*
(0.032)

0.100*
(0.032)

0.106*
(0.032)

No breastfeeding due to work

0.05

-0.038*
(0.017)

-0.029
(0.012)

-0.040*
(0.015)

Notes: N=6. Standard errors in parentheses. *~statistically significant at the 5% level. The
regression specifications are the same as described in Table 2.

36

Table 4: Two Sample Instrumental Variables Estimate of the Relationship between Months
spent at home in first year and Months of Breastfeeding in first year

First-stage Relationship between
months spent at home in first year
and weeks of mandated leave
(NLSCY)

0.092*
(0.014)

Reduced Form Relationship
between months breastfeeding in
first year and weeks of mandated
leave (CCHS)

0.031*
(0.008)

TSIV estimate of the
Relationship between Months
spent at home in first year and
Months of Breastfeeding in first
year

0.334*
(0.103)

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. Standard error for TSIV estimate following
Jappelli et al. (1998). *~statistically significant at the 5% level.

37

Table 5: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates/breastfeeding duration on
health outcomes (NLSCY data)
7-12 Months
13-24 Months

Mother’s health

PreReform
Mean
1.84

POST

0.039
(0.044)

PreReform
Mean
1.86

POST

0.017
(0.038)

Difference
in
Difference
-0.016
(0.074)

Mother’s depression

4.09

-0.171
(0.238)

3.92

-0.271
(0.191)

0.272
(0.254)

Absence of post-partum
depression

0.88

0.012
(0.057)

N.A.

N.A

N.A

Mother post-partum
problem

0.22

0.032
(0.016)

N.A

N.A

N.A

Child’s current weight

9.39

-0.103
(0.154)

11.59

-0.023
(0.083)

0.044
(0.174)

Child’s health

1.34

-0.082
(0.041)

1.44

-0.053
(0.056)

0.122
(0.074)

Child injured in past 12
months

0.03

0.008
(0.004)

0.07

0.003
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.019)

Child nose/throat
infections

0.32

0.006
(0.041)

0.47

-0.012
(0.023)

-0.005
(0.056)

Child ear infections

0.25

-0.070
(0.030)

0.50

-0.125*
(0.019)

-0.052
(0.037)

Child number of ear
infections

0.42

-0.159*
(0.069)

1.02

-0.289*
(0.060)

-0.011
(0.138)

Child asthma

0.03

-0.014*
(0.003)

0.06

-0.018
(0.007)

-0.024
(0.013)

Child wheeze

0.23

-0.000
(0.033)

0.27

-0.009
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.016)

Child allergies

0.07

-0.028*
(0.008)

0.07

-0.006
(0.011)

-0.030
(0.019)

Child bronchitis

0.02

-0.005
(0.007)

0.02

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.015*
(0.004)

Child chronic condition

0.12

-0.051*
(0.012)

0.13

-0.020
(0.014)

-0.027
(0.028)

Notes: N=6 (N=. Standard errors in parentheses. *~statistically significant at the 5% level. N.A.= not available.
The ‘POST’ columns report the regression coefficient on the ‘POST’ variable in the second stage of our two stage
procedure. The ‘Difference in Difference’ column reports the regression coefficient on the ‘POSTW-YNG’
interaction variable described in equation (3) in the text.

38

Figure 1: Estimates of months before the mother returned to work by birth cohort, relative
to 1998 births
3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Birth Cohort

Notes: Displayed are the coefficients on year of birth dummy variables using NLSCY data.

39

Figure 2: Proportion of mothers not at work by month post-birth, by birth cohort
1.2

1

0.8

Pre Reform
Post Reform

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

1

3

6

9

12

Months Post Birth

40

Figure 3: Proportion of mothers still breastfeeding by month post-birth, by birth cohort

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
Pre Reform
Post Reform

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

1

3

4

6

9

12

Months Post Birth

41

Table A1: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on time not at work

Months not at work in
the first year
Months not at work ≥
one month
Months not at work ≥
three months
Months not at work ≥
six months
Months not at work ≥
nine months
Months not at work ≥
twelve months

1999
0.934
(0.230)
0.028
(0.013)
0.033
(0.018)
0.067
(0.024)
0.125
(0.030)
0.122
(0.031)

2000
0.438
(0.244)
0.020
(0.014)
0.033
(0.019)
0.044
(0.027)
0.041
(0.033)
0.027
(0.032)

2001
3.013
(0.228)
0.045
(0.013)
0.077
(0.017)
0.159
(0.024)
0.457
(0.029)
0.368
(0.032)

2002
2.591
(0.228)
0.032
(0.012)
0.057
(0.017)
0.109
(0.024)
0.414
(0.029)
0.324
(0.032)

2003
2.798
(0.228)
0.042
(0.012)
0.055
(0.018)
0.127
(0.024)
0.435
(0.029)
0.356
(0.031)

Notes: N=5758. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

42

Table A2: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on breastfeeding by year
of birth

Incidence of breastfeeding
Months of breastfeeding in
first year
Months of breastfeeding ≥
one month
Months of breastfeeding ≥
three months
Months of breastfeeding ≥
four months
Months of breastfeeding ≥
six months
Months of breastfeeding ≥
nine months
Months of breastfeeding ≥
twelve months
Months of exclusive
breastfeeding in first year
Months of exclusive
breastfeeding ≥ three months
Months of exclusive
breastfeeding ≥ four months
Months of exclusive
breastfeeding ≥ six months
Introduced food due to work
Stopped breastfeeding due to
work
Stopped breastfeeding baby
ready for solid food
No breastfeeding due to work

1999
-0.003
(0.024)
-0.148
(0.336)
-0.032
(0.033)
-0.030
(0.038)
0.019
(0.040)
-0.008
(0.040)
-0.021
(0.035)
-0.027
(0.027)
0.238
(0.217)
0.044
(0.041)
0.091
(0.041)
0.054
(0.030)
0.014
(0.021)
0.054
(0.033)
0.002
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.054)

2000
-0.028
(0.024)
0.083
(0.032)
-0.050
(0.030)
-0.022
(0.033)
0.003
(0.036)
0.009
(0.036)
0.032
(0.033)
0.009
(0.026)
0.129
(0.198)
0.025
(0.037)
0.081
(0.036)
0.049
(0.027)
-0.008
(0.018)
-0.009
(0.029)
0.056
(0.011)
-0.038
(0.045)

2001
0.005
(0.021)
0.854
(0.297)
0.024
(0.027)
0.054
(0.031)
0.071
(0.033)
0.098
(0.035)
0.081
(0.032)
0.035
(0.026)
0.578
(0.191)
0.091
(0.035)
0.131
(0.034)
0.108
(0.026)
-0.028
(0.016)
-0.056
(0.026)
0.105
(0.014)
-0.046
(0.040)

2002
0.018
(0.021)
0.728
(0.332)
0.009
(0.030)
0.040
(0.035)
0.046
(0.038)
0.077
(0.039)
0.073
(0.036)
0.039
(0.029)
0.499
(0.211)
0.074
(0.039)
0.102
(0.038)
0.099
(0.031)
-0.039
(0.017)
-0.087
(0.028)
0.162
(0.019)
-0.080
(0.040)

2003
0.013
(0.022)
0.592
(0.316)
0.006
(0.030)
0.040
(0.033)
0.061
(0.036)
0.064
(0.089)
0.053
(0.034)
0.019
(0.027)
0.393
(0.203)
0.065
(0.038)
0.135
(0.037)
0.084
(0.028)
0.051
(0.017)
-0.092
(0.026)
0.174
(0.019)
-0.069
(0.046)

Notes: N=5708 for all regressions except those for those in last four rows for which N=4778,
4709, 4709, 818, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

43

Table A3 Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates/breastfeeding duration on
Health Outcomes in the NLSCY, 7-12 months by year of birth

Mother’s health
Mother’s depression
Absence of post-partum
depression
Mother post-partum
problem
Child’s current weight
Child’s health
Child injured in past 12
months
Child nose/throat
infections
Child ear infections
Child number of ear
infections
Child asthma
Child wheez
Child allergies
Child bronchitis
Child chronic condition

1999
0.435
(0.145)
0.250
(0.763)

0.106
(0.163)
-0.104
(0.101)
0.009
(0.025)
-0.076
(0.072)
-0.080
(0.069)
-0.217
(0.116)
-0.025
(0.016)
-0.115
(0.042)
0.000
(0.041)
-0.014
(0.010)
0.024
(0.063)

2000
0.043
(0.065)
0.556
(0.362)
-0.110
(0.030)
0.007
(0.043)
-0.354
(0.097)
-0.082
(0.053)
-0.001
(0.011)
-0.102
(0.037)
-0.041
(0.032)
-0.105
(0.066)
-0.001
(0.014)
0.072
(0.036)
0.018
(0.023)
-0.015
(0.015)
0.026
(0.029)

2001
0.026
(0.122)
0.266
(0.594)
-0.031
(0.048)
-0.009
(0.065)
-0.251
(0.220)
-0.185
(0.078)
0.014
(0.020)
-0.036
(0.068)
-0.174
(0.052)
-0.371
(0.087)
-0.022
(0.012)
0.004
(0.048)
-0.015
(0.027)
-0.004
(0.011)
-0.051
(0.034)

2002
0.091
(0.070)
0.004
(0.334)
-0.017
(0.025)
0.030
(0.043)
0.075
(0.188)
-0.104
(0.058)
0.006
(0.012)
-0.039
(0.039)
-0.071
(0.033)
-0.173
(0.067)
-0.012
(0.012)
0.032
(0.034)
-0.019
(0.020)
0.003
(0.013)
-0.034
(0.027)

2003
0.114
(0.132)
0.359
(0.619)
-0.183
(0.095)
0.125
(0.092)
0.829
(0.074)
-0.186
(0.084)
0.022
(0.026)
-0.058
(0.073)
-0.139
(0.069)
-0.346
(0.097)
-0.013
(0.017)
-0.021
(0.051)
-0.034
(0.027)
-0.010
(0.009)
-0.062
(0.034)

Notes: N=1674 for all regressions, except mother’s post-partum depression 1379 and mother’s
post-partum problems 1263. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

44

Table A4 Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates/breastfeeding duration on
Health Outcomes in the NLSCY, 13-24 months by year of birth

Mother’s health
Mother’s depression
Child’s current weight
Child’s health
Child injured in past 12
months
Child nose infections
Child ear infections
Child number of ear
infections
Child asthma
Child wheeze
Child allergies
Child bronchitis
Child chronic condition

1999
0.083
(0.073)
-0.237
(0.370)
-0.195
(0.131)
-0.128
(0.057)
-0.035
(0.022)
-0.040
(0.043)
-0.018
(0.043)
-0.104
(0.106)
-0.005
(0.018)
-0.001
(0.038)
-0.006
(0.021)
-0.013
(0.009)
-0.032
(0.026)

2000
0.114
(0.082)
-0.072
(0.371)
-0.324
(0.125)
0.003
(0.064)
-0.035
(0.020)
-0.090
(0.044)
-0.012
(0.044)
-0.124
(0.101)
0.010
(0.021)
-0.019
(0.041)
-0.028
(0.021)
-0.010
(0.014)
-0.042
(0.027)

2001
0.134
(0.072)
-0.730
(0.364)
-0.203
(0.140)
-0.148
(0.056)
-0.016
(0.024)
-0.034
(0.043)
-0.106
(0.042)
-0.278
(0.101)
-0.028
(0.018)
-0.048
(0.037)
-0.002
(0.022)
-0.020
(0.010)
-0.043
(0.027)

2002
0.036
(0.074)
-0.178
(0.332)
-0.189
(0.151)
-0.030
(0.061)
-0.020
(0.023)
-0.086
(0.043)
-0.183
(0.038)
-0.441
(0.090)
-0.005
(0.019)
0.008
(0.041)
-0.021
(0.019)
-0.001
(0.011)
-0.026
(0.025)

2003
0.071
(0.066)
-0.250
(0.364)
-0.091
(0.132)
-0.133
(0.053)
-0.029
(0.019)
-0.053
(0.040)
-0.138
(0.039)
-0.414
(0.098)
-0.016
(0.019)
0.003
(0.035)
-0.027
(0.019)
-0.014
(0.010)
-0.059
(0.024)

Notes: N=3418 for all regressions Robust standard errors in parentheses.

45

Table A5 Full Sample Results
Time spent not at work post-birth
Months spent at home in first
year

POST
2.092*
(0.229)

Months at home ≥ one month

0.017
(0.006)

Months at home ≥ three months

0.031*
(0.009)

Months at home ≥ six months

0.080*
(0.021)

Months at home ≥ nine months

0.343*
(0.031)

Months at home ≥ twelve
months

0.271*
(0.029)

Breastfeeding
Incidence

0.028*
(0.006)

Months of Breastfeeding in first
year

0.665*
(0.128)

Months of Exclusive
Breastfeeding in first year

0.349*
(0.071)

Introduced food due to work

-0.034*
(0.009)

Stopped breastfeeding due to
work

-0.079*
(0.019)

Stopped breastfeeding baby ready
for solid food

0.105*
(0.034)

No breastfeeding due to work

-0.034
(0.017)

Notes: N=6. Standard errors in parentheses. *~statistically significant at the 5% level.

46

