NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES THE CERTAINTY OF ARREST REDUCE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE? EVIDENCE
FROM MANDATORY AND RECOMMENDED ARREST LAWS
Radha Iyengar
Working Paper 13186
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13186

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

I am grateful to Hank Farber, David Autor, Jesse Rothstein, Francine Blau, Faruk Gul, Lawrence
Katz and participants at the Princeton University Industrial Relations Section labor lunch and Law
and Public Affairs seminar for numerous comments and insightful suggestions. Financial support
from Princeton University Industrial Relations Section, the Woodrow Wilson Society of Fellows, and
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Any remaining errors are entirely my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Radha Iyengar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Does the Certainty of Arrest Reduce Domestic Violence? Evidence from Mandatory and Recommended
Arrest laws
Radha Iyengar
NBER Working Paper No. 13186
June 2007
JEL No. D01,I1,J12,K14
ABSTRACT
Domestic violence remains a major public policy concern despite two decades of policy intervention.
To eliminate police inaction in response to domestic violence, many states have passed mandatory
arrest laws, which require the police to arrest abusers when a domestic violence incident is reported.
These laws were justified by a randomized experiment in Minnesota which found that arrests reduced
future violence. This experiment was conducted during a time period when arrest was optional. Using
the FBI Supplementary Homicide Reports, I find mandatory arrest laws actually increased intimate
partner homicides. I hypothesize that this increase in homicides is due to decreased reporting. I investigate
validity of this reporting hypothesis by examining the effect of mandatory arrest laws on family homicides
where the victim is less often responsible for reporting. For family homicides, mandatory arrest laws
appear to reduce the number of homicides. This study therefore provides evidence that these laws
may have perverse effects on intimate partner violence, harming the very people they seek to help.
Radha Iyengar
Harvard University
Center for Government and International Studies
1730 Cambridge Street, Room 408
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
riyengar@rwj.harvard.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION

Women are more likely to be beaten, raped, or killed by a current or former male partner
than by anyone else (Epstein, 1999).

Despite two decades of increased public awareness,

domestic violence remains a serious public policy issue in the United States. States, faced with
increased liability for police inaction in the mid-eighties to late-nineties, passed laws requiring
the warrentless arrests of individuals police believe to be responsible for misdemeanor assault of
an intimate partner.

Many of these policies were justified by results from a randomized

experiment that demonstrated that arrests were effective at deterring future violence. This
experiment was extended to support mandating arrest in all cases of domestic violence.
However, the experiment provided no evidence on the effectiveness of a public policy requiring
arrest. Policies which mandate arrest (i.e. make arrests certain, conditional on reporting) may
have a different result from experiments which probabilistically apply arrest.

Indeed the

empirical analysis presented in this paper demonstrates that mandatory arrest laws increase
intimate partner homicides. One reason for this is that a known policy of arrest may affect the
decision by victims to seek police intervention making the application of experimental results to
the public policy of required arrests inappropriate. In particular, it appears that the certainty of
arrest dissuades victims from reporting abuse to the police resulting in higher rates of intimate
partner abuse.
Using a difference-in-difference framework, I tested to see if mandatory arrest laws
affected the level of domestic violence. I found that intimate partner homicides increased by
about 60 percent in states with mandatory arrest laws. These results may be due to changes in
the reporting behavior of victims in response to the certainty of arrest.

Because police

intervention may decrease the risk of escalation and thus the risk of homicides, this rise in
homicide rates is consistent with a decline in reporting for intimate partner homicides. Results
from a similar analysis of non-intimate partner family member homicides show declines in these
homicides in response to mandatory arrest laws. These results are also consistent with the
reporting explanation. In most cases of child abuse, the reporting of abuse comes from a third
party (such as a teacher or doctor). In such cases the certainty of arrest does not shift the
incentives of the third party to report, and as such we would expect to see a deterrence effect
from arrest. Thus, the declines in familial homicides represent evidence consistent with the

3

theory that a decline in reporting by victims may be responsible for the perverse effects of
mandatory arrest laws.
This studies attempts to provide a careful evaluation of a public policy that currently
enjoys both popular and financial support. This enhanced understanding of the full range effects
generated by arrest laws for domestic abuse will hopefully be useful in constructing a more
effective criminal justice response to domestic violence. This paper also highlights an important
consideration for policy makers; criminal justice policies aimed at deterring violence must
concern themselves with both the probability of detection and the actual penalty enhancement.
Laws like mandatory arrest laws may fail if the responsiveness of victims to incentives generated
by these policies is larger than the response of criminals to the cost of the new penalty. Thus,
increasing criminal sanctions without concern for the impact on the probability of detection may
generate perverse outcomes from public policy. In addition, because of the powerful role the
empirical social science research played in the case of this policy, this study provides a
cautionary tale about using experimental results to justify new policies. The misapplication of
experiments without concern for the ways in which policies might deviate from experiments may
result in government programs that become counterproductive, harming the very people they
seek to help.

II.

THE EMERGENCE OF MANDATORY ARREST LAWS FOR INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE

Policies that encourage or require arrest of domestic abusers play a prominent role in the
government’s attempt to combat domestic violence. This is in part because the criminalization
of domestic violence represented the major shift in the acceptance and treatment of domestic
violence and in part because arrest laws represent a transparent mechanism by which the
government can enforce anti-violence statutes.
The criminal justice response to intimate partner violence has been codified in many
jurisdictions through policies which encourage or mandate the arrest of individuals who commit
domestic abuse. Currently, fourteen states and the District of Columbia have passed mandatory
arrest laws. These laws requires police to arrest a suspect without a warrant, if there is probable
cause to suspect that an individual has committed some form of assault (either misdemeanor or
felonious) against an intimate partner or family member.

4

An additional eight states have

recommended arrest laws, which specify arrest as a recommended but not required when
confronted with probable cause that an intimidate partner or familial assault has occurred. States
in both of these groups are reported in Table 1.

[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]

To begin an evaluation of arrest laws for domestic abuse, it is first necessary to establish
why these laws were initially passed. Mandatory arrest laws appear to have been passed largely
in response to a court decision in Connecticut as well as what many took to be empirical support
for arrest from a randomized experiment. Nevertheless, we might be skeptical of any subsequent
analysis attempting to establish the causal effect of arrest laws on domestic violence if these laws
were passed in response to a rising trend in domestic violence levels. This does not appear to be
the case.
Historically, law enforcement has been reluctant to arrest or even intervene in cases of
domestic violence. In fact in the 1970s, the American Bar Association (1973) urged police to
use conflict resolution, not arrests, when intervening in “conflicts…which occur between
husband and wife.” In the early eighties this began to change as attitudes towards domestic
violence changed. Increasingly, there was political pressure for states to offer more protection
for victims of domestic violence.1 Moreover, there was a shift in the medical opinion regarding
the dangers posed to victims of domestic violence.

For instance, the American Medical

Association began to advise its member that counseling was dangerous and increased its effects
to educate its member about the harms of domestic violence.
The emergence of mandatory arrest laws occurred within this environment, largely
prompted by two events. First, Thurman v. City of Torrington (1984) a law suit in Connecticut
established the right to police protection from domestic violence.2 Threats of future law suits

1

In 1984, the U.S. Attorney General established domestic violence as a crime by ordering all criminal justice
agencies to treat it as such. In the same year, Congress passed the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act,
which funded some domestic violence programs (for shelters, counseling, research, and training of law enforcement
agencies). Also in 1984, the Victims of Crime Act allocated $150 million for grant aid to survivors of crimes.
Priority for this grant aid was given to victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, and child abuse (Brooks, 1997).
2
In 1984, Tracey Thurman, a battered woman was awarded 2.3 million dollars in damages from the city of
Torrington, Connecticut. The Torrington Police failed to intervene in Thurman’s domestic dispute despite her
frequent calls for help resulting in severe injuries and permanent paralysis for Ms. Thurman. This decision signaled
a shift in legal liability where not only individual officers but also police departments could be held liable for failure

5

served as motivation for municipalities to protect themselves from liability issues by
implementing more aggressive arrest policies.3 The establishment of police liability in domestic
violence cases, created the desire to monitor and regulate police enforcement of restraining
orders and intervention in violent incidents. A natural means to do this was the removal of police
discretion through a policy which mandated arrest. However, arrest policies might not have been
so widely adopted had it not been for the second event—the Minnesota Domestic Violence
Experiment. The results of this experiment were used by US Department of Justice, academics,
legislators, and criminal justice spokespersons to justify and support mandatory arrest policies
(Mignon et. al., 1995).4For example, the Violence Against Women Act (1994) used the results
from this experiment to justify grants and funds to support pro-arrest policies in various states.5
This change in funding and availability of training encouraged several more states to pass
mandatory arrest laws
The use of mandatory arrest laws was thus in many respects predicated on the results of
the Minnesota Domestic Violence Experiment (MDVE). This experiment, funded by the
Minnesota Police Department, the Police Foundation, and the Department of Justice, was run by
randomly assigned a police response to domestic violence calls (Wanless, 1996). Police applied
one of three possible treatments: (1) advising and counseling the couple, (2) separating the
individuals, or (3) arresting the suspect. Researchers then interviewed the victims shortly after
police involvement and then followed up every two weeks for six months. The original results
found that arresting the suspect resulted in substantially less future violence than did either
advising or counseling (Sherman, 1992).6 An in depth evaluation of the results by Tauchen and
Witte (1995) found that arrest resulted in significantly more deterrence than either advising or
to protect battered women. Twenty-four police officers, as well as the City of Torrington were held accountable for
their failure to intervene (Sparks, 1997).
3
Although Thurman v. Torrington is certainly the most famous case establishing the right to police protection from
domestic violence, several other states also found police departments liable for failing to protect battered women
(Heise, 1992). The first class action lawsuit, Scott v. Hart, No. C-76-2395, was filed against the Oakland, California
city police in 1976. Two months later, in Bruno v. Codd, 396 N.Y.S.2d 974 (Sup. Ct. Special Term 1977), found
police liable for failure to comply with state laws regarding domestic violence. In 1985, Sorichetti v. City of New
York held police liable for failing to investigate and enforce violations of orders of protection. See Bracher (1996)
for a discussion of these cases. For a more detailed discussion on the legislative history of mandatory arrest laws,
see Buzawa and Buzawa (1996) and Stark (1993).
4
While the results from the experiment formed the justification for many pro-arrest policies, the authors and other
experts cautioned against generalizing from these findings.
5
Currently, the Violence Against Women Office at the Department of Justice spends between $30 to 50 million
each year on grants to encourage these mandatory arrest laws.
6
Further replications of the MDVE in Milwaukee, Omaha, Colorado Springs and Charlotte have produced mixed
results. For a comparison of these experiments, see Symposium on Domestic Violence, 1992.

6

separating the couple, consistent with the original findings of the experiment. However, unlike
the original findings, Tauchen and Witte use a dynamic setting which found that most of the
deterrent effect of arrest occurs within two weeks of the initial arrest. Thus, any deterrent effect
that exists is highly transitory.
While this experiment provided support for the contention that arrest deters abuse, the
applicability of the findings is uncertain. The public in general and battered women in particular
were not informed of this experiment. Thus, the experiment actually tested the effect of a
probabilistic arrest rather than a deterministic policy which requires arrest.

This difference is

significant because of behavioral differences that may arise in an ongoing nature of the
relationship between the battered women and their abusers. A noteworthy difference between a
mandatory arrest policy and the MDVE is the potential response by battered women to the
certainty of an arrest of their abuser. The response by batterers relative to the response by
victims to the increased costs of abuse may be relevant when determining the efficacy of an
intervention such as mandatory arrest laws.
Thus, while a full discussion of the political economy of the emergence of domestic
violence laws is beyond the scope of this paper, the motivation of most of these arrest laws does
not appear to have been the level of intimate partner violence. In a detailed analysis of the
motivations for mandatory arrest laws, Stark (1993) states that the most important reason for
passing mandatory arrest laws was controlling police behavior in response to political pressure
and liability exposure. Reducing the level of violence was actually only of distant concern after
the desire to stop immediately violence and avoid liability from inaction. Additionally, in as
much as public pressure existed regarding the passage of these laws, this pressure was not due to
the level of violence but rather perceived government treatment of offenders. For example,
Buzawa and Buzawa (1993) argue that alternative reforms (such as mediation) were dismissed
by inappropriate or sexist as American society became more conservative and punitive towards
offenders. Thus, while these laws were not passed as parts of omnibus “tough on crime”
legislation, they represent the desire to adopt a more punitive approach to crime. Finally, the
timing of arrest law passages appears to be tied to both the publication of the MDVE results, the
promotion of these results by the Justice department in subsequent years, and finally federal

7

funding of these policies after 1994.7 Thus, these laws appear to be at least plausibly exogenous
and useful means of identifying the effects of the certainty of arrest on intimate partner violence.

III.

QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL ESTIMATES ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF MANDATING ARREST

To test the effectiveness of mandatory arrest laws, I consider the effect of these laws on
intimate partner abuse. This requires special attention to the total number of incidents of
domestic violence not simply the number of reported incidents because the fraction of incidents
that are reported to the police is potentially affected by this policy. 8 If I cannot observe
unreported incidents, changes in the number of reported incidents and change in the total number
of incidents (both reported and unreported) are observationally equivalent. 9 In part because I
can observe victim-offender relationship and in part because these crimes are almost perfectly
reported, I use measure of intimate partner homicides as a way to measure intimate partner
abuse. Assuming that police intervention can reduce the probability of violence changes in the
intimate partner homicide measure may provide insight into the impact of mandatory arrest laws
on intimate partner violence.10
To illustrate how changes in the level of homicides can be linked to the total number of
abusive incidents, consider a model where with some small probability, p, domestic abuse
escalates to murder. For n intimate partner incidents, the number of homicides in a jurisdiction is
then pn. Next, suppose that the probability of reporting given violence decreases in after the
passage of mandatory arrest laws. This failure to report to the police can increase the rate of
intimate partner homicide in two ways. First, police presence, regardless of the police response,
can disrupt a violent incident keeping the violence level below a certain threshold. Thus, the
7

For further discussion of this, see Gelles (1993) which describes the rapidity of the law changes and the timing of
various changes and law/policy changes at the city and state level.
8
The National Incident Based Reporting System which does provide identification of the victim-offender
relationships is therefore ill-suited to the purposes of this study. Because the NIBRS is comprised solely of reported
incidents, analysis of this data is not useful for measuring the true incidence of domestic violence.
9
An ideal data source for this type of analysis would be the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) with state
level identifiers. Although previous researchers were able to access geo-coded versions of this data (see for example
Farmer and Tiefenthaler, 2003), recent changes in the administration and management of the NCVS make such
access no longer possible. Some analysis using this data previous obtained suggests that mandatory arrest laws may
reduce intimate partner violence but also reduce the number of cases which are reported in the system. (Dugan,
2003). Additional information about reasons why NCVS access is no longer possible is available upon request.
10
The linkage between misdemeanor assault prevalence and intimate partner homicide is well established. See for
example Gwinn and O’Dell (1993). Moreover the underlying causes are linked see Mercy and Saltzman (1989)

8

victim’s decision not to notify the police may face an increased p. Second, if arrest, conditional
on reporting, deters violence, then the reduction in reporting also reduces the number of arrests
which reduces the deterrence effect. Thus, the decision not to notify the police increases n
relative to a situation where the police are called. We would therefore expect intimate partner
homicides to be associated with changes in reporting rates even though homicides themselves are
not reported by the victim.
To construct a dataset of intimate partner homicides, I use the FBI Uniform Crime
Reports, Supplementary Homicide Reports which provide data for all homicides that took place
in the years 1976 to 2003 in all 50 states and the District of Columbia with additional descriptive
variables about the victim, offender, and the nature of the crime. I define an intimate partner
homicide to include any homicide committed against a husband, wife, common-law husband,
common-law wife, ex-husband, or ex-wife.11 While the specific coverage of arrest laws varies
by state, the general categories and their proportion of the overall number of homicides are listed
in Table 2. The data are constructed at the incident level with about 6.5 percent of the sample
(36,442 observations) being intimate partner homicides.12 I constructed a count of the number of
relevant homicides by aggregating the incidents of intimate partner homicide, as defined above,
in a given state for each year from 1976 until 2003. I also aggregated the number of intimate
partner homicides by the race of the victim and offender and by sex of the victim and offender.
Estimates are then scaled using census estimates for state population.13

[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]

A plot of the trend in various types of homicides before and after mandatory arrest laws,
suggests that these laws may have had a significant impact on intimate partner abuse. Figure 1

11

The specific coverage of each law is reported in the legal appendix.
There is some measurement error in victim-offender relationship variable. About 1.25% of female victims
reported as having a relationship to their offender that would imply she’s a man and about .43% of male victims
reported as having a relationship to their offender that would imply he’s a woman. Together these account for about
200 observations and less than 1 percent of the total sample. This is due to the classification of multiple homicides.
In multiple victim homicides the first victim-offender relationship is recorded for all of the victims. Because the
selection of the “first” victim tends to be arbitrary and this constitutes a very small fraction of the overall sample,
these cases are excluded from analysis.
13
This scaling by population seems the appropriate deflater as arrest laws often apply to unmarried couples
however, the subsequent analysis has been repeated with number of married couples with little qualitative effect on
the coefficients.
12

9

shows the rate of intimate partner and family homicide rates as a function of time since the arrest
law change. There appears to be a discrete increase of about 0.4 intimate partner homicides per
100,000. There is only a small decline in the number of family violence homicides. In contrast,
Figure 2 shows that recommended arrest laws have relatively little effect on intimate partner or
familial homicides. Similarly, figure 3 shows no effect on uncovered homicides in states with
either recommended or mandatory arrest laws.

[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]
[FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]

Comparing intimate partner homicides in states with and without arrest laws before and
after the passage of these laws, I estimate a linear regression of the impact of mandatory arrest
laws on the number of intimate partner homicides per 100,000 inhabitants. Column (1) of Table
3 reports some coefficients from this regression. The mandatory arrest effect variable is defined
as 1 in states that passed mandatory arrest laws in the years after the law was passed. Similarly,
recommended arrest effect variable equals 1 in states that passed recommended arrest laws in the
years after the law was passed. The results suggest that mandatory arrest laws are responsible
for an additional 0.8 murders per 100,000 people. This corresponds to a 54 percent increase in
intimate partner homicides. There does not appear to be a significant effect in recommended
arrest law states, although the coefficient is negative it is measured relatively imprecisely.
Estimates in columns (2) and (3) of table 3, control for some other state characteristics and
correlates of crime rates.

To measure unemployment I used the average annual state

unemployment rate derived from the Current Population Survey. To measure the violent crime
rate, I used the number of rape, robbery, and assault crime reports per 100,000 people from the
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports. Column (2) of Table 3 reports these results. There appears to be
little effect of these limited covariates on the mandatory arrest law effect.

[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]

10

Column (3) of Table 3 includes a more rich set of covariates including state-year level
variables on demographics, economic conditions and social policies. Demographic covariates
include demographic controls (such as fraction of population that is black, fraction of the
population that is white) as well as share of prison population in the state that is aged under 20,
20-35, 35-49 and 50 or older. In addition to the unemployment rate used in the previous
specification, I include economic covariates of crime such as state-year average log personal
income and male-female employment ratio. Finally, the state social policy controls which are
related to crime generally include whether the state has the death penalty and the AFDC/TANF
max for a family of 3. I also included a control for when the state passed unilateral divorce laws
based on Stevenson and Wolfers (2006). After including these covariates, the coefficient on the
effect of mandatory arrest laws on intimate partner homicides shrinks to about 0.76, which is
slightly smaller but similar in magnitude to the estimates from previous specification.
Columns (6) and (7) report results from a count model estimate of the parsimonious
specification and full set of controls specification respectively. The count model estimates use a
poisson likelihood function with robust standard errors. The results in column (6) for the
mandatory arrest law effect are nearly half the size of the corresponding OLS estimates. The
coefficient in the model which includes the full set of controls (column 7) is about two-thirds the
size of the similar OLS estimate. Nevertheless, the coefficient remains positive and significant,
suggesting an effect of about 35 percent.
To estimate the effect of the adoption of these laws over time, the specifications reported
in column (4) includes a time since law change interaction effect. Combined with the year fixed
effects this both controls for any differences at a given point in time (year fixed effect) as well as
differences generated from the duration of the law (years since law change). The main effect of
mandatory arrest laws corresponds to the effect of mandatory arrest laws in the initial year of
passage. This effect is about half the size of previously estimated effect and insignificant.
However, while the effect in the initial year is not significantly different than zero, the effect in
the second year (the mandatory arrest law main effect plus the 1 year post-law change effect) is
about .7 and is significant with a p-value of 0.02. The total law effect in later years is similarly
significant (although the 2 years post –law effect is significantly only at the 10 percent level) and
there does not appear to be a significantly different effect of these laws over time.

11

Because mandatory arrest laws were an important means by which domestic violence
became represented and treated as a criminal justice issue (as compared to a family or
community problem), we might be concerned that these laws will have a disparate impact on
communities which have greater mistrust of the criminal justice system.

In particular, some

studies have shown that African American women may be especially reluctant to report crimes to
the police, preferring instead to handle instances within their own communities.14 To evaluate
the effect on different subgroups of interest, columns (2), (3), and (4) of Table 4 compare the
effect of mandatory arrest laws on intimate partner homicides committed between White
couples, African-American couples and Asian couples respectively. There appears to be no
significant difference in the response of white and black couples and there appears to be only a
small effect of these arrest laws on homicides in Asian couples.

This give provides some

evidence that the negative effect of mandatory arrest laws is not due to a disproportionately
strong response in particular communities.

[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]

Thus far I have given little attention to the question of fault when constructing these
counts. This is relevant because the intimate partner homicide count used thus far likely includes
some homicides which are eventually (but not initially) classified as self-defense or justifiable.
While I cannot identify “self-defense” killings from murders, homicides of males by their female
intimate partner may more closely approximate the subset of cases for which self-defense is a
plausible future classification. Column (5) of table 4 presents estimate of intimate partner
homicides with only female victims killed by male intimate partners. Column (6) presents
estimates of intimate partner homicides committed by females against male intimate partners.
Intimate partner homicides of females increase about 50 percent, a similar percent increase to the
main, unrestricted estimate (presented in column 1 of Table 4). In contrast, homicides of males
by their female intimate partners are not significantly affected by mandatory arrest laws.
14

This point is highly contested. Evidence from the National Crime Victimization Survey suggests that African
American women report intimate partner violence at higher rates than do their white or Asian counterparts (see for
example Rennison, 2001). However, surveys and outreach workers cite general mistrust of the police, mistreatment
of the police and concerns that reporting will send partners with criminal records back to prison as reasons why
under-reporting may be more prevalent in African American communities (see Hampton, Oliver, and Magarian,
2003; Bobbit and Williams, 2006)

12

Overall, this suggests that most of the effect is likely driven by the response of women in abusive
situations to the law change. This evidence is consistent with studies that suggest that battered
women who kill their husbands do so more often when they have fewer extra-legal
opportunities.15 As a result, these homicides may be less responsive to changes in women’s
opportunities within the criminal justice system (such as arrest law policies).
In an effort to verify the difference-in-difference framework, I test the effect of
mandatory arrest laws on various sets of uncovered homicides. If the difference-in-difference
estimates find a significant effect of mandatory arrest laws on homicides between individuals
who should be unaffected by domestic and family violence laws, then it is likely the differences
identified above may be unrelated to the passage of these laws.
For the purposes of these falsification tests, I define a class of homicides called “other
homicides” which includes homicides committed against employees, employers, friends, other
known individuals, and strangers.16 These homicides should be unaffected by mandatory arrest
laws. I estimate two specifications, one with only state and year fixed effects, and one with the
full set of covariates described above. The results from these regressions are reported in Table 5,
columns (1) and (2). In both specifications, neither mandatory arrest laws nor recommended
arrest laws have a significant effect on the homicide level of uncovered homicides. To more
closely approximate the homicides of females, I also estimate these two specifications on a count
of “other homicides” which have female victims. The results from these two regressions are
reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 and again, there appears to be no significant effect of
these laws on homicide rates. Finally, I test the effect of arrest laws on intimate and familial
homicides which are uncovered by arrest laws.

These include homicides committed by

boyfriends, girlfriends, homosexual partners, and non-nuclear family relatives. The results are
reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5. These results suggest that there is no significant
effect of these laws on uncovered homicides.
[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]

15

See for example O’Keefe (1997) This is also consistent with evidence that finds female perpetrated abuse is
affected not by criminal justice options but by outside extra-legal resources (e.g. shelters) (Browne and Williams
(1989).
16
I have excluded homicides committed by individuals of “unknown relationship.” While it is likely that these
homicides were not committed by immediate family members or intimate partners, it is was not possible to estimate
the subset of these homicides that would be covered and thus all are excluded. For additional information on this
point see the data appendix

13

IV. REPORTING BEHAVIOR AND THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF ARREST LAWS

The quasi-experimental results presented in this study appear to conflict with the findings
of the MDVE. The conflict can be explained by recognizing that the MDVE actually estimated
the effect of an actual arrest conditional on reporting while the estimates presented in this study
estimate the unconditional effect of the certainty of arrest.

The MDVE held constant the

probability of reporting given violence because all cases in the experiment required an initial
report of domestic abuse to the police. Thus, the MDVE estimated the effect of a decrease in the
utility to batterers when they abuse and are reported on that abuser’s probability of choosing
violence in the future. Unfortunately, if the victim bears the full incidence of the increased cost
of the increased penalty, then the overall effect of these laws on abuse is theoretically ambiguous
(and empirically these laws appear to increase levels of abuse).
In the case of domestic violence, victims may bear the costs of an increased penalty to the
abusers in several ways: First, there is a psychological and emotional component of intimate
partner abuse that often generates victims who remain committed to their abuser and do not wish
to send him to prison. Thus, guilt effectively transfers the cost from abusers to victims.17
Second, if abusers are arrested but no further legal action is taken, they may return home within a
day of their arrest and further terrorize their victim.

In a non-experimental evaluation of

mandatory arrest as a policy, Lyon (1999) used a logistic model to compare the likelihood of
arrest under mandatory arrest laws versus pro-arrest laws in two cities in Michigan. She found
that once a victim calls the police to report an incident, she is significantly less likely to call
again. She posits this was likely because police intervention in the form of an arrest resulted in
retribution by the abuser deterring future reporting.18 Third, in many cases arrests laws resulted
in the victim also being arrested if there was evidence that she (or he) physically assaulted her
(or his) partner. In many areas, women constitute nearly 20 percent of domestic violence arrests,

17

Recent research finds that many women do not perceive any benefit from mandatory arrest laws, no drop policies
(requiring prosecution conditional on reporting) and mandatory medical reporting and these laws may make them
less willing to report in the future. (See Smith, 2000)
18
Rennison (2000) found that fear of reprisal from abuser the most commonly cited cause for not reporting a
domestic violence incident. This is hotly contested claim. Mills (1998) based on research by Sherman and Berk
(1984) claims that arrests actually increase re-assaults. More recent work by Maxwell, Garner and Fagan (2002)
find that there is no significant change in the risk of assault.

14

a far higher percentage than the estimated proportion of female abusers. 19 Over half of these
female arrestees can be identified as previous victims of intimate partner violence (Martin,
1997). Anecdotal evidence from some battered women advocates suggests that these “dual
arrests” are the most serious problem with mandatory arrest.20

Dual arrests have serious

implications for victims who are immigrants and may be deported if convicted of assault. In
addition, those who have children face potential loss of custody during the arrest period. All of
these costs may result in an increased unwillingness to report abuse to the police.
To test the plausibility of the reporting story, I considered the effect of mandatory arrest
laws on homicides committed against members of the immediate family. Because mandatory
arrest laws required the arrest of an abuser in a domestic situation, familial abuse was also
covered by these laws. However, unlike for adults, children typically do not report their own
physical abuse to police. Instead, abuse is usually detected by an outside adult (such as a teacher
or a doctor).21 In this case reporting would not be a function of the cost of reporting to the
abuser.22 Unlike in intimate partner abuse settings, the escalation of violence in child abuse
situations could increase the probability of another adult noticing and therefore reporting the
abuse. Given this situation, mandatory arrest laws should reduce the probability of severe
violence to children by family members. I therefore defined “family homicides” as homicides
committed against a father, mother, step-father, step-mother, son, daughter, step-son, step-

19

For example, in Phoenix, AZ, 18 percent of domestic violence arrests are women (AZCASA). Women are
thought to be abusers in less than 5 percent of intimate partner violence cases (Dobash, R.P., Dobash, E.E., Wilson,
M. & Daly, M. 1992). Though some work suggests there is a surprisingly high rate of female on male abuse (see
Strauss and Geller (1980)) however this work is problematic and for the most part ignores the severity and context
of the violence (see Blau, 1998). This is particularly relevant in the case of intimate partner abuse. For example,
suppose a husband spent years beating his wife severely. At the time of the survey, the husband shoved his wife and
she immediately threatened him with a knife. The conflict tactics scale (CTS) treats the wife’s behavior as
aggressive when it is, in context, clearly defensive. Moreover, the CTS fails to properly differentiate acts of
violence that constitute severe abuse. When such a breakdown is down, men typically have the higher rates of the
most dangerous behaviors, such as firing a gun, repeated their violence more often, and do more physical harm. For
a greater discussions see DeKeserdy and Schwartz (1998).
20
This statement is based on conversations with individuals at battered women’s coalitions in NJ, AZ, NY, CA, CT
and IL.
21
More specifically, of the nearly 2.8 million child abuse cases reported to child protective services agencies in
2000, 56.1 percent of all reports were from law enforcement, educators, medical and mental health professionals,
social services personnel, child care providers and other mandated reporters. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration on Children, Youth and Families, Child Maltreatment 2000 (Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 2002).
22
Actually, many professionals have legal requirements to report suspected abuse which can compensate for any
potential costs they might incur from reporting abusers in their community.

15

daughter, brother, or sister.23 I constructed a count of these homicides by state by year and
defined a count of family homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 reports the results from a regression of family homicides
per 100,000 inhabitants on an indicator for the mandatory arrest laws, an indicator for
recommended arrest laws controlling for state and year fixed effects. Column (2) adds the full
set of demographic, economic and social policy controls.

The results indicate the family

homicides decreased by about 0.4 per 100,000, corresponding to a 42 percent decline.24 Because
the reporting hypothesis suggests that arrest laws should more strongly effect the abuse of
children rather than the abuse of any residential individual, I estimate two sets of regressions on
a more restricted dependent variable. The first restriction I impose is that the victim was a child
(either by blood or marriage) of the perpetrator produces similar effects. These results are
reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 and are quite similar in percent change terms in
homicides rates to the unrestricted family homicides levels. The second restriction I impose is
that the children are of school age (i.e. age 6-17). It is certainly possible that abuse of quite small
or quite old children may rely more on the reporting by an individual within the household and
thus be subject to the same transference of costs as direct victims of intimate partner violence. In
contrast, school age children are likely to see teachers, doctors, and nurses on a regular basis. As
such, heightened abuse of these children is mostly likely to generate an increased likelihood of
third party reporting. As such, we might expect to observe a larger effect of arrest laws on these
homicides. Indeed, the results reported in columns (5) and (6) of table 6 suggest a nearly 75
percent reduction in homicides of these children. These results are consistent with the model
suggesting that once arrest laws do not rely on reporting by the abused, these laws appear to
function as predicted, reducing harm to the protected individuals.

[TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]

IV. CONCLUSIONS
Many states use laws requiring the warrentless arrest of individuals believed to be
responsible for intimate partner abuse as a major policy tool in their effort to end domestic
23
24

For specific coverage by state law, see legal appendix.
This substantial decline in familial homicides has been the subject of much discussion. See Durose, et al. (2005)

16

violence. The results presented in this study suggest that this may in fact be counterproductive.
Using data from the FBI Supplementary Homicide Reports from 1976-2003, I find that the level
of intimate partner homicide increased in states with these mandatory arrest laws. This may be
because abuse victims may be less likely to contact the police in the face of a mandatory arrest
law.

This failure to contact the police results in fewer interventions risking an increased

probability of escalating violence.

To support this interpretation, I present evidence of the

effect of these laws on different types of homicides. I estimated the change in familial homicides
in response to mandatory arrest laws. These crimes are covered by arrest laws but the reporting
of abuse typically is not performed by the victim. Thus the reporting effect should be reduced or
eliminated and the results should more closely resemble the results from the MDVE.

A

difference-in-difference analysis reveals that familial homicides declined in response to
mandatory arrest laws. In contrast, there was no significant effect of arrest laws on uncovered
homicides. This suggests that mandatory arrest laws may deter reporting nullifying the potential
deterrence of abuse intended by the required arrests.
The analysis in this study leaves open several issues.

First, while intimate partner

homicides may have increased, it is not certain that this corresponds to increased levels of
intimate partner abuse.

If the intimate partner homicides and intimate partner abuse are

negatively correlated, then arrest laws may decrease abuse while increasing homicides. The
affect of mandatory arrest laws on less severe abuse therefore remains an open question.
Second, the reasons why mandatory arrest laws produce perverse outcomes for victims of
domestic violence is also uncertain. If abusers penalize victims with harsher abuse after arrests,
then arrests are an insufficient response to domestic violence.

In this scenario, stronger

sentences and aggressive prosecution policies, which will incapacitate abusers, are necessary to
ensure the safety of victims. On the other hand, if mandatory arrest laws fail because of the
psychological component of abuse that is based on the emotional bonds between the abuser and
the victim making victims unwilling to inflict harsh penalties on their abusers then an alternative
approach which does not depend on victims reporting is needed.

If the problem is a

misapplication of the law (for example, through dual arrests) then preceding the enforcement of
arrest laws, comprehensive police training is required.

Finally, it is well known in the

sociological and psychological literature that arrests are not sufficient to induce victims to leave

17

their abusers.25 If the objective of arrest laws is to promote a decline in the prevalence of
intimate partner violence then policy efforts focused on providing victims the opportunities and
resources to leave abusive situations are also required.
The irony that a mandatory arrest law intended to deter abuse actually increases intimate
partner homicides is not lost on this author. Given the dangerous and pervasive nature of
domestic violence, there is little doubt that state intervention, in some form, is required.
Determining what shape that intervention takes is of vital importance. The results from this
study suggest that the threat of arrest is insufficient to deter abusers from killing their victims.
Finding arrests deter victim reporting rather than perpetrator abuse provides valuable insight into
the intricacies facing governmental attempts to decrease intimate partner violence. While it
appears that mandatory arrest laws are not sufficient to deter abuse, the set of policies that can
effectively prevent abuse and protect victims remains an issue for future research

25

See Mills (1998) for a comprehensive discussion of the problem of arrest policy

18

REFERENCES
American Bar Association (1973). Standards for the Urban Police Functions, Project on
Standards for Criminal Justice, 106-108.
American Psychological Association, “Violence and the Family: Report of the American
Psychological Association”, Presidential Task Force on Violence and the Family (1996), p. 10.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. and Mullainathan, S. (2004) “How Much Should We Trust Differencesin-Differences Estimates?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
Blau, Francine D. (1998). “Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1970-1995” Journal
of Economic Literature, Vol. 36, No. 1. (Mar., 1998), pp. 112-165.
Brick, J. Michael, Jones, Michael E., Kalton, Graham and Richard Valliant (2005) “Variance
Estimation with Hot Deck Imputation: A Simulation Study of Three Methods” Survey
Methodology Vol. 31, No. 2, pp.151-159
Bracher, Pamela Blass (1996) “Comment: Mandatory Arrest for Domestic Violence: The City of
Cincinnati's Simple Solution to a Complex Problem”, 65 U. Cin. L. Rev. 155, 162-64.
Brooks, Rachelle. “Feminists Negotiate the Legislative Branch: The Violence Against Women
Act,” Feminists Negotiate the State. (1997: University Press of America Inc.).
Browne, Angela and Kirk Williams (1989). “Exploring the Effect of Resource Availability and
the Likelihood of Female-Perpetrated Homicides” Law and Society Review Vol. 23 (1) 75-94
Buzawa, Eve S. and Carl G. Buzawa (1996) Domestic Violence: The Criminal Justice Response
(2nd ed.) Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. pp.126-128
Dobash, R.P., Dobash, E.E., Wilson, M. & Daly, M. 1992 "The myth of sexual symmetry in
marital violence", Social Problems, 391
Dugan, Laura (2003) “Domestic Violence Legislation: Exploring its Impact on the Likelihood of
Domestic Violence, Police Involvement, and Arrest” Criminology and Public Policy Vol 2, p.
283
Durose, M, Harlow, C, Langan, P, Motivans, M Rantala, R and E. Smith (2005) “ Family
Violence Statistics: Including Statistics on Strangers and Acquaintances” Bureau of Justice
Statistics (NCJ 207846)
Efron, Bradley and Gail Gong (1983) “ A Leisurely look at the bootstrap, the Jackknife, and
Cross-Validation” The American Statistician, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp.36-48
Farmer, Amy and Jill Tienfenthaler(1997). “An Economic Analysis of Domestic Violence,”
Review of Social Economy, Vol. 55, No. 3, Fall, pp. 337-358

19

Farmer, Amy and Jill Tiefenthaler (2003) “Explaining the Recent Decline in Domestic Violence”
Contemporary Economic Policy Vol. 21(2) 158-172
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Reports, Supplementary Homicides Reports
1976-1999
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Reports, Offenses Known and Clearances 19651999.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Reports, County-Level Detailed Arrest and
1990-1999
Fox, James Alan (2004) “Missing Data Problems in the SHR: Imputing Offender and
Relationship Characteristics” Homicide Studies Vol. 8, No. 3 August pp.214-254
Fox, James Alan and Marianne W. Zawitz (2004). Homicide Trends in the United States Bureau
of Justice Statistics
Greenfeld, L., Rand, M., Craven, D., Klaus, P., Perkins, C., Ringel, C., Warchol, G., Maston, C.,
& Fox, J. (1998). “Violence by intimates - Analysis of data on crimes by current or former
spouses, boyfriends, and girlfriends.” Bureau of Justice Statistics Factbook (#NCJ167237).
Gwinn, Casey and Anne O’Dell (1993). “Stopping the Violence: The Role of the Police Officer
and the Prosecutor”, Western State Law Review, 1501-1521
Hampton, Robert, Oliver, William, and Lucia Magarian (2003) “Domestic Violence in the
African American Community: An Analysis of Social and Structural Factors” Violence Against
Women Vol. 9,(5) 533-557.
Heise Lori and Chapman Jane Roberts. “Reflections on A Movement: The U.S. Battle Against
Women Abuse,” Freedom From Violence. (1992:UNIFEM).
Kirsch (2001) “Problems in Domestic Violence: Should Victims be Forced to Participate in the
Prosecution of their Abusers”, William and Mary Journal of Women and Law
Kryriacou, DN, Anglin, D, Taliaferro, E, Stone, S, Tubb, Toni, Linden, J, Muelleman, R, Barton,
E, and J. Kraus (1999). “Risk Factors for Injury to Women from Domestic Violence” The New
England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 341 (25) 1892-1898
Lalonde, Robert (1986) “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data” American Economic Review Vol. 76 (4) 604-20
Lyon, Andrea D. (1999). “Be Careful What You Wish For: An Examination of Arrest and
Prosecution Patterns of Domestic Violence Cases in Two Cities in Michigan”, Michigan Journal
of Gender and Law, pp. 272-297

20

Martin, Margaret (1997). Double Your Trouble: Dual Arrest in Family Violence”, Journal of
Family Violence Volume 12, Number 2
Maxwell, Garner & Fagan “The Effects of Arrest on Intimate Partner Violence: New Evidence
From the Spouse Assault Replication Program” Criminology & Public Policy Vol. 2, No. 1
Mercy, JA and LE Saltzman (1989) “Fatal Violence Among Spouses in the United States”
American Journal of Public Health Vol. 79(5) 595-9
Meyers, Bruce (1992). “Natural and Quasi-Experimental in Economics” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics Vol. 13(2)
Mills, L. G. (1998). Mandatory arrest and prosecution policies for domestic violence: A critical
literature review and the case for more research to test victim empowerment approaches.
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 25, 306-318.
Mignon, Sylvia I., Holmes, William M. “Police Response to Mandatory Arrest Laws,” Crime
and Delinquency. (1995: Sage Publications Inc.): Vol. 41, No 4, 430-443.
Neville, HA and AO Pugh (1997). “General and Culture-Specific Factors Influencing African
American women's reporting patterns and perceived social support following sexual assault. An
exploratory investigation” Violence Against Women Vol. 3 (4) 361-381
O’Keefe, Maura (1997) “Incarcerated Battered Women: A Comparison of Battered Women who
Killed Their Abusers and Those Incarcerated for Other Offenses” Journal of Family Violence
Vol. 12 (1) 1-19
Pampel, Fred C. and Kirk R. Williams “Intimacy and Homicide: Compensating for Missing Data
in the SHR” Criminology Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 661-679
Pollak, Robert A. (2004). “An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence”, Journal of
Population Economics
Rennison, Callie (2002). Rape and Sexual Assault: Reporting to Police and Medical Attention
1992 – 2000 Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics
Riedel (1999) “Sources of Homicide data: A review and comparison” In M. Dwayne Smith and
Margaret A. Zahn (eds.), Homicide: A Sourcebook of Social Research
Rosenthal, RW (1981) “Games of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and the Chain Store
Paradox” Journal of Economic Theory Vol. 25 (1) 92-100
Rubin, D.B. (1987) Multiple Imputations for Nonresponse in Survey. New York: John Wiley &
Sons

21

Rubin, D.B. and N. Schenker (1986) “Multiple Imputation for interval estimation for simple
random samples with nonignorable nonresponse” Journal of the American Statistical Association
Vol. 81, pp.361-374
Sherman, Lawrence (1992) Policing domestic violence New York: Free Press, 1992
Sherman, Lawrence W., and Richard A. Berk, (1984) "The Specific Deterrent Effects of Arrest
for Domestic Assault," American Sociological Review 49 (1) 261-72.
Selten, R. (1978) “The Chain Store Paradox” Theory and Decision Vol. 9(2) 127-159
Smith, Alisa (2000) “It’s My Decision, Isn’t It? A research Note on Battered Women’s
Perceptions of Mandatory Intervention Laws” Violence Against Women Vol. 6(12) 1384-1402.
Stark, E. (1993), “Mandatory Arrest of Batterers”, American Behavioral Scientist, Vol. 36, No 5
Strauss and Gelles (1980) Behind Closed Doors: A Survey of Family Violence in America New
York: Double Day
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2006) “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
Laws and Family Distress” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 121(1) 267-288
Symposium on Domestic Violence (1992), 83 U. Crim. L. & Criminology. Spring
Tauchen, Helen and Ann Dryden Witte (1995). “The Dynamics of Domestic Violence”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 2, May, pp. 414-418
Thurman v. City of Torrington, 595 F. Supp. 1521 (D. Conn. 1984)
Wanless, Marion (1996): Mandatory Arrest: A Step Toward Eradicating Domestic Violence, But
is it Enough”, 1996 U. Ill. L. Rev. 533
Williams, Kirk and Robert L. Flewelling (1987) “Family, Acquaintance, and Stranger Homicide:
Alternative Procedures for Rates Calculations” Criminology Vol. 25, No. 3, pp.543-560
West (2003). Westlaw Campus accessed via Princeton University license
Zorza, Joan (1994). “Must We Stop Arresting Batterers?: Analysis and Policy Implications of
New Police Domestic Violence Studies, 28 New Eng. L. Rev. 929

22

-.5

homicides per 100,000 people
0
.5
1
1.5

Figure 1. Intimate Partner and Familial Homicide Rates in Mandatory Arrest Law States

-10

-5

0
5
years since arrest law change

10

15

avg. intimate partner homicides per capita
avg. family member homicides per capita

Notes: Means based on author’s own calculations using Supplementary Homicide Reports 1976-2003. Intimate
partner homicides include homicides of husbands, wives, ex-husbands, ex-wives, common-law husbands and
common-law wives. Mandatory arrest states are defined as states where officers have no discretion as to whether to
make a warrentless arrest when an intimate partner offense is reported.

23

.5

homicides per 100,000 people
1
1.5
2

2.5

Figure 2. Intimate Partner and Familial Homicide Rates in Recommended Arrest Law States

-10

-5

0
years since arrest law change

5

10

avg. intimate partner homicides per capita
avg. family member homicides per capita

Notes: Means based on author’s own calculations using Supplementary Homicide Reports 1976-2003. Intimate
partner homicides include homicides of husbands, wives, ex-husbands, ex-wives, common-law husbands and
common-law wives. Recommended arrest states are defined as states where officers are instructed but not required
to make a warrentless arrest when an intimate partner offense is reported.

24

0

homicides per 100,000 people
5
10
15

20

Figure 3. Non-Intimate, Non-Familial Homicide Rates in Mandatory and Recommended Arrest
Law States

-10

-5

0
5
10
years since arrest law change

15

Avg. Stranger Homicides in MA States per capita
Avg. Stranger Homicides in RA States per capita

Notes: Means based on author’s own calculations using Supplementary Homicide Reports 1976-2003. “Other
homicides” include homicides committed against employees, employers, other (non-immediate) family, friends,
other known individuals, and strangers. Mandatory arrest (MA) states are defined as states where officers have no
discretion as to whether to make a warrentless arrest when an intimate partner offense is reported. Recommended
arrest (RA) states are defined as states where officers are instructed but not required to make a warrentless arrest
when an intimate partner offense is reported.

25

Table 1. Mandatory Arrest Laws by State
State
Year Passed
Code/Statute
AZ
1991
Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §13-3601(B)
CA
1993
Cal. Penal Code §836(c)(1)
KS
2000
Kan. Stat. Ann. §22-2401(c)(2)
Recommended
MS
1995
Miss. Code Ann. §99-3-7(3)(a)
Arrest States
MO
1989
Mo. Ann. Stat. §455.085(1)
NY
1994
N.Y. Crim. Proc. Law §140.10(4)
OH
1994
Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §2935.032(A)(1)(a)
SC
2002
S.C. Code Ann. §16-25-70(B)
AK
1996
Alaska Stat. §18.65.530(a)
CO
1994
Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. §18-6-803.6(1)
CT
1987
Conn. Gen. Stat. §46b- 38b(a)
DC
1991
D.C. Code Ann. §16-1031(a)
IA
1990
Iowa Code §236.12(3)
ME
1995
Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 19-A, §4012(6)(D)
Mandatory Arrest
NV
1989
Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. §171.137(1)
States
NJ
1991
N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:25-21(a)
OR
2001
Or. Rev. Stat. §133.055(2)(a)
RI
2000
R.I. Gen. Laws §12-29-3(c)(1)
SD
1998
S.D. Codified Laws §23A-3-2.1
UT
2000
Utah Code Ann. §7-36-2.2(2)(a)
VA
2002
Va. Code Ann. §19.2-81.3(B)
WI
1996
Wis. Stat. Ann. §968.075(2)(a)
WA
1999
Wash. Rev. Code Ann. §10.31.100(2)
Source: West, 2003. Mandatory arrest states are defined as states where officers have no discretion as to
whether to make a warrentless arrest when an intimate partner offense is reported. Recommended arrest states
are defined as states where officers are instructed but not required to make a warrentless arrest when an
intimate partner offense is reported. For specific information on coverage see data appendix.

26

Table 2. Definition and Summary Statistics for Homicide Categories

N
Total Percent of Sample
Husband
Wife
Common-law
Husband
Common-law Wife
Ex-husband
Ex-wife

Fraction of Category
Homicides committed
against:

Mother/Step-mother
Father/Step-father
Son/Step-son
Daughter/Stepdaughter
Brother
Sister
Stepson
Stepdaughter

Intimate
Partner
Homicide

Familial
Homicide

"Other"
Homicide

Excluded
Groups

36,442
6.45
0.28
0.52
0.07

24,664
4.37
----

299961
53.10
----

26,700
4.73
----

0.07
0.02
0.04
------

---0.11
0.15
0.27
0.19

---------

---------

-----

0.19
0.04
0.04
0.02

-----

-----

In-law
--0.01
-Neighbor
--0.02
-Acquaintance
--0.45
-Employee
--0.10
-Employer
--0.14
-Friend
--0.07
-Other known
--0.09
-Stranger
--0.35
-Other family
---0.27
Homosexual relation
---0.05
Boyfriend
---0.24
Girlfriend
---0.43
Unknown relationship
---0.90
Notes: Fractions based on FBI Supplementary Homicide Reports, 1976-2003. Numbers in sub-categories may
not sum to one due to rounding errors. 177,138 observations, or 31.36 percent of the sample was committed
by an unknown assailant. The statistical implications of these missing observations is discussed in the data
appendix.

27

Table 3: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws
(1)

(4)
(5)
(2)
(3)
All Intimate Partner Homicides per 100,000 inhabitants

(7)

1.48

Dependant Variable Mean
Mandatory Arrest Law Effect
(=1 in MA law states after law change)

0.83**
(0.33)

0.81**
(0.33)

0.76**
(0.34)

0.47
(0.30)

0.49***
(0.16)

0.53***
(0.17)

Recommended Arrest Law Effect
(=1 in RA law states after law change)

-0.61
(0.61)

-0.66
(0.59)

-0.62
(0.47)

-0.96*
(0.54)

-0.03
(0.18)

-0.03
(0.18)

unemployment rate

--

0.01
(0.07)

0.04
(0.09)

0.02
(0.07)

--

-0.035
(0.014)

1 year post-law change

--

--

--

0.23
(0.27)

--

--

2 year post-law change

--

--

--

0.14
(0.31)

--

--

3 or more years post-law change

--

--

--

0.41
(0.42)

--

--

OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
Poisson
Poisson
Estimation Method
a
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Controls for other Violent Crime rates
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Controls for Unemployment Rate b
c
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
State-year Demographic Variables
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
State-year Economic and Social Controls d
N
N
N
Y
N
N
Post-law interaction effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year Fixed Effects
-R-squared
-0.6125
0.6127
0.701
0.6746
Notes: All regressions include 992 observations. The dependant variable for each column is the column title per 100,000 inhabitants. Robust standard errors, clustered by
state, are reported in parentheses. Coefficients that are significant at the .05 (.01, .1) percent level are marked with ** (***, *). Intimate partner homicides include
homicides of husbands, wives, ex-husbands, ex-wives, common-law husbands and common-law wives. Mandatory arrest (MA) states are states which require an arrest
conditional on a report of domestic violence. Recommended arrest (RA) states are states where officers are instructed but not required to make a warrentless arrest when an
intimate partner offense is reported.

28

a. Crime rate controls use FBI Uniform Crime reports for the number of crimes per 100,000 inhabitants. Indexed crimes included in the violent crime variable are murder,
robbery, assault, and rape. Indexed crimes included in the nonviolent crime count are burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft and drug crimes.
b. Unemployment estimates are based on the March Current Population Survey
c. State demographic controls are based on the March Current Population Survey and include variables for the fraction of the population that is black, fraction of the
population that is white, the fraction of the population that is other race, as well as age composition indicating share of prison population that is aged 14-19, 20-49, 50 or
older.
d. State economic control variables are based on the March Current Population Survey and included the variables log state personal income per capita, female-to-male
employment ratio. State social policy controls include max AFDC/TANF for a family of 3, unilateral divorce laws indicators (based on classification in Stevenson and
Wolfers, 2006) and indicators for whether the state has the death penalty.

29

Table 4 Estimates of the Effect of Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws on Intimate Partner Homicides for Various Subgroups
(1)
All Intimate
Partner
Homicides per
100,000
inhabitants
1.48

(4)
(5)
(2)
(3)
Intimate partner Intimate partner Intimate partner Homicides of
homicides with homicides with homicides with
female by
White victims
Black victims
Asian victims
males intimate
and perpetrator and perpetrators and perpetrators
partners

(6)
Homicides of
males by
female intimate
partners

0.81

0.59

0.01

0.89

0.59

0.762**
(0.326)

0.407*
(0.218)

0.393***
(0.129)

0.014*
(0.008)

0.458**
(0.216)

0.257
(0.180)

Recommended Arrest Law Effect
(=1 in RA law states after law change)

-0.618
(0.592)

-0.231
(0.265)

-0.379
(0.316)

0.011
(0.013)

-0.229
(0.305)

-0.430
(0.308)

unemployment rate

0.043
(0.074)

0.016
(0.034)

0.003
(0.040)

-0.000
(0.000)

0.001
(0.036)

0.013
(0.038)

Dependant Variable Mean
Mandatory Arrest Law Effect
(=1 in MA law states after law change)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Controls for other Crime Rates a
b
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Controls for Unemployment Rate
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State-year Demographic Variables c
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State-year Economic and Social Controls d
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year Fixed Effects
R-squared
0.701
0.7680
0.5401
0.4534
0.7361
0.5707
Notes: All regressions include 994 observations. The dependant variable for each column is the column title per 100,000 inhabitants. Robust standard errors, clustered
by state, are reported in parentheses. Coefficients that are significant at the .05 (.01, .1) percent level are marked with ** (***, *). Intimate partner homicides include
homicides of husbands, wives, ex-husbands, ex-wives, common-law husbands and common-law wives. Mandatory arrest (MA) states are states which require an arrest
conditional on a report of domestic violence. Recommended arrest (RA) states are states where officers are instructed but not required to make a warrentless arrest when
an intimate partner offense is reported.
a. Crime rate controls use FBI Uniform Crime reports for the number of crimes per 100,000 inhabitants. Indexed crimes included in the violent crime variable are
murder, robbery, assault, and rape. Indexed crimes included in the nonviolent crime count are burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft and drug crimes.
b. Unemployment estimates are based on the March Current Population Survey
c. State demographic controls are based on the March Current Population Survey and include variables for the fraction of the population that is black, fraction of the
population that is white, the fraction of the population that is other race, as well as age composition indicating share of prison population that is aged 14-19, 20-49, 50 or
older.
d. State economic control variables are based on the March Current Population Survey and included the variables log state personal income per capita, female-to-male
employment ratio. State social policy controls include max AFDC/TANF for a family of 3, unilateral divorce laws indicators (based on classification in Stevenson and
Wolfers, 2006) and indicators for whether the state has the death penalty.

30

Table 5 Falsification Tests of Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Effect of Mandatory and Recommended Arrest Laws

Dependant Variable Mean
Mandatory Arrest
Law Effect
Recommended
Arrest Law Effect

(1)
(2)
“Other Homicides” per 100,000
inhabitants
10.37
3.15
2.91
(2.46)
(2.39)
-0.56
(3.70)

-0.89
(3.64)

(3)
(4)
“Other Homicides” with female
victims
1.41
0.39
0.35
(0.39)
(0.37)
-0.37
(0.54)

-0.43
(0.52)

(5)
(6)
Intimate Partner Homicides
Uncovered by Arrest laws
0.73
0.26
0.23
(0.20)
(0.20)
0.09
(0.20)

0.06
(0.19)

N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Controls for other Crime Rates a
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Controls for Unemployment Rate b
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
State-year Demographic Variables c
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
State-year Economic and Social Controls d
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year Fixed Effects
R-Squared
0.6396
0.6419
0.5984
0.6025
0.6662
0.6704
Notes: All regressions include 994 observations. The dependant variable for each column is the column title per 100,000 inhabitants. Robust standard errors, clustered by state,
are reported in parentheses. Coefficients that are significant at the .05 (.01, .1) percent level are marked with ** (***, *). “Other homicides” include homicides committed
against employees, employers, other (non-immediate) family, friends, other known individuals, and strangers. Intimate partner homicides uncovered by law refers to
relationships that are classified as intimate partner but were not specified in the state’s arrest law statute. See Legal Appendix for detailed coverage by state. Mandatory arrest
(MA) states are states which require an arrest conditional on a report of domestic violence. Recommended arrest (RA) states are states where officers are instructed but not
required to make a warrentless arrest when an intimate partner offense is reported.
a. Crime rate controls use FBI Uniform Crime reports for the number of crimes per 100,000 inhabitants. Indexed crimes included in the violent crime variable are murder,
robbery, assault, and rape. Indexed crimes included in the nonviolent crime count are burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft and drug crimes.
b. Unemployment estimates are based on the March Current Population Survey.
c. State demographic controls are based on the March Current Population Survey and include variables for the fraction of the population that is black, fraction of the population
that is white, the fraction of the population that is other race, as well as age composition indicating share of prison population that is aged 14-19, 20-49, 50 or older.
d. State economic control variables are based on the March Current Population Survey and included the variables log state personal income per capita, female-to-male
employment ratio. State social policy controls include max AFDC/TANF for a family of 3, unilateral divorce laws indicators (based on classification in Stevenson and Wolfers,
2006) and indicators for whether the state has the death penalty.

31

Table 6 Difference-in-Difference Estimates of Familial and non-familial homicide Rates
(1)
(2)
Family homicides per 100,000
inhabitants

(3)
(4)
Family Homicides: Child of
Offender victims

(5)
(6)
Family Homicides, school-age
child of offender victims

0.88

0.42

0.33

Dependant Variable Mean
Mandatory Arrest
Law Effect

-0.392*
(0.205)

-0.367*
(0.197)

-0.225*
(0.127)

-0.208*
(0.121)

-0.264**
(0.118)

-0.250**
(0.113)

Recommended
Arrest Law Effect

-0.058
(0.327)

-0.090
(0.318)

-0.012
(0.172)

-0.003
(0.169)

-0.024
(0.139)

-0.012
(0.137)

N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Controls for other Crime Rates a
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Controls for Unemployment Rate b
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
State-year Demographic Variables c
d
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
State-year Economic and Social Controls
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
State Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Year Fixed Effects
R-Squared
0.7098
0.7171
Notes: All regressions include 994 observations. The dependant variable for each column is the column title per 100,000 inhabitants. Robust standard errors, clustered by state,
are reported in parentheses. Coefficients that are significant at the .05 (.01, .1) percent level are marked with ** (***, *). “Family Homicides” include homicides committed by
mothers, fathers, daughters, sons, step-mother, step-father, step-daughter, step-son, and other family members. “Family homicides: Child of Offender victims” include only
homicides committed by fathers, mothers, step-fathers, or step-mothers, against sons, daughters, step-sons or step-daughters. “Family homicides: school-age child of offender
victims” includes homicides committed by fathers, mothers, step-fathers, or step-mothers, against sons, daughters, step-sons or step-daughters in which the victim is aged 6-18.
a. Crime rate controls use FBI Uniform Crime reports for the number of crimes per 100,000 inhabitants. Indexed crimes included in the violent crime variable are murder,
robbery, assault, and rape. Indexed crimes included in the nonviolent crime count are burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft and drug crimes.
b. Unemployment estimates are based on the March Current Population Survey.
c. State demographic controls are based on the March Current Population Survey and include variables for the fraction of the population that is black, fraction of the population
that is white, the fraction of the population that is other race, as well as age composition indicating share of prison population that is aged 14-19, 20-49, 50 or older.
d. State economic control variables are based on the March Current Population Survey and included the variables log state personal income per capita, female-to-male
employment ratio. State social policy controls include max AFDC/TANF for a family of 3, unilateral divorce laws indicators (based on classification in Stevenson and Wolfers,
2006) and indicators for whether the state has the death penalty.

32

33

