                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DEMOCRACY, TECHNOLOGY, AND GROWTH

                                           Philippe Aghion
                                            Alberto Alesina
                                           Francesco Trebbi

                                         Working Paper 13180
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13180


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




The authors are particularly grateful to Daron Acemoglu for his comments. We also benefitted from
discussions with Matilde Bombardini, Elhanan Helpman Guido Tabellini and seminar participants
at a CIAR meeting in Toronto for comments, and we thank Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Jim
Robinson, and Pierre Yared for sharing their data. Andrea Asoni provided excellent research assistance.
Trebbi kindly acknowledges financial support from the Initiative on Global Financial Markets. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Philippe Aghion, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Democracy, Technology, and Growth
Philippe Aghion, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 13180
June 2007
JEL No. H7

                                              ABSTRACT

We explore the question of how political institutions and particularly democracy affect economic growth.
Although empirical evidence of a positive effect of democracy on economic performance in the aggregate
is weak, we provide evidence that democracy influences productivity growth in different sectors differently
and that this differential effect may be one of the reasons of the ambiguity of the aggregate results.
We provide evidence that political rights are conducive to growth in more advanced sectors of an economy,
while they do not matter or have a negative effect on growth in sectors far away from the technological
frontier. One channel of explanation goes through the beneficial effects of democracy and political
rights on the freedom of entry in markets. Overall, democracies tend to have much lower entry barriers
than autocracies, because political accountability reduces the protection of vested interests, and entry
in turn is known to be generally more growth-enhancing in sectors that are closer to the technological
frontier. We present empirical evidence that supports this entry explanation.

Philippe Aghion                                      Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics                              Graduate School of Business
Harvard University                                   University of Chicago
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
and NBER                                             Chicago, IL 60637
paghion@fas.harvard.edu                              and NBER
                                                     ftrebbi@chicagogsb.edu
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
1       Introduction

There are two main open questions in the debate on the relationship between economic development and

democratic institutions. One is whether or not countries become democratic only at high levels of per capita

income, and the second is whether or not (or when) democracy enhances economic development, captured

by per capita GDP growth.

     On both questions there are disagreements amongst scholars. Most observers would agree that richer

countries are democracies and therefore economic development favors transitions towards political freedom,

as argued by Lipset (1959) and Barro (1999). However, Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2005)

suggest that this cross-sectional evidence is not robust to controlling for factors aﬀecting simultaneously

income and political institutions. When they add country fixed eﬀects in repeated cross-country regressions

they find no eﬀect of the level of income on democracy. Admittedly this procedure looses all the information

arising from cross country comparisons, which seems crucial in this context. Huntington (1991) argues that

the progress towards democratization is not linear and there are back and forth waves of democratization.

     On the second question the evidence is mixed at best1 . Perhaps democratic institutions increase redis-

tributive pressures2 that may be harmful to growth, especially for middle income countries, and this is one of

the reasons why Barro (1996) argues that countries cannot become democracies too ”soon” in terms of their

level of income per capita. However, Mulligan, Sala-i-Martin and Gil (2003) do not find much of a diﬀerence

in public policies between democracy and non democracies, questioning therefore any link between form of

government and economic performance3 . Glaeser et al. (2004) also question the causal eﬀects of political

institutions on economic growth.

     Very few studies address both questions jointly. Two exceptions are Przewroski et al. (2000) and de

Mesquita et al. (2003). Persson and Tabellini (2006) use the transition from democracies to dictatorship

and the concept of the accumulated stock of democratic capital, concluding that the latter is conducive to

growth and consolidation of democratic institutions at the same time4 . Giavazzi and Tabellini (2005) analyze
    1 See   for instance Helliwell (1994), Barro (1996) and Papaioannou and Siourounis (2004) and the refereces cited therein.
    2 For   some results consistent with this observation see Aghion Alesina and Trebbi (2004) and Boix (2003).
    3 They    consider education spending, spending on pensions and welfare, trade openness amongst other variables.
    4 On    a related topic see also Rodrik and Wacziarg (2005).



                                                                   3
the timing of economic and political liberalizations.

   In this paper we will focus mostly on the second question of whether or when democracy enhances

economic growth. Most of the existing papers on the subject employ aggregate data on income levels and

economic growth. A first point of departure of this paper is its use of disaggregated data to shed new

light on the debate. A second point of departure is the idea that political institutions, and democracy in

particular, may have diﬀerent eﬀects on diﬀerent sectors of the economy, possibly depending on the specific

characteristics of the technology and the industry’s market. Our results can be summarized in three points.

First, we find that democratic institutions and political rights enhance growth of more advanced sectors,

namely in sectors close to the technological frontier in the sense of Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2006).

Second we uncover that an important channel of this eﬀect is freedom of entry in markets. Political rights are

associated with freedom of entry and the latter is especially important for sectors close to the technological

frontier. In fact entry of new firms and competition are especially beneficial in spurring innovation at high

levels of technological development, whereas it may discourage innovation in more backward sectors as argued

by Aghion et al. (2006). Third, and this is an implication of the first two results, more advanced economies

benefit more from democratic institutions and therefore the demand for democracy should increase with the

level of per capita income in a country, calling into question, indirectly at least, the result by Acemoglu et

al. (2005) suggesting that development does not bring about democratic institutions.

   That democracy may entails both, positive and negative eﬀects, on growth, has already been stressed

for example by Acemoglu (2007). There, higher democracy tends to be good for growth because it reduces

the extent to which existing oligarchies can prevent entry by potential competitors. On the other hand,

democracy leads to higher tax rates in equilibrium, which in turn tends to discourage innovation everything

else remaining equal. However, unlike in our analysis below, in Acemoglu (2007) the comparison between the

costs and benefits of democracy does not interact with the economy’s proximity to the world technological

frontier.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model of democracy and entry which blends

the entry model of Aghion, Burgess, Redding, and Zilibotti (2006), henceforth ABRZ, with the model of

vested interests in Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2006), henceforth AAZ. Section 3 discusses the empirical


                                                        4
evidence. The last section concludes.




2     The model

The point of the model is to show that freedom of entry is especially growth enhancing in sectors closer to

the technological frontier. Freedom of entry is correlated with political rights, as we assume in the model

and we show below in the empirical part. Therefore the model derives the relationship between sectorial

growth and democratic institutions which we then test.



2.1    Production and profits

Time is discrete and all agents live for one period. One final good is produced competitively using a continuum

of intermediate inputs, indexed from 0 to 1, according to the following technology:
                                                      Z   1
                                                  1
                                           yt =               A1−α   α
                                                               it xit di,
                                                  α   0


where xit is the quantity of intermediate input produced in sector i at date t, Ait is a productivity parameter

that measures the quality of the intermediate input i in producing the final good, and the parameter α ∈

(0, 1). The final good can be used either for consumption, or as an input in the process of production of

intermediate goods, or for investments in innovation. We normalize the price of the final good to one.

    In each intermediate sector i only one firm (a monopolist) is active in each period, and produces inter-

mediate input i using final output as input, one for one. Since the final good sector is competitive, the

intermediate monopolist i sells its intermediate good to the final good sector at a price equal to its marginal

cost. The first order condition for the final sector producers reads as follows:


                                              pit = (Ait /xit )1−α .                                       (1)


    Then profit maximization for intermediate-good producers yields the choice:

                                                         1    1
                                              xit = Ait ( )− 1−α ,
                                                         α

and the equilibrium profit:

                                                  π it = δAit ,                                            (2)

                                                              5
                            1
where δ ≡ ( α1 − 1)( α1 )− 1−α .

   Substituting for xit in the production function for final output, we also get:


                                                   yt = ζAt ,                                              (3)


where
                                                       Z       1
                                                At =               Ait di
                                                           0
                                                       α
is the average productivity at date t and ζ = ( α1 )1− 1−α is a constant.



2.2     Entry and incumbent innovation

Let p denote the probability of a potential entrant appearing in any intermediate sector. In the model

the government directly chooses this parameter in a way described below. This is of course a short cut

that captures diﬀerent policies that may favor or hinder competition and entry. There are only two types

of intermediate firms: advanced firms, with productivity Ait = At , and backward firms with productivity

Ait = γ1 At , and we focus on technologically advanced entry; accordingly, each potential entrant arrives with

the leading-edge technology parameter At , which grows by the factor γ with certainty each period. An

advanced firm can use a first-mover advantage to block entry and retain his monopoly. But if the firm

is backward, then entry will occur, Bertrand competition will ensue, and the technologically dominated

incumbent will be eliminated and replaced by the entrant.

   A new innovation costs cit Ait−1 and allows the innovating incumbent firm to improve productivity by

factor γ. We assume cit to be random and i.i.d. across intermediate sectors with support {0, c}, with

                                                                            1
                                        Pr(cit = 0) = Pr(cit = c) =           .
                                                                            2

The eﬀect of entry threat p on incumbent innovation will depend on the marginal benefit vit which the

incumbent expects to receive from an innovation. Note that firms know their cost of innovation when they

decide whether to innovate (i.e. there’s no uncertainty).

   Consider first an incumbent who was an advanced firm last period. If he innovates then he will remain on

the frontier, and hence will be immune to entry. His profit will then be δAt = δγAt−1 . If he fails to innovate


                                                       6
then with probability p he will be eliminated by entry and earn zero profit, while with probability 1 − p he

will survive as the incumbent earning a profit of δAt−1 . Dividing through by At−1 , an advanced firm with

innovation cost cit will innovate whenever


                                     δ(γ − (1 − p)) = δ(γ − 1 + p) > cit .                                 (4)


In particular an increase in entry threat encourages this incumbent to innovate. Intuitively, a firm close to

the frontier responds to increased entry threat by innovating more in order to escape the threat.

   Next consider an incumbent who was a backward firm last period, and who will therefore remain behind

the frontier even if he manages to innovate, since the frontier will also advance by the factor γ. For this

firm, profits will be zero if entry occurs, whether he innovates or not, because he cannot catch up with the

frontier. Thus it will innovate whenever:


                                             δ (1 − p) (γ − 1) > cit .                                     (5)


where the left hand side is the profit gain from innovation that will be realized with probability (1 − p), the

probability that no potential entrant shows up. Thus in this case innovation incentives depend negatively

on the entry threat p. Intuitively, the firm that starts far behind the frontier is discouraged from innovating

as much by an increased entry threat because he is unable to prevent the entrant from destroying the value

of his innovation.

   We assume that initially the entry rate p is equal to zero, and that


                                               A1 : δ(γ − 1) < c,


so that, absent any entry threat, no firm with innovation cost equal to c ever innovates.

   Using these assumptions, one can determine the steady-state fraction of advanced firms conditional upon

p = 0. Following ABRZ, suppose that an advanced firm that successfully innovates at date t, starts out in

period t + 1 as an advanced firm. All other firms start out as backward firms. Moreover, with exogenous

probability h, a backward firm at the end of period t is replaced by a new, advanced, firm at date t + 1. If

at denotes the fraction of advanced firms at t, then it satisfies the dynamic equation (see ABRZ):


                                         at+1 = zA at + h (1 − zA at ) ,

                                                        7
where
                                                                     1
                                               zA = Pr(c = 0) =
                                                                     2

is the probability that an advanced firm innovates if p = 0. Thus the steady-state fraction of advanced firms

is:
                                                           h          2h
                                           a∗ =        1           =     .
                                                  1−   2   (1 − h)   1+h


2.3      Politics and the equilibrium probability of entry

Suppose that entry policy, p, is determined each period by a politician that cares about the current con-

sumption, but may also respond to bribes. Following AAZ, we assume that the politician’s pay-oﬀ is equal

to HAt−1 , where H > 0, if she chooses the policy that maximizes current output yt , and to Bt otherwise,

where Bt denotes the bribe that the politician may receive from private firms to limit entry. The parameter

H reflects the aggregate welfare concerns of politicians, or the eﬀectiveness of check-and-balances that the

political system imposes on politicians. It is our proxy for democracy in this model and we discuss this below.

To compute the equilibrium bribe incumbent firms are willing to pay to prevent moving from initial entry

probability p0 = 0 to p > 0, we need to compute the equilibrium payoﬀs for each type of firm (advanced or

backward) and for each cost realization cit = 0 or c, as a function of p.

      Consider first an advanced firm. If this firm’s innovation cost is zero, then the firm will always innovate

and its post-innovation profit δγ Āt is independent of the entry probability. However, if the innovation cost

is c, this firm will lose from higher entry threat only if the threat p becomes suﬃciently high that condition

(4) holds. Then, indeed, the firm will lose the amount



                                                  Āt−1 [c − δ(γ − 1)]

 which is positive by Assumption (A1). Thus the maximum bribe advanced firms would be ready to pay as

a whole to prevent an increase in entry threat from zero to p, is given by:

                                                   1
                                  Ba (p) = Āt−1 a∗ [c − δ(γ − 1)].1(δ(γ−1+p)>c) ,
                                                   2




                                                            8
         1
where    2    is the probability that cit = c and 1(δ(γ−1+p)>c) is equal to one whenever (4) holds and to zero

otherwise.5

    Now, consider a backward firm. Such a firm will innovate if and only if c = 0 by Assumption (A1), no

matter the entry probability. And it will lose from a higher threat of entry, whether it innovates or not, just

because this reduces her probability of survival. The maximum bribe backward firms will be willing to pay

to prevent an increase in entry threat from zero to p, is equal to:

                                                                        1     1 δp
                                               Bb (p) = Āt−1 (1 − a∗ )[ δp +      ],
                                                                        2     2 γ

 where the first (resp. second) term in the bracket is the expected loss incurred by backward firms with low

(resp. high) innovation cost6 .

    Altogether, incumbent firms will successfully prevent the increase in entry threat from zero to p whenever

p is greater than p∗ such that:

                                              B(p∗ ) = Ba (p∗ ) + Bb (p∗ ) = Āt−1 H.                      (6)

Given that B(p) is strictly increasing in p, equation (6) defines the equilibrium entry probability p∗ as an

increasing function of H.
   5 Indeed   the firm’s expected profit if the entry probability is p, is equal to


                                                             (δγ − c)At−1


whereas it is just

                                                                 δAt−1

if the firm does not innovate. The diﬀerence between the latter and the former is just equal to


                                                          (c − δ(γ − 1))At−1 .



   6A   backward firm’s ex ante expected profit is:

                                                     1          1
                                                    ( δ(1 − p) + δγ(1 − p))At−1
                                                     2          2

whenever the entry probability is p.




                                                                    9
2.4    Democracy, distance to frontier, and growth

The above analysis tells us that more democracy, as measured by a higher H, increases the probability

of entry. But this in turn, encourages innovation by advanced firms whereas it discourages innovation by

backward firms (from (4) and (5) above). The overall eﬀect on aggregate innovation and growth will then

depend upon the fraction of advanced firms a∗ in the economy, which also measures the economy’s proximity

to the world technology frontier: for a∗ suﬃciently close to one, the overall eﬀect of entry and therefore

democracy on innovation will be positive, whereas it will be negative if a∗ (i.e. h) is close to zero.



2.5    Main prediction and discussion

Combining (6) with (4) and (5), yields the prediction that an increase in "democracy" as measured by H,

will stimulate innovation by advanced firms but not by backward ones. One should thus expect a higher

impact of democracy on productivity growth in sectors that are closer to the world technological frontier.

   We identify with democratic institutions the parameter H in our model. This parameter captures the

relative benefits of investing in a new technology relative to that of bribing a policy maker to make him

raise barrier to entry. Bribes are certainly not unknown in democracies, but since they are more open,

associated with more freedom of the press and involve alternation in power of diﬀerent groups, democratic

leaders are generally less likely to be permanently captured by incumbents. A diﬀerent way of interpreting

the evidence that we present below is to say that democracy enhance growth in technologically advanced

sectors when democracy is associated with policies that allow more competition and more freedom of entry.

In the empirical section which follows, we do indeed review evidence that imply a strong correlation between

freedom of entry and democratic institutions as measured by indicators of political rights.




                                                      10
3       Empirical analysis

3.1        Data

We use industry employment and value added data from the Industrial Statistics database collected by the

UNIDO (2005, revision 2).7 The data include 28 ISIC (level 3) manufacturing sectors at the three digit level

for 180 countries for the period 1963 to 2003. UNIDO is arguably the most comprehensive source of sectorial

data available in a cross-country-sector panel format8 . The UNIDO data provide the most extensive coverage

of developing countries sectorial output data available, a very important sub-sample for our study as most

of them are partially free or not free from a political standpoint. However, a drawback of this source is the

extensive use of national statistics, which tend to be especially noisy for industry-level data of developing

countries.

     For our empirical analysis two are the key independent variables: democracy and the distance to the

technological frontier. In measuring the former we use standard, well-established measures of democracy in

political economics, such as the aggregate indicators from the Polity IV database (2005) and the Freedom

House measures of civil liberties and political rights. The Polity IV project records various regime charac-

teristics for every independent state above half million total population. In particular we make use of the

combined polity index9 ranging from −10 to 10 (−10 = high autocracy; 10 = high democracy). Such index

incorporates more specific sub-indexes concerned with constraints on the executive, open political compe-

tition, eﬀectiveness of legislature, etc. The Freedom in the World data by Freedom House report annual

analysts’ assessments of both political dimensions10 and civil dimensions11 since 1972 for more than 192
    7 Rajan   and Zingales (1998) is one of the early seminal papers employing sectorial growth rates analysis.
    8 Other   well-recognized sources of country-sector panel include OECD and ILO. However UNIDO employs OECD data forthe

relevant subsample, while ILO produces employment data aggregated to the ISIC level-2, therefore more coarse than the data

we employ here.
    9 We   exclude special polity conditions such as transitions, interruptions, and interregnums as coded in the Polity IV database

-66; -77; -88.
  1 0 Participate   freely in the political process; Vote freely in legitimate elections; Have representatives that are accountable to

them.
  1 1 Exercise   freedoms of expression and belief; Be able to freely assemble and associate; Have access to an established and

equitable system of rule of law; Have social and economic freedoms, including equal access to economic opportunities and the




                                                                   11
countries. For the Political Rights and Civil Liberties indexes, respectively; 1 represents the most free and

7 the least free rating. For consistency we re-scale both indexes in order to have 7 as the most free rating.

    As for distance to the technological frontier we consider the logarithm of the value added per worker

(V A/EM P ) of a sector divided by the maximum of the log of the same variable in the same sector across

all countries in each year and take one minus this ratio as a proxy for distance to frontier. Specifically we

define:

                                                            (V Aict /EM Pict )
                                  DIST AN CEict   = 1−
                                                         maxc0 (V Aic0 t /EM Pic0 t )

                                              i = industry; c = country; t = year.


We also substituted log value added per worker with the logarithm of output per worker in order to construct

an alternative measure of distance to frontier. We do not report results employing this variable, however, as

they tend to be similar.

    Finally, we make use of measures of entry barriers and costs of entry estimates as constructed by Djankov

et al. (2002) and of real gross domestic product per capita in international dollars as reported in the Penn

World Tables, mark 6.2. Summary statistics for the sample are reported, classified by year, in the Appendix

Table A1.



3.2       Specification

On the left hand side of our regression we have the growth rate of either output (Y ), value added (V A)

or employment (EM P ) in the industrial sector. On the right hand side we have a measure of democracy

(and other measures of political/civil rights), a measure of distance to the technological frontier, and the

interaction term between the two. This term allows the marginal eﬀect of democracy to vary with the

proximity to the world’s most productive technology. We also include time and country-industry fixed

eﬀects in order to account for contemporaneous shifts in world growth rates and unobserved heterogeneity

across countries and industries. Thus, the empirical specification is as follows, where with yict we mean

either output, value added or employment in industry i of country c at time t:
right to hold private property.



                                                         12
                        ∆s log yict   = β 0 + β 1 DIST AN CEict + β 2 P OLct                               (7)

                                          +β 3 DIST AN CEict ∗ P OLct + αXict + uict

                        ∆s log yict   = log yi,c,t+s − log yict

                               uict   = δ t + γ i,c + εi,c,t+s

                                 s = {5, 10}

                                  i = industry; c = country; t = year.

   In the analysis we study 5-year and 10-years output, value added and employment sectorial growth rates.

We compute growth rates over non-overlapping periods and in particular 5-years growth rates are computed

over the periods 1970-75, 1975-80, 1980-85, 1985-90, 1990-95, and 1995-2000. For the 10-year growth rates

we use alternatively the 1975-85, 1985-95 (odd) years and the 1980-90, and 1990-2000 (even years). Given

the somewhat measurement-error prone nature of the data, we perceive this sample segmentation as a

conservative approach. By employing this segmentation approach we are able to exclude issues of mechanical

serial correlation present in a moving average setting. As we show below, indeed the results are sometimes

influenced by the specific assumptions on sample periods. In a series of results that we do not report we also

reestimate our main specification with yearly growth rates (s = 1). By and large the main implications of

our discussion hold for this sampling choice as well. However, the degree of measurement error is substantial

in UNIDO data at the yearly level, mostly because idiosyncrasies at the national statistical level are present,

and results tend to be sometimes (and expectably) sensitive in this respect. By employing growth rates over

longer periods of time signal to noise ratios tend to improve and ameliorate measurement error issues.

   All the standard errors are robust and clustered at the country or country-industry level whenever

possible, in order to account for general variance-covariance structures at the country-industry level within

the panel setup. This approach is useful in order to address arbitrary forms of serial correlation in the error

terms by allowing general variance-covariance structures within any industry-country error term.

   The set of controls that we systematically include in any industry-country regression, Xict , include the

level of real GDP per capita and its interaction with distance to frontier. The empirical model (7) is

                                                        13
essentially a reduced-form specification and we do not intend to over-emphasize any channel of causation. A

two-way causation mechanism is surely at work within a growth-democracy (or income-democracy) aggregate

specification. The aim of this paper is to emphasize a significant diﬀerential role in the correlation between

growth and democracy, this does not require the reader assigning causal interpretation to our finding.



3.3    Basic Results

Table 1 shows, in accordance to Acemoglu et al. (2005), that there is no eﬀect of democracy on growth

rates for manufacturing in a fixed-eﬀects regression at the country level (obtained aggregating the UNIDO

sectorial data at country-year level). If any, the eﬀect of democracy on growth appears to be negative, since

a few of the coeﬃcients in the various regressions are significantly negative (even though most coeﬃcients

on democracy are insignificantly diﬀerent from zero). Specifically, the upper panel (5-years growth rates)

presents a split picture between value added and employment growth rates regressions. In the notation for

this table (and the following ones) we employ the L j operator notation for j−years lagged values. The middle

panel (10-year growth for odd years) appears mostly positive and the lower panel (10-years even) presents

mostly negative coeﬃcients. These results are therefore consistent with what is found in the literature: no

robust eﬀects of democracy on aggregate growth.

   Table 2 reports results on the eﬀect of democracy on growth at the country-industry disaggregated level.

The unit of observation becomes now a particular industry in a country at a specific moment in time. Still

no eﬀect of democracy is statistically or quantitatively significant in the data. Once again some of the

coeﬃcients of democracy (or political/civil rights) are negative and statistically diﬀerent from zero. This

table then shows that adding an extra dimension (industry level data) does not produce a departure from

standard fixed eﬀects country-level results per se. Notice that Table 2 introduces a control for the level of

real gross domestic product per capita. We include a control for income levels (and its interactions when

necessary) in order to partial out the eﬀects of political institutions and of the level of economic development.

   Table 3 introduces in specification at the country-industry level (7) an interaction term between democ-

racy and distance from the technological frontier. We report results concerning output, value added and

employment for all sample periods (5-year; the even and odd 10-year). This interaction matters statistically


                                                       14
and quantitatively in most specifications and enters with a negative and significant coeﬃcient. The table

shows that introducing a diﬀerential eﬀect of distance to the technological frontier and democracy explains

the data better in terms of fit. The sign of the interaction between distance to frontier and democracy

is usually negative, while the level of democracy is positive. The result indicates that when close to the

technological frontier, the eﬀect of democracy on growth is positive. However, far away from the techno-

logical frontier the eﬀect of democracy may be growth-diminishing. This can be interpreted as the basic

reduced-form implication of the theoretical model we built. Finally, we interpret the positive sign of the

coeﬃcient associated with the regressor DIST AN CE as evidence of convergence, a robust and recurrent

finding in the empirical economic growth literature. Notice also that a component of convergence is also

captured (predictably) by the level of GDP per capita which present a negative sign (growth rates are lower

in countries with higher levels of GDP per capita). The interaction term between GDP per capita and

distance to frontier is usually negative, although mostly insignificant.

   Concerning quantitative implications of Table 3, let us begin from the first panel (5-year growth rates),

recalling that the Polity index ranges from −10 to +10, increasing in the level of democratic freedom. The

statistically and quantitatively significant results concern the value added and the employment growth re-

gressions (columns 4-9) and the political rights and civil liberty indexes. In general output growth regressions

tend to appear more noisy and so do regressions employing the Polity IV index as a proxy for democracy in

the right-end side.

   Column (5) implies that the eﬀect of an increase of a unit point on the Polity IV scale of democracy for

a sector that operates with the most advanced technology (i.e. distance from the frontier is 0) has the eﬀect

of increasing the growth rate of value added of 1.2 percent. However at the mean distance to frontier in the

sample (0.16) the eﬀect of a similar increase in democracy on the growth rate of value added decreases to −1

percent. Notice that this figure is roughly consistent with the results of Table 2. Considering a technology

half the productivity of the world frontier we would find a really substantial eﬀect of an increase of a Polity

IV unit of democracy: a drop of −5.7 percent. The unit measure for political rights and civil liberties is

diﬀerent from the Polity IV index, ranging from 1 to 7 (rescaled so that 7 indicates full democracy and 1

full autocracy). Once the coeﬃcients are scaled for the unit of measurement, the results employing Freedom


                                                      15
House data (columns 2 and 3) confirm the column (1)’s estimates.

    Results systematically present more beneficial eﬀects of democracy when we use as left-hand-side variable

the sector’s employment growth. In column (8) the eﬀect of an increase of a unit point on the Polity IV scale

of democracy for a sector that operates with the most advanced technology (i.e. distance from the frontier

is 0) has the eﬀect of increasing the growth rate of value added of 3.9 percent. At the mean distance to

frontier the eﬀect of a similar increase in democracy on the growth rate of employment is −0.7 percent.

    Considering the 10-year growth rates for both the even years and the odd years samples we maintain the

finding of a negative interaction term and a positive coeﬃcient on the level of democracy in the majority

of the specifications, albeit with some exceptions that we tend to attribute to the demanding nature of our

three-way fixed-eﬀects specification. The result confirm a positive role of democracy especially when close to

the technological frontier. Consider column (1) of the odd-years panel. The estimated eﬀects are consistent

with the 5-years growth rates but not statistically significant. Again the results on employment growth rates

are stronger.

    Overall these results, including many other specification tests which we performed and are available upon

request12 , suggest that our intuition of a diﬀerential eﬀects of democracy in diﬀerent sectors as a function of

distance form the frontier is plausible. However, as the last part of Table 3 shows, some degree of sensitivity

of the results to certain specification or measurement issues remains evident.



3.4     Entry and Democracy

The previous section presents evidence of diﬀerential eﬀects of political institutions on sectorial performance,

depending on the specific characteristics of each industry. In this section we make some progress in the

investigation of a channel, especially focusing on entry barriers.

    In the model of Section 2 we discussed the role of freedom of entry and we assumed a correlation between

freedom of entry and political freedom. In Appendix Table A2 we report evidence that democracies do
  1 2 Among   the additional tests we performed are: change of sampling frequency (yearly panel results; modified dates for the

computation of the sample changes); specification changes (including quadratic terms of the democracy index); exclusion of

country or sector fixed eﬀects.




                                                               16
indeed have lower barriers and cost of entry by employing the Djankov et al. (2002) cross-country data on

regulation of entry. Indeed, a table similar to A2 is also present in the original Djankov et al. (2002) paper

and here it is reported only for completeness of the argument. The left-hand-side variable is a measure of the

cost of entry given by the number of bureaucratic procedures needed for a firm to enter the market (number

of procedures necessary to start up a business), available from the Doing Business project by the World

Bank. All measures of democratic development (constraints on the executives, political and civil rights, et

similar) present a negative correlation with entry costs, even controlling for income levels. Notice that in

addition to the Polity IV autocracy index and Freedom House political and civil rights indexes we also report

results employing all the additional measures of democracy and political liberties that Djankov et al. (2002)

employ, such as the Polity IV sub-indexes of executive de facto independence; constraints on executive power;

eﬀectiveness of legislature; government eﬀectiveness; competition in the legislative nominating process.

   Perotti and Volpin (2006) study in detail the cross national determinants of investor protection and

entry. They present convincing evidence that "countries with more accountable political institutions have

better investor protection and lower entry costs". Note that , as they point out, poor investor protection

is indirectly a barrier for entry since new investors face higher risks in entering a new market. Perotti and

Volpin (2006) also use POLITY IV as a measure of political accountability but the experiment with several

others finding consistently a strong correlation between democracy and freedom of entry.

   A direct way of relating our approach to past literature would be to consider the diﬀerential eﬀect of

democracy and entry using as a proxy for the probability of entry of a competitor the number of procedures

needed to start up a business in the country as reported by Djankov et. al. (2002). We could check if,

controlling for a diﬀerential eﬀect of entry, the role of democracy and the significance of the interaction term

change. Given the cross-sectional nature of the cost of entry variables only the interaction term between

entry cost and distance can be added to the specification of Table 3.

   Although promising in principle, this approach did not yield any statistically relevant result in our

attempts. In tables available from the authors we considered this approach, with and without controls for

GDP levels. The estimates of the coeﬃcients on democracy and its interaction with distance seemed to be

unaﬀected by introducing this particular measure of entry costs interacted with distance. Considering the


                                                      17
5-year growth rate sample and the 10-year rates for both even and odd dates presents a noisy picture at

best: the marginal eﬀects of democracy at diﬀerent distances become somewhat smaller but the proxy for

entry is always insignificant and often with the wrong sign. This is also true if we add further interactions

on property rights protection, which we explored as well. The results on democracy and the interaction with

distance remain generally significant and with a positive and a negative sign respectively. These results taken

together suggest either that the Polity IV and Freedom House variables capture something more general than

the number of procedures regarding the possibility of entry and competition or that a purely cross-sectional

measure of cost of entry as the one proposed by Djankov et. al. (2002) does not present suﬃcient variation

to allow our three-way panel setup (industry-country-time, which is indeed fairly demanding in this respect)

to pick up any significant relationship with growth.

   In order to provide a reasonable amount of variation in the data in Table 4 we replace the number of

procedures with the eﬀective level of entry in the sector, measured by the 5-year or 10-year growth rates in

the number of establishments. Notice that the growth rate in the number of establishment is a realized (ex

post) measure of entry and one could argue about whether or not is the relevant covariate to influence the

pattern of innovation discussed in the model, as opposed to ex ante proxies. Clearly a point in favor of our

approach is the scarcity of alternatives in terms of time-varying proxies of entry.

   The time-varying entry variable allows to control for both the level of entry and its interaction with

distance to frontier. However, the UNIDO data do not include information on the number of establishments

before the eighties, therefore limiting the sample period for the analysis. In addition, casual inspection of the

original data indicates a somewhat more noisy nature of the establishment figures relative to employment and

value added figures, with somewhat large (abnormal) jumps (which we decide not to censor in the analysis).

   The eﬀect of democracy is now reduced substantially. If we interpret eﬀective entry as a precise proxy

for entry costs, this finding tends to support our interpretation of the data. However, only for the 10-

year sample the marginal eﬀects of entry depend on the distance to frontier in a direction in line with the

model’s prediction. Entry in levels has a positive and significant eﬀect in all regressions and the interaction

with distance is instead negative. Statistically significant coeﬃcients on the interaction between entry and

distance are present for both sectorial output and value added. The eﬀect of democracy is generally negative


                                                       18
at the mean distance to frontier (0.16), but the coeﬃcients on democracy and its interaction with distance

are significant only in the case of political rights. This suggests that indeed an entry channel may explain

why democracy is conducive to growth in sectors closer to the technological frontier rather than other less

advanced sectors, at least over relatively long periods of time (10 years).




4     Conclusions

This paper investigates a diﬀerent approach and some novel empirical evidence on the relationship between

democracy, level of development, and economic growth by employing disaggregated data on industrial sec-

tors’ growth rates. We have argued (and shown empirically with some degree of success) that democratic

institutions favor growth in sectors of the economy that are particularly advanced in terms of value added

per worker, or in our terminology, close to the world technological frontier. Our interpretation is that it is in

sectors close to the technological frontier that democracy is more beneficial, possibly through fostering entry,

competition, and innovation, which are relatively more important for growth in those sectors. Thus our

analysis introduces a technological motive for political freedom survival, a dimension that has not received

much attention in the wide empirical literature on democratization. It also suggests that the demand for

democracy should be higher in richer countries, that is in which more sectors are closer to the technological

frontier.

    In a general sense this paper contributes to the strand of the politico-economic literature focusing on the

diﬀerential eﬀects of political institutions on economic outcomes. The same institutional features may have

quite diﬀerent eﬀects on diﬀerent components of the economy.

    Natural next steps in this research program would be, first, to dig further into the various channels

whereby democracy fosters growth in more advanced sectors, and, second, to analyze the process by which

the economic demand for democracy may or may not translate into a real transition to democracy.




                                                       19
References

Acemoglu, Daron (2007), ”Oligarchic Versus Democratic Societies”, forthcoming, Journal of the European

Economic Association


Acemoglu, Daron, Aghion, Philippe, and Zilibotti, Fabrizio (2006), ”Distance to Frontier, Selection and

Economic Growth”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(1), 37—74.


Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, Robinson, James, and Yared, Pierre (2005), “Income and Democracy”,

Mimeo, MIT.


Aghion, Philippe, Alesina, Alberto, and Trebbi Francesco (2004) " Endogenous Political Institutions", Quar-

terly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 565-611.


Aghion, Philippe, Burgess, Robin, Redding, Stephen and Zilibotti, Fabrizio (2006), ”The Unequal Eﬀects of

Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India”, NBER working papers No 12031.


Barro, Robert (1996), “Democracy and Growth”, Journal of Economic Growth 1, 1-27.


Barro, Robert (1999), “The Determinants of Democracy”, Journal of Political Economy 107, S158-S183.


Barro, Robert and Lee, Jong-Wha (2000), “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and

Implications,” CID Working Paper, No 42.


Boix, Carlos (2003), Democracy and Redistribution, Cambridge University Press.


Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Smith, Alastair, Siverson, Randolph and Morrow, James (2003), The Logic of

Political Survival, The MIT Press.


Djankov, Simon, LaPorta, Raphael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio and Shleifer, Andrei (2002), ”The Regulation

of Entry”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1-37.


Gerring, John, Bond, Philip, Barndt, William T. and Moreno, Carola (2005), “Democracy and Economic

Growth: A Historical Perspective”, World Politics 57, 323-364.




                                                    20
Giavazzi, Francesco and Tabellini, Guido (2005), ”Economic and Political Liberalizations”, Journal of Mon-

etary Economics, 52, 1297-1330.


Gibson, James (1997), “Mass Opposition to the Soviet Putsch of August 1991: Collective Action, Rational

Choice, and Democratic Values in the Former Soviet Union”, American Political Science Review 91, 671-84.


Glaeser, Edward., La Porta, Rafael, Lopez de Silanes, Florencio, and Shleifer, Andrei (2004) “Do Institutions

Cause Growth”, Journal of Economic Growth 9, 271-304.


Helliwell, John. (1994). “Empirical Linkages Between Democracy and Economic Growth”, British Journal

of Political Science 24, 225—248.


Huntington, Samuel (1991), The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century, University

of Oklahoma Press.


Inglehart, Ronald, and Welzel, Christian (2005), Modernization, Cultural Change, and Democracy: The

Human Development Sequence, Cambridge University Press.


Jenkins, Stephen (2004), Survival Analysis, Mimeo, University of Essex.


Jones, Ben and Olken, Benjamin (2005), “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth since World

War II”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 835-864.


LaPorta, Raphael, Lopez-De-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert (1999). “The Quality

of Government”, The Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15, 222-79.


Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959), “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and Political

Legitimacy”, American Political Science Review 53, 69-105.


Londregan, John, and Poole, Keith (1990), “Poverty, the Coup Trap, and the Seizure of Executive Power”,

World Politics 42, 151-183.


Maddison, Angus (2001), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, OECD.




                                                     21
Morris, Stephen and Shin, Hyun (2002), “Global Games: Theory and Applications”, in Dewatripont, Math-

ias, Hansen, Lars and Turnovsky, Stephen (eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics, The Eighth

World Congress, Cambridge University Press.


Mulligan, Casey B., Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Gil, Ricard (2004),“Do Democracies Have Diﬀerent Public

Policies than Nondemocracies?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 18, 51-74.


Opp, Karl-Dieter (1999), “Contending Conceptions of the Theory of Rational Action”, Journal of Theoretical

Politics 11, 171-202.


Papaioannou, Elias, and Siourounis, Gregorios (2004), “Democratization and Growth”, Mimeo, LBS.


Perotti, Enrico and Volpin, Eduardo (2006) ”Investor Protection and Entry” unpublished


Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido (2006) ”Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and Economic

Change” NBER Working Papers No 12175.


Przeworski, Adam, Alvarez, Michael, Cheibub, Jose, and Limongi, Fernando (2000), Democracy and Devel-

opment: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World 1950-1900, Cambridge University Press.


Przeworski, Adam and Limongi, Fernando (1993), “Political Regimes and Economic Growth”, Journal of

Economic Perspectives 7, 51-69.


Rajan, Raghuram, and Zingales, Luigi (1998) ”Financial Dependence and Growth”, American Economic

Review 88, 559-586.


Rodrik, Dani and Wacziarg, Romain (2005), “Do Democratic Transitions Produce Bad Economic Out-

comes?”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 95, 50-56.




                                                   22
                                        Table 1: Aggregate manufacturing growth and democracy
                         F.E.         F.E.        F.E.       F.E.        F.E.        F.E.     F.E.                  F.E.        F.E.
                         country      country     country    country     country     country  country               country     country
                         year         year        year       year        year        year     year                  year        year

                                                             5-year        5-year        5-year        5-year       5-year      5-year
                         5-year      5-year      5-year
                                                             Value         Value         Value         Employme     Employme    Employme
1975-80-85-90-95-00      Output      Output      Output
                                                             added         added         added         nt growth    nt growth   nt growth
                         growth rate growth rate growth rate
                                                             growth rate   growth rate   growth rate   rate         rate        rate

L5. Dem. polityIV        0.001                                  -0.003                                 -0.009
                         [0.006]                                [0.005]                                [0.005]*
L5. Polit. rights                     0.023                                -0.014                                   0.003
                                      [0.024]                              [0.023]                                  [0.016]
L5. Civil liberty                                  0.029                                 -0.036                                 -0.008
                                                   [0.031]                               [0.033]                                [0.022]
Observations             627          591          591          405        362           362           438          411         411
Number of countries      133          148          148          106        111           111           116          130         130
R-squared                0.08         0.08         0.08         0.34       0.26          0.27          0.12         0.06        0.06

                                                             10-year       10-year       10-year       10-year      10-year     10-year
                         10-year     10-year     10-year
                                                             Value         Value         Value         Employme     Employme    Employme
1975-1985-1995           Output      Output      Output
                                                             added         added         added         nt growth    nt growth   nt growth
                         growth rate growth rate growth rate
                                                             growth rate   growth rate   growth rate   rate         rate        rate

L10. Dem. polityIV       -0.003                                 0.007                                  0.001
                         [0.007]                                [0.013]                                [0.012]
L10. Polit. rights                    0.05                                 0.002                                    0.102
                                      [0.038]                              [0.081]                                  [0.055]*
L10. Civil liberty                                 0.05                                  0.057                                  -0.046
                                                   [0.051]                               [0.065]                                [0.077]
Observations             277          226          226          181        142           142           190          157         157
Number of countries      111          121          121          82         82            82            87           92          92
R-squared                0.13         0.14         0.14         0.37       0.29          0.3           0.09         0.03        0.02

                                                             10-year       10-year       10-year       10-year      10-year     10-year
                         10-year     10-year     10-year
                                                             Value         Value         Value         Employme     Employme    Employme
1980-1990-2000           Output      Output      Output
                                                             added         added         added         nt growth    nt growth   nt growth
                         growth rate growth rate growth rate
                                                             growth rate   growth rate   growth rate   rate         rate        rate

L10. Dem. polityIV       0.02                                   -0.009                                 -0.022
                         [0.010]*                               [0.008]                                [0.008]***
L10. Polit. rights                    0.087                                -0.028                                   -0.07
                                      [0.051]*                             [0.053]                                  [0.046]
L10. Civil liberty                                 0.098                                 -0.04                                  -0.084
                                                   [0.089]                               [0.053]                                [0.042]**
Observations              290          217         217           184       121           121           194          133         133
Number of countries 111                119         119           82        77            77            89           85          85
R-squared                 0.04         0.05        0.04          0.45      0.01          0.01          0.27         0.15        0.15
Clustered standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                   Table 2: Growth by sector and democracy
                                  F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC                 F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC
                                  country      country     country    country     country  country          country      country      country
                                  year         year        year       year        year     year             year         year         year

                                  5-year       5-year      5-year        5-year     5-year     5-year
                                  Output       Output      Output        Value      Value      Value        5-year       5-year       5-year
                                  growth       growth      growth        added      added      added        Employme     Employme     Employme
                                  rate         rate        rate          growth     growth     growth       nt growth    nt growth    nt growth
1975-80-85-90-95-00                                                      rate       rate       rate         rate         rate         rate
L5. Dem. polityIV                 0.002                                  0.001                              -0.008
                                  [0.002]                                [0.002]                            [0.001]***
L5. Polit. rights                              -0.004                               -0.006                               -0.012
                                               [0.009]                              [0.009]                              [0.006]*
L5. Civil liberty                                       -0.015                                 -0.015                             -0.012
                                                        [0.010]                                [0.011]                            [0.007]*
L5. Real GDP per capita           -0.321     -0.518     -0.505           -0.155     -0.397     -0.384       -0.141     -0.178     -0.17
                                  [0.048]*** [0.057]*** [0.058]***       [0.049]*** [0.059]*** [0.060]***   [0.031]*** [0.038]*** [0.038]***
Observations                      9250       8234       8234             9412       8078       8078         10097      8932       8932
Number of countries               2579       2650       2650             2408       2447       2447         2619       2779       2779
R-squared                         0.3        0.26       0.26             0.26       0.22       0.22         0.08       0.05       0.05

                                  10-year      10-year     10-year       10-year    10-year    10-year
                                  Output       Output      Output        Value      Value      Value        10-year      10-year      10-year
                                  growth       growth      growth        added      added      added        Employme     Employme     Employme
                                  rate         rate        rate          growth     growth     growth       nt growth    nt growth    nt growth
1975-1985-1995                                                           rate       rate       rate         rate         rate         rate
L10. Dem. polityIV                0.003                                  -0.002                             0.007
                                  [0.006]                                [0.006]                            [0.004]*
L10. Polit. rights                             -0.001                               -0.043                               0.017
                                               [0.031]                              [0.031]                              [0.019]
L10. Civil liberty                                         0.104                               0.135                              0.008
                                                           [0.031]***                          [0.030]***                         [0.022]
L10. Real GDP per capita          -0.239       -0.142      -0.163        -0.04      0.064      0.04         -0.428     -0.356     -0.35
                                  [0.119]**    [0.182]     [0.184]       [0.113]    [0.171]    [0.173]      [0.085]*** [0.129]*** [0.129]***
Observations                      4103         3217        3217          4164       3183       3183         4386       3486       3486
Number of countries               1963         1950        1950          1941       1867       1867         2038       2032       2032
R-squared                         0.19         0.07        0.07          0.17       0.07       0.08         0.1        0.01       0.01
                                                                         10-year    10-year    10-year
                                  10-year      10-year     10-year                                          10-year      10-year      10-year
                                                                         Value      Value      Value
                                  Output       Output      Output                                           Employme     Employme     Employme
                                                                         added      added      added
                                  growth       growth      growth                                           nt growth    nt growth    nt growth
                                                                         growth     growth     growth
                                  rate         rate        rate                                             rate         rate         rate
1980-1990-2000                                                           rate       rate       rate
L10. Dem. polityIV                -0.001                                 -0.006                             -0.013
                                  [0.003]                                [0.003]*                           [0.003]***
L10. Polit. rights                             -0.006                               -0.012                               -0.044
                                               [0.020]                              [0.021]                              [0.016]***
L10. Civil liberty                                             0.01                            -0.028                                 -0.049
                                                               [0.024]                         [0.026]                                [0.018]***
L10. Real GDP per capita             -0.715      -1.044        -1.059    -0.592     -0.984     -0.958       -0.379       -0.203       -0.165
                                     [0.096]*** [0.159]*** [0.160]***    [0.101]*** [0.166]*** [0.166]***   [0.072]***   [0.103]**    [0.106]
Observations                         4060        2661          2661      4294       2682       2682         4485         2874         2874
Number of countries                  1873        1685          1685      1962       1693       1693         2087         1811         1811
R-squared                            0.45        0.1           0.1       0.37       0.09       0.09         0.17         0.03         0.03
Clustered standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                     Table 3: Differential effect of democracy depending on distance to frontier
                                            F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC                     F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC
                                            country country country country country country country                            country      country
                                            year        year         year       year       year        year       year         year         year
                                            5-year      5-year       5-year                                       5-year       5-year       5-year
                                            Output      Output       Output     5-year VA 5-year VA 5-year VA Emp.             Emp.         Emp.
                                            growth      growth       growth     growth     growth      growth     growth       growth       growth
1975-80-85-90-95-00                         rate        rate         rate       rate       rate        rate       rate         rate         rate
L5. Distance to frontier in VA/Emp          4.283       5.939        6.044      5.06       6.307       6.262      0.873        1.845        1.626
                                            [1.259]*** [1.588]*** [1.588]*** [1.308]*** [1.707]*** [1.700]*** [0.952]          [1.142]      [1.159]
L5. Dist. to front. x dem. polityIV         0.008                               -0.022                            -0.056
                                            [0.024]                             [0.023]                           [0.018]***
L5. Dem. polityIV                           0.001                               0.005                             0.004
                                            [0.004]                             [0.004]                           [0.003]
L5. Dist. to front. x Polit. rights                     -0.076                             -0.138                              -0.29
                                                        [0.076]                            [0.080]*                            [0.052]***
L5. Polit. rights                                       0.006                              0.01                                0.039
                                                        [0.014]                            [0.014]                             [0.010]***
L5. Dist. to front. x Civil liberty                                  -0.128                            -0.21                              -0.249
                                                                     [0.087]                           [0.093]**                          [0.063]***
L5. Civil liberty                                                    0.003                             0.019                              0.04
                                                                     [0.015]                           [0.016]                            [0.011]***
L5. Dist. to front. x real GDP p.c.         -0.192      -0.269       -0.256     -0.063     -0.047      -0.007     -0.155       -0.1       -0.104
                                            [0.147]     [0.179]      [0.175]    [0.153]    [0.192]     [0.190]    [0.110]      [0.130]    [0.128]
L5. Real GDP p.c.                           -0.148      -0.298       -0.29      0.087      -0.11       -0.117     -0.218       -0.223     -0.237
                                            [0.061]** [0.070]*** [0.070]*** [0.059]        [0.069]     [0.069]* [0.044]***     [0.051]*** [0.050]***
Observations                                8110        7449         7449       8427       7649        7649       8607         7893       7893
Number of industry-country                  2205        2295         2295       2250       2318        2318       2257         2368       2368
R-squared                                   0.34        0.31         0.31       0.33       0.3         0.3        0.09         0.07       0.06
                                            10-year     10-year      10-year    10-year    10-year     10-year    10-year      10-year      10-year
                                            Output      Output       Output     VA         VA          VA         Emp.         Emp.         Emp.
                                            growth      growth       growth     growth     growth      growth     growth       growth       growth
1975-1985-1995                              rate        rate         rate       rate       rate        rate       rate         rate         rate
L10. Distance to frontier in VA/Emp 13.985              15.496       16.527     10.689     11.224      12.987     1.274        -3.171       -1.676
                                            [2.278]*** [3.945]*** [4.212]*** [2.503]*** [5.250]** [5.384]** [1.713]            [2.997]      [3.181]
L10. Dist. to front. x dem. polityIV        -0.04                               -0.066                            -0.035
                                            [0.057]                             [0.053]                           [0.044]
L10. Dem. polityIV                          0.01                                0.012                             0.017
                                            [0.010]                             [0.009]                           [0.007]**
L10. Dist. to front. x Polit. rights                    -0.58                              -0.447                              -0.469
                                                        [0.216]***                         [0.223]**                           [0.157]***
L10. Polit. rights                                      0.105                              0.046                               0.095
                                                        [0.040]***                         [0.042]                             [0.027]***
L10. Dist. to front. x Civil liberty                                 -0.387                            -0.334                             -0.576
                                                                     [0.266]                           [0.266]                            [0.198]***
L10. Civil liberty                                                   0.157                             0.172                              0.123
                                                                     [0.040]***                        [0.041]***                         [0.029]***
L10. Dist. to front. x real GDP p.c.        -1.319      -1.073       -1.318     -0.655     -0.362      -0.654     -0.309       0.529      0.395
                                            [0.277]*** [0.450]** [0.441]*** [0.296]** [0.600]          [0.580]    [0.209]      [0.339]    [0.335]
L10. Real GDP p.c.                          0.183       0.218        0.219      0.305      0.399       0.413      -0.422       -0.523     -0.5
                                            [0.147]     [0.214]      [0.216]    [0.139]** [0.226]* [0.225]* [0.104]***         [0.151]*** [0.151]***
Observations                                3803        3045         3045       3900       3114        3114       3999         3238       3238
Number of industry-country                  1835        1812         1812       1864       1831        1831       1896         1868       1868
R-squared                                   0.22        0.13         0.13       0.22       0.15        0.16       0.09         0.03       0.03
Clustered standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                  Table 3: Differential effect of democracy depending on distance to frontier (cont.)
                                            F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC                    F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC
                                            country country country country country country country                           country      country
                                            year         year        year       year       year       year       year         year         year
                                            10-year      10-year     10-year    10-year    10-year    10-year    10-year      10-year      10-year
                                            Output       Output      Output     VA         VA         VA         Emp.         Emp.         Emp.
                                            growth       growth      growth     growth     growth     growth     growth       growth       growth
1980-1990-2000                              rate         rate        rate       rate       rate       rate       rate         rate         rate
L10. Distance to frontier in VA/Emp 6.672                11.612      11.296     4.619      13.327     13.666     8.025        15.233       15.414
                                            [2.682]** [4.183]*** [4.117]*** [2.955]        [4.260]*** [4.234]*** [2.196]***   [3.648]***   [3.612]***
L10. Dist. to front. x dem. polityIV        0.158                               0.147                            0.062
                                            [0.047]***                          [0.046]***                       [0.039]
L10. Dem. polityIV                          -0.027                              -0.033                           -0.021
                                            [0.006]***                          [0.007]***                       [0.005]***
L10. Dist. to front. x Polit. rights                     -0.676                            -0.763                             -0.683
                                                         [0.201]***                        [0.194]***                         [0.161]***
L10. Polit. rights                                       0.064                             0.067                              0.004
                                                         [0.023]***                        [0.024]***                         [0.022]
L10. Dist. to front. x Civil liberty                                 -0.697                           -0.852                             -0.841
                                                                     [0.214]***                       [0.214]***                         [0.166]***
L10. Civil liberty                                                   0.115                            0.1                                0.023
                                                                     [0.033]***                       [0.037]***                         [0.026]
L10. Dist. to front. x real GDP p.c.        -0.483       -0.444      -0.411     -0.121     -0.427     -0.414     -1.083       -1.263     -1.197
                                            [0.306]      [0.428]     [0.414]    [0.334]    [0.451]    [0.432]    [0.246]***   [0.395]*** [0.378]***
L10. Real GDP p.c.                          -0.542       -0.89       -1.071     -0.511     -0.83      -0.959     -0.254       0.151      0.099
                                            [0.127]*** [0.179]*** [0.173]*** [0.140]*** [0.180]*** [0.172]*** [0.111]**       [0.142]    [0.141]
Observations                                3546         2499        2499       3662       2546       2546       3729         2638       2638
Number of industry-country                  1737         1599        1599       1784       1634       1634       1782         1619       1619
R-squared                                   0.47         0.22        0.22       0.4        0.25       0.25       0.18         0.08       0.09
Clustered standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                  Table 4: Growth, Democracy, and Actual entry
                                               F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC             F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC   F.E. SIC   F.E. SIC
                                               country country country country country                  country      country    country    country
                                               year       year       year       year       year         year         year       year       year
                                               5 year     5 year     5 year     5 year     5 year       5 year
                                               Output Output Output Value                  Value        Value        5-year     5-year     5-year
                                               growth growth growth added                  added        added        Employm    Employm    Employm
1985-90, 1990-95, 1995-2000                    rate       rate       rate       growth growth           growth       ent        ent        ent
L5. Distance to frontier in VA/Emp             -16.168 -10.385 -0.197           -15.656 -11.037         0.732        -0.187h    2.102 h    3.607 h
                                               [9.651]* [7.660]      [8.171]    [10.027] [9.887]        [9.496]      [7.299]    [5.304]    [5.394]
L5. Dist. to front. x 5-yr No. Esta.growth     -0.296     -0.372     -0.448     0.236      0.13         0.163        -0.192     -0.381     -0.33
                                               [0.549]    [0.514]    [0.526]    [0.450]    [0.462]      [0.451]      [0.465]    [0.453]    [0.480]
L5. 5-year No. Establ. growth rate             -0.058     -0.066     -0.055     -0.143     -0.165       -0.176       -0.055     -0.047     -0.046
                                               [0.081]    [0.078]    [0.080]    [0.045]*** [0.045]***   [0.046]***   [0.053]    [0.051]    [0.054]
L5. Dist. to front. x dem. polityIV            -0.368                           -0.36                                -0.208
                                               [0.205]*                         [0.200]*                             [0.150]
L5. Dem. polityIV                              0.105                            0.137                                0
                                               [0.033]***                       [0.030]***                           [0.028]
L5. Dist. to front. x Polit. rights                       0.497                            0.611                                0.062
                                                          [0.283]*                         [0.274]**                            [0.149]
L5. Polit. rights                                         -0.111                           -0.119                               0.05
                                                          [0.070]                          [0.066]*                             [0.047]
L5. Dist. to front. x Civil liberty                                  -0.453                             -0.394                             -0.206
                                                                     [0.340]                            [0.368]                            [0.254]
L5. Civil liberty                                                    -0.074                             -0.1                               0.022
                                                                     [0.048]                            [0.049]**                          [0.032]
L5. Dist. to front. x Real GDP p.c.            2.577      1.749      1.086      2.83       2.102        1.288        0.103      -0.24      -0.266
                                               [1.115]** [0.867]** [0.913]      [1.164]** [1.088]*      [1.044]      [0.883]    [0.620]    [0.624]
L5. Real GDP p.c.                              -1.673     -1.478     -1.731     -1.791     -1.777       -2.01        -0.864     -0.575     -0.624
                                               [0.347]*** [0.224]*** [0.217]*** [0.309]*** [0.225]***   [0.219]***   [0.201]*** [0.158]*** [0.164]***
Observations                                   1694       1789       1789       1742       1835         1835         1819       1910       1910
Number of industry-country                     1117       1161       1161       1145       1187         1187         1184       1228       1228
R-squared                                      0.31       0.33       0.34       0.37       0.4          0.41         0.12       0.1        0.1
Clustered standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                              Table 4: Growth, Democracy, and Actual entry (Cont.)
                                               F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC F.E. SIC                            F.E. SIC     F.E. SIC
                                               country country country country country country country                                   country      country
                                               year      year     year       year       year       year  year                            year         year
                                                                             10-year 10-year 10-year     10-year                         10-year      10-year
                                               10-year 10-year 10-year Value            Value      Value Employm                         Employm      Employm
                                               Output Output Output added               added      added ent                             ent          ent
                                               growth growth growth growth growth growth growth                                          growth       growth
1985-95, 1990-2000                             rate      rate     rate       rate       rate       rate  rate                            rate         rate
L10. Distance to frontier in VA/Emp           -8.102       -7.676       -7.387       -10.077      -8.546       -13.865      1.111        0.285        -6.124
                                              [9.748]      [9.374]      [10.137]     [9.889]      [8.825]      [9.523]      [5.762]      [4.884]      [5.726]
L10. Dist. to front. x 10-yr No. Esta. growth -1.916       -1.985       -2.332       -1.939       -1.857       -1.983       -0.217       -0.56        -0.612
                                              [0.646]***   [0.639]***   [0.652]***   [0.689]***   [0.638]***   [0.664]***   [0.616]      [0.631]      [0.649]
L10. 10-yr No. Establ. growth rate            0.691        0.637        0.695        0.565        0.521        0.555        0.486        0.486        0.505
                                              [0.104]***   [0.112]***   [0.113]***   [0.119]***   [0.117]***   [0.119]***   [0.119]***   [0.128]***   [0.127]***
L10. Dist. to front. x dem. polityIV          -0.277                                 -0.071                                 -0.022
                                              [0.140]**                              [0.124]                                [0.082]
L10. Dem. polityIV                            0.029                                  0.014                                  -0.009
                                              [0.021]                                [0.019]                                [0.015]
L10. Dist. to front. x Polit. rights                       -1.335                                 -1.611                                 -0.283
                                                           [0.466]***                             [0.328]***                             [0.198]
L10. Polit. rights                                         0.288                                  0.31                                   0.152
                                                           [0.096]***                             [0.056]***                             [0.036]***
L10. Dist. to front. x Civil liberty                                 -0.639                                -1.148                                 -0.53
                                                                     [0.393]                               [0.362]***                             [0.248]**
L10. Civil liberty                                                   0.136                                 0.172                                  0.153
                                                                     [0.062]**                             [0.054]***                             [0.034]***
L10. Dist. to front. x Real GDP p.c.           1.524      2.025      1.525           2.079      2.733      2.994            -0.334     -0.005     0.748
                                               [1.131]    [1.269]    [1.276]         [1.135]* [1.068]** [1.158]***          [0.653]    [0.538]    [0.686]
L10. Real GDP p.c.                             -1.478     -1.965     -1.994          -1.671     -1.763     -1.963           -0.562     -0.757     -0.944
                                               [0.307]*** [0.254]*** [0.298]***      [0.267]*** [0.245]*** [0.272]***       [0.184]*** [0.155]*** [0.185]***
Observations                                   1718       1852       1852            1732       1838       1838             1837       1980       1980
Number of industry-country                     1186       1267       1267            1170       1225       1225             1220       1314       1314
R-squared                                      0.55       0.49       0.47            0.57       0.52       0.5              0.5        0.45       0.44
Clustered standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                      Table A1: Summary Statistics by Year
Year         1975   1975    1975        1975       1975         1980       1980   1980      1980     1980
Variable     Obs    Mean    St.dev.     Min        Max          Obs        Mean   St.dev.   Min      Max

logY         2249   19.16   2.75        8.15       26.73      2348       19.60    2.73      9.04     26.76
logVA        2272   18.09   2.63        10.26      25.66      2269       18.52    2.63      10.50    25.97
logEmp       2494   8.45    2.43        0.00       15.79      2576       8.63     2.41      0.00     15.79
logEsta      0                                                0
dlogY        2176   0.04    0.32        -3.54      4.25       2184       0.06     0.34      -3.58    7.79

dlogVA       2238   0.03    0.33        -3.18      4.13       2133       0.04     0.35      -3.19    7.96
dlogEmp      2428   0.04    0.26        -2.85      3.76       2469       0.02     0.26      -2.84    6.58
dlogEsta     0                                                0
d5logY       1869   0.61    0.58        -2.35      5.39       2054       0.41     0.57      -3.48    4.44
d5logVA      2074   0.57    0.60        -2.70      4.48       2101       0.39     0.60      -3.21    4.15

d5logEmp     2191   0.26    0.47        -1.61      3.24       2342       0.16     0.50      -3.67    6.92
d5logEsta    0                                                0
d10logY      1429   0.93    0.78        -2.42      5.59       1812       0.98     0.81      -3.49    6.99
d10logVA     1475   0.90    0.77        -1.67      5.71       1971       0.91     0.84      -3.64    6.51
d10logEmp    1584   0.44    0.63        -2.45      4.38       2143       0.41     0.70      -3.64    6.45

d10logEsta   0                                                0
distfront    2171   0.15    0.08        0.00       0.45       2159       0.15     0.08      0.00     0.49
db_proc_99   1911   10.19   4.51        2.00       21.00      1969       10.22    4.45      2.00     21.00
polityIV     2837   -0.91   7.83        -10.00     10.00      2836       -0.33    7.98      -10.00   10.00
pr           3168   3.64    2.24        1.00       7.00       3262       3.96     2.20      1.00     7.00

cl           3168   3.98    1.94        1.00       7.00       3262       3.95     1.96      1.00     7.00

Year         1985   1985    1985        1985       1985       1990       1990     1990      1990     1990
Variable     Obs    Mean    St.dev.     Min        Max        Obs        Mean     St.dev.   Min      Max

logY         2249   19.51   2.69        9.31       26.85      2286       19.73    2.79      10.20    26.88
logVA        2067   18.51   2.54        10.34      25.94      2124       18.89    2.62      9.29     25.96
logEmp       2387   8.73    2.44        0.00       15.80      2441       8.88     2.31      0.00     16.11
logEsta      2069   4.37    2.24        0.00       11.02      2202       4.38     2.25      0.00     10.97
dlogY        2179   -0.02   0.32        -2.50      4.78       2048       0.00     0.43      -5.83    3.49

dlogVA       1992   -0.04   0.36        -2.40      4.86       1941       0.03     0.43      -6.08    4.46
dlogEmp      2309   0.01    0.21        -3.89      3.82       2159       0.02     0.26      -3.21    2.99
dlogEsta     1892   0.03    0.21        -1.61      1.72       1912       0.09     0.42      -4.62    3.76
d5logY       2008   -0.26   0.58        -4.94      4.30       1787       0.32     0.63      -7.91    4.47
d5logVA      1868   -0.31   0.63        -5.15      4.52       1701       0.34     0.66      -7.12    3.35

d5logEmp     2181   -0.01   0.43        -3.60      4.91       1881       0.09     0.45      -6.38    3.93
d5logEsta    0                                                1576       0.23     0.67      -4.31    4.27
d10logY      1875   0.15    0.77        -4.11      4.68       1736       0.07     0.76      -4.62    7.27
d10logVA     1835   0.11    0.79        -2.78      3.85       1717       0.05     0.82      -6.09    7.39
d10logEmp    2086   0.15    0.65        -4.22      5.15       1871       0.07     0.61      -4.97    7.76

d10logEsta   0                                                0
distfront    2100   0.15    0.08        0.00       0.47       1953       0.16     0.09      0.00     0.53
db_proc_99   1989   10.20   4.43        2.00       21.00      2133       10.19    4.33      2.00     21.00
polityIV     2861   0.37    7.93        -10.00     10.00      2806       2.45     7.41      -10.00   10.00
pr           3287   4.12    2.23       1.00        7.00        3151       4.46     2.19      1.00     7.00

cl           3287   3.90    2.05       1.00        7.00        3151       4.53     1.86      1.00     7.00




                                  Table A1: Summary Statistics by Year (Cont.)
Year         1995   1995    1995        1995      1995          2000        2000   2000      2000     2000
Variable     Obs    Mean    St.dev.     Min       Max           Obs         Mean   St.dev.   Min      Max

logY         2289   19.31   2.99       8.35        27.00       1649       19.71    3.05      6.68     27.12
logVA        1982   18.69   2.85       8.00        26.04       1405       19.16    2.71      8.70     26.20
logEmp       2408   8.68    2.39       0.00        15.77       1780       8.90     2.38      0.00     15.41
logEsta      2225   4.40    2.50       0.00        11.38       1695       5.05     2.44      0.00     11.47
dlogY        2171   0.08    0.49       -7.69       6.70        1579       0.03     0.31      -2.31    2.31

dlogVA       1877   0.07    0.51       -6.60       5.68        1312       -0.01    0.27      -1.92    1.73
dlogEmp      2280   0.00    0.34       -4.12       4.20        1674       0.00     0.20      -2.39    1.78
dlogEsta     2109   0.10    0.48       -2.69       3.84        1621       0.05     0.36      -3.76    2.68
d5logY       1709   0.06    0.91       -5.92       5.09        1495       -0.07    0.75      -7.10    6.02
d5logVA      1654   0.04    0.80       -6.47       4.08        1246       -0.07    0.63      -4.64    3.94

d5logEmp     1944   -0.11   0.68       -5.89       4.30        1613       -0.07    0.50      -4.69    2.78
d5logEsta    1673   0.33    0.97       -4.23       4.87        1396       0.15     0.70      -4.22    5.46
d10logY      1546   0.43    1.03       -10.86      5.31        1233       0.02     1.11      -5.82    5.68
d10logVA     1486   0.47    0.97       -6.89       4.67        1126       0.05     0.83      -4.87    5.29
d10logEmp    1677   0.12    0.73       -6.20       4.33        1417       -0.14    0.78      -5.37    3.43

d10logEsta   1328   0.50    1.13       -3.57       5.01        1289       0.53     1.11      -4.25    5.23
distfront    1969   0.18    0.10       0.00        0.82        1410       0.16     0.10      0.00     0.85
db_proc_99   2194   10.30   4.34       2.00        21.00       1954       10.17    4.39      2.00     21.00
polityIV     3241   3.79    6.54       -10.00      10.00       2542       4.96     6.07      -10.00   10.00
pr           3576   4.74    2.06       1.00        7.00        2729       5.11     2.06      1.00     7.00

cl           3576   4.48    1.79       1.00        7.00        2729       4.87     1.64      1.00     7.00
                                        Table A2: Explaining the differential: Entry and democracy
                                                 Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure Procedure        Procedure   Procedure   Procedure
                                                 s No.      s No.       s No.       s No.     s No.       s No.       s No.       s No.
GDP per capita, log                              -0.544     -0.687      -0.111      -0.367    -0.757      -0.853      -1.094      -0.783
                                                 [0.337]    [0.367]* [0.382]        [0.511]   [0.320]**   [0.338]**   [0.440]**   [0.383]**
executive de facto independence                  -0.853
                                                 [0.270]***
constraints on executive power                              -0.658
                                                            [0.290]**
effectiveness of legislature                                            -2.553
                                                                        [0.661]***
government effectiveness                                                            -1.88
                                                                                    [0.933]**
competition in the legisl. nominating process                                                 -2.051
                                                                                              [0.963]**
autocracy                                                                                                 0.322
                                                                                                          [0.185]*
political rights average 1972-99                                                                                      -0.655
                                                                                                                      [2.263]
civil rights average 1972-99                                                                                                      -4.171
                                                                                                                                  [2.362]*
Observations                                        84          84     73        85         73            84          84          84
R-squared                                           0.26        0.24   0.3       0.25       0.22          0.22        0.2         0.23
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
