NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTOR SENTIMENT IN THE STOCK MARKET
Malcolm Baker
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 13189
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13189

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We thank Xavier Gabaix, Robin Greenwood, Jim Hines, Stefan Nagel, Ronnie Sadka, Andrei Shleifer,
Timothy Taylor, and Michael Waldmann for very helpful comments. We thank the Investment Company
Institute for data on mutual fund flows. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 13189
June 2007
JEL No. E32,G11,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
Real investors and markets are too complicated to be neatly summarized by a few selected biases and
trading frictions. The "top down" approach to behavioral finance focuses on the measurement of reduced
form, aggregate sentiment and traces its effects to stock returns. It builds on the two broader and more
irrefutable assumptions of behavioral finance -- sentiment and the limits to arbitrage -- to explain which
stocks are likely to be most affected by sentiment. In particular, stocks of low capitalization, younger,
unprofitable, high volatility, non-dividend paying, growth companies, or stocks of firms in financial
distress, are likely to be disproportionately sensitive to broad waves of investor sentiment. We review
the theoretical and empirical evidence for these predictions.
Malcolm Baker
Baker Library 261
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu
Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

The history of the stock market is full of events striking enough to earn their own names:
the Great Crash of 1929, the 'Tronics Boom of the early 1960s, the Go-Go Years of the late
1960s, the Nifty Fifty bubble of the early 1970s, and the Black Monday crash of October 1987.
Each of these events refers to a dramatic level or change in stock prices that seems to defy
explanation. The standard finance model, where unemotional investors always force capital
market prices to equal to the rational present value of expected future cash flows, has
considerably difficulty fitting these patterns. Researchers in behavioral finance have been
working to augment the standard model with an alternative model built on two basic
assumptions. 1
The first assumption is that investors are subject to sentiment. Investor sentiment, defined
broadly, is a belief about future cash flows and investment risks that is not justified by the facts
at hand. The second assumption is that betting against sentimental investors is costly and risky.
And so, rational investors, or arbitrageurs as they are often called, are not as aggressive in
forcing prices to fundamentals as the standard model would suggest. In the language of modern
behavioral finance, there are limits to arbitrage. Recent stock market history has cooperated
nicely, providing the Internet bubble and the ensuing Nasdaq and telecom crashes and thus
validating the two premises of behavioral finance. A period of extraordinary investor sentiment
pushed the prices of speculative and difficult-to-value technology stocks to unfathomable levels
in the late 1990s. Instead of creating opportunity for contrarian arbitrageurs, the period forced
many out of business, as prices that were merely high went higher still before an eventual crash.
Now, the question is no longer, as it was a few decades ago, whether investor sentiment
affects stock prices, but rather how to measure investor sentiment and quantify its effects. One

1

See De Long et al. (1990) and Shleifer and Vishny (1997) for this conception.

1

approach is “bottom up,” using biases in individual investor psychology, such as overconfidence,
representativeness, and conservatism, to explain how individual investors underreact or overreact
to past returns or fundamentals. 2 A related class of models, discussed by Hong and Stein in this
issue, relies on differences of opinion across investors, often combined with short sales
constraints to generate misvaluation. When aggregated, these models make predictions about
patterns in market wide investor sentiment, stock prices, and volume.
The investor sentiment approach that we develop in this paper is, by contrast, distinctly
“top down” and macroeconomic. The starting point for this approach is that many of the bottom
up models lead to a similar reduced form of variation over time in mass psychology, and
certainly none is uniquely true. Real investors and markets are too complicated to be neatly
summarized by a few selected biases and trading frictions. The top down approach focuses on
the measurement of reduced form, aggregate sentiment and traces its effects to market returns
and individual stocks. The new directions in this top down approach build on the two broader
and more irrefutable assumptions of behavioral finance—sentiment and the limits to arbitrage—
to explain which stocks are likely to be most affected by sentiment, rather than simply pointing
out that the level of stock prices in the aggregate depends on sentiment. 3
In particular, stocks of low capitalization, younger, unprofitable, high volatility, nondividend paying, growth companies, or stocks of firms in financial distress, are likely to be
disproportionately sensitive to broad waves of investor sentiment. As the reader will recall, small
startup firms represented a majority of the excitement and subsequent carnage of the Internet
bubble, so this statement may ring true already. Theoretically, it follows because these groups of
2

See Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyman (1998) for models of this
sort.

3

As an analogy, aggregate risk aversion is another one-dimensional variable that will affect all stocks to some
degree but will also affect some more than others.

2

stocks tend to be harder to arbitrage, for example they have higher transaction costs, and because
they are more difficult to value, making biases more insidious and valuation mistakes more
likely.
The remainder of the paper develops these theoretical predictions in more detail, shows
how one might measure sentiment explicitly, and finally how to use the sentiment measures to
validate the key predictions of the top down approach. Certainly, both the bottom up and top
down approaches to investor sentiment deserve continued attention. The advantage of the top
down approach is its potential to encompass bubbles, crashes, and more everyday patterns in
stock prices in a simple, intuitive and comprehensive way. The advantage of the bottom up
model is in providing microfoundations for the variation in investor sentiment that the top down
model takes as exogenous.

Theoretical Effects of Investor Sentiment on Stocks

A pioneering and well-known set of studies of sentiment and aggregate stock returns
appeared in the 1980s. They were largely atheoretical, testing in various ways whether the stock
market as a whole could be mispriced. Authors looked for: the tendency of aggregate returns to
mean revert; volatility in aggregate stock index returns that could not be justified by volatility in
fundamentals, which is in fact another way of characterizing mean reversion in returns; or

3

predictability of aggregate returns using simple valuation ratios like the ratio of aggregate
dividends to stock market value. 4
In these studies, the role of sentiment was left implicit, and the statistical evidence was
not usually very strong. Practically speaking, it is hard to distinguish a random walk from a longlived bubble, especially in a short time series containing at best a few bubbles. Even when
statistical inferences seemed robust, the economic interpretation was still unclear. Predictability
of stock returns could reflect the correction of sentiment-induced mispricings or, arguably, timevarying risk or risk aversion that causes time variation in expected stock returns.
The more recent studies, such as Baker and Wurgler (2006), utilize interim advances in
behavioral finance theory to provide sharper tests for the effects of sentiment. In particular, in the
many behavioral models of securities markets inspired by De Long et al. (1990), investors are of
two types: rational arbitrageurs who are sentiment-free and irrational traders prone to exogenous
sentiment. They compete in the market and set prices and expected returns. But, arbitrageurs are
limited in various ways. These limits come from short horizons or costs and risks of trading and
short selling. So, prices are not always at their fundamental values. In such models, mispricing
arises out of the combination of two factors: a change in sentiment on the part of the irrational
traders, and a limit to arbitrage from the rational ones.
The key predictions of this framework come from its two moving parts. Consider first the
possibility that sentiment-based demand shocks vary across firms, while arbitrage is equally
difficult across firms. For example, suppose one thinks about investor sentiment as the
propensity to speculate by the marginal investor, akin to a propensity to play the lottery. Then
sentiment is almost by definition a higher demand for more speculative securities, and when
4

See Shiller (1981) on excess volatility, Fama and French (1988) and Poterba and Summers (1988) on mean
reversion, and Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Fama and French (1989) on valuation ratios.

4

sentiment increases we expect such “speculative” stocks to have contemporaneously higher
returns.
What makes some stocks more speculative than others? We believe that the crucial
characteristic is the difficulty and subjectivity of determining their true values. For instance, in
the case of a young, currently unprofitable but potentially extremely profitable growth firm, the
combination of no earnings history and a highly uncertain future allows investors to defend
valuations ranging from much too low to much too high, as befits their prevailing sentiment.
During a bubble, when the propensity to speculate is high, investment bankers can join the
chorus arguing for high valuations. By contrast, a firm with a long earnings history, tangible
assets, and stable dividends is much less subjective to value, and thus its stock is likely to be less
sensitive to sentiment. One could appeal to psychological foundations here. Uncertainty means
that the effect of overconfidence (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyman, 1998),
representativeness, and conservatism (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998) is more pronounced.
And, differences of opinion (Miller, 1977), even when investors have the same basic
information, can be large. The changes over time in these biases, we would call shifts in the
propensity to speculate.
Now suppose instead that we view investor sentiment as simply optimism or pessimism
about stocks in general, and we allow the limits to arbitrage to vary across stocks. A large body
of research shows that arbitrage tends to be particularly risky and costly for certain stocks:
namely those that are young, small, unprofitable, or experiencing extreme growth. Such stocks
tend to be more costly to buy and to sell short (D’Avolio, 2002). Such stocks have a high degree
of idiosyncratic variation in their returns, which makes betting on them riskier (Wurgler and
Zhuravskaya, 2002). Such stocks’ higher volatility may lead to second-guessing by the investors

5

who provide funds to the arbitrageur, ultimately leading to withdrawals from contrarian
arbitrageurs just when the mispricing is greatest (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). By not paying
dividends, such stocks’ fundamentals remain far in the future and therefore subject to speculation
(Pontiff, 1996). Thus, again, we might expect that sentiment has a greater effect on such stocks.
The key point is that in practice, the same securities that are difficult to value also tend to
be difficult to arbitrage. Therefore we are left with a very robust and testable conclusion: The
stocks most sensitive to investor sentiment will be those of companies that are younger, smaller,
more volatile, unprofitable, non-dividend paying, distressed or with extreme growth potential, or
having analogous characteristics. Whereas “bond-like” stocks will be less driven by sentiment.
Again, note that this assessment does not depend on specifying a fine definition of investor
sentiment or rely on just one arbitrage mechanism such as short-sales constraints.

The Sentiment Seesaw
Figure 1 summarizes this into a simple, unified view of the effects of sentiment on stocks.
The x-axis orders stocks according to how difficult they are to value and arbitrage. Bond-like
stocks, such as regulated utilities, are toward the left; stocks of companies that are newer,
smaller, more volatile, distressed or extreme growth are toward the right. The y-axis measures
prices, with P* denoting fundamental values which, of course, can vary over time. The lines then
illustrate the basic hypotheses about how stock valuations are affected by swings in sentiment.
High sentiment should be associated with high stock valuations, particularly for the hardest to
value and arbitrage stocks. Low sentiment works in the reverse direction. In the absence of
sentiment, stocks are, on average, assumed to be correctly priced at P*.

6

An empirical question that arises in the drawing of Figure 1 is where to locate the
crossing point of this seesaw. One case (not in Figure 1) is that no crossing point exists: the
upward-sloping high sentiment line lies entirely above the no sentiment P line, which in turn lies
entirely above the downard-sloping low sentiment line. That is, when sentiment increases, all
stocks’ prices go up, but some more than others. In this case, the aggregate effects of sentiment
will be strong, because aggregate stock indexes are simply averages of the underlying stocks.
As drawn, Figure 1 reflects the more complex case where the prices of particularly safe,
easy-to-arbitrage stocks actually are inversely related to sentiment. This could occur if sentiment
fluctuations induce substantial changes in the demand for speculative securities, for example
engendering “flights to quality” within the stock market. Such episodes may, controlling for any
changes in fundamentals, reduce the prices of speculative stocks and at the same time increase
the prices of bond-like stocks. In this case, the effect of sentiment on aggregate returns will be
muted, as stocks are not all moving in the same direction.
Behavioral theory thus delivers clear cross-sectional predictions about the effects of
sentiment—but the aggregate predictions are somewhat less clear, which may help to explain
why the 1980s studies did not always reach strong statistical conclusions. The rest of the paper
reviews some empirical evidence regarding three critical aspects of Figure 1. First, we discuss
how investor sentiment can be empirically measured.
Second, we ask whether more speculative and harder to arbitrage stocks are indeed more
sensitive to sentiment, in the sense that their prices comove more with an index of sentiment
changes. In finance parlance, we ask whether speculative and harder to arbitrage stocks have
higher “sentiment betas.” (The term is by analogy to the famous concept of market beta, which
measures the exposure of a stock to returns on the stock market as a whole. A stock with a

7

market beta of 1.0 appreciates by 1 percentage point, on average, when the market return is one
percentage point. Market betas above 1.0 indicate relatively high market risk exposure.) We also
test whether bond-like stocks have negative sentiment betas, i.e. their returns are negatively
related to changes in sentiment, as represented in Figure 1.
Third, we investigate whether current investor sentiment levels predict future returns as
sentiment wanes (perhaps spurred by fundamental news or an absence thereof) or as arbitrage
forces eventually accumulate to correct mispricings. This is an important test, because sentiment
measures may, despite our best efforts, be contaminated by economic fundamentals, and
fundamentals should of course affect stock returns contemporaneously. In other words, the
comovement patterns are subject to a correlated omitted variables critique. Return predictability
helps to address this concern because it suggests a profitable trading strategy, which by
definition cannot exist if stocks are priced correctly.

Ruling Out Other Explanations
Contrasting Figure 1 with some other finance frameworks helps to clarify the unique
predictions of the sentiment model. The classical risk-based and the behavioral disagreement
models make distinct predictions about the slope of the thick, or overall, valuation line. Neither
makes predictions about the dashed valuations, conditional on sentiment.
In the risk-based asset pricing models, such as the capital-asset pricing model, a stock’s
expected return depends on its risk exposure, measured by market beta, times the market risk
premium, which is the expected return on the stock market as a whole. Furthermore, since
investors are rational and risk averse in these models, the market risk premium is always

8

positive, though it may change over time. See Fama and French (2004) and Perold (2004) for
introductions to this model.
What does this imply for tests of return predictability? Even if speculative and hard-toarbitrage securities have higher market betas, as is likely the case, classical models predict that
such stocks always have higher expected returns than bond-like stocks. In fact, as we will see
below, this is not true. When sentiment is measured to be high, speculative and hard-to-arbitrage
stocks have lower future returns, on average, than bond-like stocks. This is a powerful
confirmation of the sentiment-driven mispricing view.
In a behavioral model of disagreement among regular investors combined with shortsales constraints by arbitrageurs, on the other hand, hard to short stocks can become overvalued.
As fundamentals are revealed, this mispricing will disappear, so the future returns of such stocks
will be relatively low on average. The sentiment seesaw in Figure 1 makes a distinct and testable
prediction that hard to arbitrage stocks can, conditional on the state of sentiment, be undervalued
as well. We will also investigate this point.

Measuring Investor Sentiment

Investor sentiment is not straightforward to measure, but there is no fundamental reason
why one cannot find imperfect proxies that remain useful over time. We discuss some generic
issues involved in measuring sentiment and describe proxies for sentiment that have come into
use. We then describe a sentiment index which combines several of these proxies, and we show
that it fluctuates with the major speculative episodes of the past 40 years.

9

Potential Sentiment Proxies
An exogenous shock in investor sentiment can lead to a chain of events, and the shock
itself could in principle be observed at any or every part of this chain. For example, it might
show up first in investor beliefs, which could be surveyed. These beliefs might then translate to
observable patterns of securities trades, which are recorded. Limited arbitrage implies that these
demand pressures might cause some mispricings, which might be observed using benchmarks for
fundamental value like the book-to-market ratio. These mispricings might engender an informed
response by insiders, such as corporate executives, who may have both the superior information
and the incentive to take advantage of it, and the patterns of firms in whether they choose to
adjust their balance of equity or debt could be observed.
The bad news is that each part of this chain is also subject to confounding influences.
Economists always treat surveys with some degree of suspicion, because of the potential gap
between how people respond to a survey and how they actually behave. Trades net to zero, so
measuring sentiment with trading activity means taking a stand on the identity of irrational
investors. Market prices of securities normally reflect fundamentals, by and large, with sentiment
playing a lesser role. And, corporations may alter their financial structure for many reasons,
including a change in business fundamentals, rather than simply acting as corporate arbitrageurs.
Such considerations suggest that the practical approach is to combine several imperfect
measures. Candidate ways of measuring sentiment, ordered from origins in investor psychology
to responses by corporate insiders, include: surveys, mood proxies, retail investor trades, mutual
fund flows, trading volume, dividend premia, closed-end fund discounts, option implied
volatility, first-day returns on initial public offerings, volume of initial public offerings, new

10

equity issues, and insider trading. We comment on these sentiment proxies and then choose
among them.
Investor Surveys. Perhaps just by asking investors how optimistic they are, we can gain
insight into the marginal irrational investor. Robert Shiller has conducted investor attitude
surveys since 1989. UBS/Gallup surveys randomly-selected investor households, and Investors
Intelligence surveys financial newsletter writers. Qiu and Welch (2006) point out that although
consumers polled for the University of Michigan Consumer Confidence Index are not asked
directly for their views on securities prices, changes in that consumer confidence index
nonetheless correlate highly with changes in the UBS/Gallup index. They show that changes in
the consumer confidence measure correlate especially strongly with small stock returns and the
returns of firms held disproportionately by retail investors.
Investor Mood. Some papers have creatively tried to connect stock prices to exogenous
changes in human emotions. Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2003) find that market returns are on
average lower through the fall and winter, which they attribute to the onset of seasonal affective
disorder, a depressive disorder associated with declining hours of daylight. Patterns at different
latitudes and both hemispheres also are consistent with this interpretation. Edmans, Garcia, and
Norli (2006) use international soccer results as a mood variable and find that losses in major
games predict poor returns in the losing country the next day, particularly among small stocks.
Retail investor trades. The inexperienced retail or individual investor is more likely than
the professional to be subject to sentiment. Greenwood and Nagel (2006) find that younger
investors were more likely than older investors to buy stocks at the peak of the Internet bubble.
More generally, Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2003) and Kumar and Lee (2006) find in micro-level
trading data that retail investors buy and sell stocks in concert, which is consistent with

11

systematic sentiment. Kumar and Lee suggest constructing sentiment measures for retail
investors based on whether such investors are buying or selling.
Mutual fund flows. Data are easily available on how mutual fund investors allocate across
fund categories. Brown, Goetzmann, Hirkai, Shiraishi, and Watanabe (2002) propose an overall
market sentiment measure based on how fund investors are moving into and out of, for example,
“safe” government bond funds to “risky” growth stocks funds. Mutual fund investors are wellknown to chase investments with high recent returns (e.g. Warther, 1995), so whether the
causality also goes the other direction—whether their allocation decisions actually lead to
mispricing—is a tricky question. Frazzini and Lamont (2005) find some affirmative evidence by
using fund flows to proxy for sentiment for individual stocks. They find that when funds that
hold a particular stock experience strong inflows, the subsequent performance of that stock is
relatively poor.
Trading volume. Trading volume, or more generally liquidity, can be viewed as an
investor sentiment index. For instance, Baker and Stein (2004) note that if short-selling is costlier
than opening and closing long positions (as it is, in practice), irrational investors are more likely
to trade, and thus add liquidity, when they are optimistic and betting on rising stocks rather than
when they are pessimistic and betting on falling stocks. In Scheinkman and Xiong (2003),
volume reveals underlying difference of opinion, which are in turn related to valuation levels
when short selling is difficult. Market turnover, the ratio of trading volume to the number of
shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange, is a simple proxy for this concept.
Dividend premium. Dividend-paying stocks resemble bonds in that their predictable
income stream represents a salient characteristic of safety. The first price-based measure we
mention here is therefore the relative “premium” for dividend-paying stocks, which may be

12

inversely related to sentiment. Baker and Wurgler (2004a, b) define the dividend premium as the
difference between the average market-to-book-value ratios of dividend payers and nonpayers.
The dividend premium explains well the major historical trends in firms’ propensity to pay
dividends, such as the post-1977 decline documented by Fama and French (2001)—that is, when
dividends are at a premium, firms are more likely to pay them, and less so when they are
discounted. On the margin, firms appear to cater to prevailing sentiment for or against “safety”
when deciding whether to pay dividends.
Closed-end Fund Discount. Closed-end funds are investment companies who issue a
fixed number of shares, which then trade on stock exchanges. The closed-end fund “discount”
(or occasionally premium) is the difference between the net asset value of a fund’s actual
security holdings and the fund’s market price. Many authors, including Zweig (1973), Lee,
Shleifer, and Thaler (1991), and Neal and Wheatley (1998), have argued that if closed-end funds
are disproportionately held by retail investors, the average discount on closed-end equity funds
may be a sentiment index, with the discount increasing when retail investors are bearish.
Option implied volatility. Options prices rise when the value of the underlying asset has
greater expected volatility, and options pricing models such as the Black-Scholes formula can be
inverted to yield implied volatility as a function of options prices. The Market Volatility Index
(“VIX”), which measures the implied volatility of options on the Standard and Poor’s 100 stock
index, is often called the “investor fear gauge” by practitioners. Whaley (2000) discusses the
spikes in the VIX series since its 1986 inception, which include the crash of October 1987 and
the 1998 Long Term Capital Management crisis.
IPO First-Day Returns. Initial public offerings sometimes earn such remarkable returns
on their first trading day that it is difficult to find an explanation that does not involve investor

13

enthusiasm. For example, Netscape’s return on the day of its August 1995 IPO was 108 percent.
Interestingly, IPO first-day returns are not idiosyncratic. Average first-day returns display peaks
and troughs which are highly correlated with IPO volume (below) and other sentiment proxies
that are not fundamentally related. 5
IPO Volume. The underlying demand for initial public offerings is often said to be
extremely sensitive to investor sentiment. Investment bankers speak of “windows of
opportunity” for an initial public offering that capriciously open and close. Such caprice could
explain the fact that IPO volume displays wild fluctuations, with a rate of over 100 issues per
month in some periods and zero issues per month in others.
Equity Issues Over Total New Issues. A broader measure of equity financing activity is
the equity share of total equity and debt issues by all corporations. This measures all equity
offerings, not just IPOs. Baker and Wurgler (2000) find that high values of the equity share
portend low stock market returns, and suggest that this pattern reflects firms shifting successfully
between equity and debt to reduce the overall cost of capital. This pattern need not imply that
individual firms or their managers can predict prices on the market as a whole. Rather, correlated
mispricings across firms may lead to correlated managerial actions, which may then forecast
correlated corrections of mispricings – that is, it will forecast market returns.
Insider Trading. Corporate executives have better information about the true value of
their firms than outside investors. Thus, legalities aside, executives’ personal portfolio decisions
may also reveal their views about the mispricing of their firm. If sentiment leads to correlated
5

Why IPOs are “underpriced” to such an extreme degree is still a puzzle, since the prices are set in consultation with
investment bankers well-informed about market conditions. The extreme unpredictability of investor sentiment may
be a factor. The offer price is typically set in advance and indications of interest are then gathered from potential
investors. It may be better to issue shares at a likely discount to first day prices than risk an undersubscribed offering
in a period of generally high sentiment and valuations. This raises the question of why companies do not simply
auction their shares. See Ritter (2003) for a discussion of underpricing and Ljungqvist, Nanda, and Singh (2006) for
a sentiment-based model.

14

mispricings across firms, insider trading patterns may contain a systematic sentiment component.
See Seyhun (1998) for evidence on the ability of insider trading patterns to predict stock returns.

An Operational Sentiment Index
Which of the above measures to choose? Data availability narrows the list considerably.
Sentiment may vary daily, but major episodes occur over years, and the most convincing tests of
the effects of sentiment are those in which it is used to actually predict long-horizon returns—
tests which suggest a contrarian trading strategy. This rules out using data that do not go back as
far as our stock returns data (i.e. to the 1960s), for example including insider trading, micro-level
data on trading behavior, and implied volatility series.
Instead, we construct an index based on the six proxies used by Baker and Wurgler
(2006): trading volume as measured by NYSE turnover; the dividend premium; the closed-end
fund discount; the number and first-day returns on IPOs; and the equity share in new issues. All
these data are available at www.stern.nyu.edu/~jwurgler. Later on, we will also consider some
mutual fund series.
Although these six proxies are highly correlated in the expected directions, some of them
also contain idiosyncratic components that are unrelated to sentiment. For example, the 1975
deregulation of brokerage commissions and the subsequent long decline in trading costs has led
to a decades-long upward trend in turnover, so we use the log of turnover minus a five-year
moving average. With respect to closed-end fund discounts, if the majority of individual
investors have come to prefer open-end funds in recent years, the discount provides a less useful
summary of the opinion of the marginal investor than it once did. And the evolution of public

15

debt markets has made the equity share less useful in recent years. But, no obvious patch
suggests itself in these cases.
Also, some of the sentiment proxies reflect economic fundamentals to some extent. For
instance, IPO volume depends, in part, on prevailing investment opportunities. To remove such
influences, at least partially, we regress each proxy on a set of macroeconomic indicators—
growth in industrial production, real growth in durable, nondurable, and services consumption,
growth in employment, and an NBER recession indicator—and use the residuals from these
regressions as our sentiment proxies.
Since the six sentiment proxies, especially given that major macroeconomic influences
have been removed, will have a common sentiment component, we can iron out the remaining
idiosyncracies by averaging them together into an index. We form a sentiment levels index to
test for return predictability conditional on the state of sentiment and also a sentiment changes
index to test for return comovement patterns associated with changes in sentiment. The levels
index is simply the first principal component of the six proxies. 6 The changes index is the first
principal component of the changes in the six proxies. 7

6

Brown and Cliff (2004) also use a principal components methodology to define a sentiment index. The first
principal component of a set of time series variables is simply the linear combination of the variables with the
coefficients chosen to capture as much of the joint variation across the series as possible. The second principal
component performs the same analysis but defines the relevant series as the residuals from the first principal
component, etc. A decision with defining which of our six series to include in the analysis is timing. Some variables
may reflect the same shift in sentiment before others. In general, proxies that involve firm supply decisions are
further down the chain of events and likely to lag behind proxies that are based directly on investor trading patterns
or prices. Baker and Wurgler (2006) find that the best combination to capture the common variation in annual series
includes the current values of the closed-end fund discount, the equity share, and IPO volume, and one-year-lagged
versions of the three other variables. We are using monthly data here, but for simplicity we also adopt this
convention.

7

While we could simply take the changes in the sentiment levels index, a better approach is to form a second index
based on the first principal component of the changes in the six proxies. The reason for this preference is that the
proxies have differential noisiness in going from levels to changes. E.g., turnover has low frequency error related to
falling transaction costs, but high frequency changes are more informative; the equity share, on the other hand, has
low frequency error related to long-term shifts in financing patterns plus high frequency error because corporations
can respond to sentiment only with a lag (which itself is unlikely to be consistent enough to try to align the changes

16

Figure 2 shows the sentiment indexes graphically. As expected, variables positively
associated with sentiment levels include share turnover, IPO volume and first-day returns, and
the equity share in new issues, and those negatively associated are the closed-end fund discount
and the dividend premium. The bottom panel reports the changes index. The coefficients all have
the same signs as in the levels index, with the exception of the equity share. We regard its
unexpected sign as a chance event made possible by the fact that its changes at high frequencies
are largely unrelated to sentiment, but we retain it to avoid data mining.
While data availability is the key constraint, some judgment has entered this approach to
measuring sentiment. Robustness is a natural question. We offer two remarks in response. First,
the process of averaging the six proxies is not crucial. They are strongly correlated and if they
were each studied as independent sentiment indexes, some would display empirical results even
stronger (i.e., more consistent with a strong role for sentiment) than those we present below. We
pursue the index approach so as not to arbitrarily elevate individual proxies and to iron out
idiosyncratic variation. Second, Baker and Wurgler (2006) find that macro fundamentals explain
little of the common variation in the six series. In other words, indexes formed from the “raw”
series would look and perform almost identically to those used here. Nonetheless we include this
step to illustrate an approach to controlling for fundamentals.

Does This Index Capture Major Fluctuations In Sentiment? An Eyeball Test
Perhaps the best evidence that the index generally succeeds in capturing sentiment is
simply that it lines up fairly well with the anecdotal accounts of bubbles and crashes written by

in the series). Hence, equity share fluctuations will feature prominently in a changes in the levels index, but will
likely drop out in an index based on changes.

17

authors such as Brown (1991), Dreman (1979), Graham (1973), Malkiel (1999), Shiller (2000),
and Siegel (1998). The first major bubble in our data period developed in 1967 and 1968. Brown
(1991, p. 90) writes that “scores of franchisers, computer firms, and mobile home manufactures
seemed to promise overnight wealth. … [while] quality was pretty much forgotten.” The early
1970s, on the other hand, are invariably described in bear market terms. Yet a set of established,
large, stable, consistently profitable stocks known as the “Nifty Fifty” enjoyed extreme priceearnings ratios. Siegel (1998, p. 106) writes, “All of these stocks had proven growth records,
continual increases in dividends … and high market capitalization.” The Nifty Fifty is a mirror
image of the speculative episodes that occurred before and after it, which generally involved
small, young, unprofitable growth stocks in high sentiment periods.
The late 1970s through mid-1980s are described anecdotally as a period of generally high
sentiment and witnessed a series of speculative episodes involving gambling issues in 1977 and
1978 and—more apparent in the levels index—natural resource startups in 1980 on the heels of
the second oil crisis (Ritter, 1984) and the high-tech and biotech booms in the first half of 1983.
But by 1987 and 1988, Malkiel (p. 80) writes, “market sentiment had changed from an
acceptance of an exciting story … to a desire to stay closer to earth with low-multiple stocks that
actually pay dividends.” Consistent with this view, the overall index shows sentiment at a high
level during the early 1980s and tailing off somewhat toward the end of the decade.
The late-1990s bubble in technology stocks will be familiar to many readers. By all
accounts, sentiment was broadly high before the bubble started to burst in 2000. Malkiel draws
parallels to episodes in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, and Shiller and others compare the Internet
bubble to that of the late 1920s. The sentiment index flags 1999 as a high-sentiment year, and the
dividend premium and first-day returns on IPOs hit record levels that year.

18

The sentiment changes index in the bottom of Figure 2 is harder to decipher in an eyeball
test. However, when the series is viewed in light of major speculative episodes, one pattern does
appear: The volatility of sentiment rises in a speculative episode. This suggests that the relative
influence of fundamentals and sentiment on aggregate market returns changes over time.

Mutual Fund Flows
Detailed data on mutual fund flows are not available back to the 1960s, so we do not
include these in our main indexes. However, we use the period of overlap to correlate patterns in
fund flows and the indexes. This is useful because fund flows provide a transparent measure of
decisions made by a large set of investors who are, on average, less sophisticated and more likely
to display sentiment. Moreover, the fund flows data help us to investigate the precise mechanism
through which sentiment affects stock prices, as we explain.
The Investment Company Institute offers monthly data on flows into various categories
of funds. We look at net flows into the eight stock-oriented fund categories for which data exist
back to January 1990. The categories vary from speculative “Aggressive Growth” funds to safer,
dividend-paying “Income” funds.
Figure 3 shows the results of a principal components analysis of changes in fund flows,
as in Goetzmann et al. (2000). Once more, the principal components analysis helps us detect
general patterns across several time series while ironing out distracting idiosyncratic fluctuations.
The results in the figure show that across the eight stock fund categories, the first principal
component is a “general demand” effect. It reflects the fact that investors often shift in and out of
stock funds en masse. In contrast, the second principal component shows that the next most
important effect is shifts between more speculative funds and safer funds. Thus we call this the

19

“speculative demand” component. Therefore, controlling for the overall generic equity fund
demand, when flows fall in the more speculative categories they tend to rise in the less
speculative categories. Barberis and Shleifer (2003) would call this “style investing.”
With these two principal components in hand, we can construct monthly time series of
the two most important sources of changes in mutual fund flows: one reflecting general demand
and another reflecting speculative demand. We then correlate these with the sentiment changes
index. During the period of overlap, the sentiment changes index has a marginally significant
correlation of 0.16 with general fund demand and, perhaps more interestingly, a highly
significant correlation of 0.36 with speculative demand. This latter correlation is particularly
suggestive that our overall sentiment indexes do, to a large extent, capture a prevailing “greed”
versus “fear” or “bullish” versus “bearish” notion.
Finally, recall that there are essentially two distinct channels by which sentiment will
have cross-sectional effects: when general investor demand for risky assets is uniform but stocks
differ in the costs and risks arbitrage, and when investor demand focuses on relatively
speculative stocks and the difficulty of arbitrage is held constant. The fairly clean empirical
break of fund flows into general and speculative demand components suggests the possibility of
empirically separating the two channels. Of course, both can operate at the same time.

Using Sentiment to Explain Current Returns

With the index of sentiment changes and the fund flow series in hand, we now turn to
testing the key hypotheses about how sentiment affects stocks. We start by asking whether

20

speculative and harder-to-arbitrage stocks are relatively more affected by sentiment changes. At
the end of the section, we briefly consider effects on the aggregate market.

Defining Speculative, Difficult-to-arbitrage Stocks
To study the differential effects of investor sentiment across firms, we first need to settle
on a way of sorting stocks according to their speculative appeal and their difficulty of arbitrage.
A natural proxy for speculative appeal would be the dispersion of professional analysts’earnings
forecasts for that company, but such forecasts are not available for all stocks back to the mid1960s. A possible proxy for difficulty of arbitrage could be a direct measure of transaction costs
for given stocks, but those too are unavailable for a long time series.
We simply sort stocks according to their recent return volatility, specifically the standard
deviation of monthly returns over the prior year. Returns data are from the Center for Research
in Securities Prices (CRSP). High volatility is characteristic of stocks with strong speculative
appeal; low volatility is a bond-like feature. Moreover, highly volatile stocks are generally riskier
to arbitrage, so an arbitrageur with limited risk-bearing capacity will hesitate before making large
bets against mispricing. Each month, we place each stock into one of ten portfolios according to
the decile of their return volatility of the previous year, and we use the returns on the resulting
portfolios to represent the cross-section of stock returns. 8

8

Baker and Wurgler (2006) divide stocks in several other ways, including firm age, market capitalization, dividend
payment, and profitability. These are natural given an intuition that larger, older, dividend paying and profitable
firms tend to be more bond-like and generally easier to arbitrage. They also sort stocks on growth and distress
indicators such as the market-to-book equity ratio, asset growth, and sales growth. When sorted this way, bond-like
stocks now lie in the middle deciles while speculative stocks, whether due to their extreme growth potential or risk
of financial distress, are found at both extremes. These other sorting methods produce qualitatively similar results,
so we report results only for volatility portfolios here.

21

Sentiment Betas: Cross-Sectional Effects of Sentiment Changes
Figure 4 shows the relationship between sentiment changes and the returns on the ten
volatility portfolios. The dependent variable is the monthly return on one of the ten volatility
portfolios. For each one of these ten portfolios, we run three time-series regressions. In Panel A,
we plot the coefficients on the general or speculative mutual fund demand factors. In Panel B, we
plot the coefficients on the sentiment changes index. Each of the regressions also includes the
value-weighted market return as a control variable, because high volatility stocks are likely to
have higher market betas, an effect that we do not want to contaminate the sentiment betas.
The results are as expected. The effect of general demand for stock funds on monthly
returns is higher for higher volatility portfolios, presumably because stocks therein are harder to
arbitrage. In addition, the effect of speculative demand is also increasing, presumably reflecting
the more speculative nature of volatile stocks. The convex pattern in the coefficients is
intriguing—stocks in the extreme volatility decile, which are often small, rapidly growing, or in
financial distress, are disproportionately more sensitive to both components of fund flows.
Sentiment betas also increase as stocks become more speculative and harder to arbitrage. 9
The figure shows that controlling for market returns, a one-standard-deviation increase in the
sentiment changes index increases returns on the eighth volatility decile portfolio, for example,
by about one percentage point. The effect on the tenth decile portfolio is over two percentage
points. For particularly bond-like stocks, on the other hand, the effect is slightly negative. This is
consistent with the most bond-like stocks actually having slightly negative sentiment betas, i.e.
as conjectured in Figure 1. Once again, there is a convex pattern in the sentiment betas.

9

See Glushkov (2005) for sentiment betas for portfolios sorted on other characteristics as well (as opposed to only
volatility). All of his results are closely consistent with the argument that hard to arbitrage and value stocks are more
sensitive to sentiment.

22

Although these results are all highly consistent with the seesaw diagram, there are other
interpretations. For example, perhaps speculative flows are highly correlated with the returns of
speculative stocks simply because mutual fund investors chase returns, not because their trading
has any causal effect on its own. Or, the sentiment changes index may include components, such
as the dividend premium, which lead to mechanical differences in the correlations between
sentiment changes and different stocks (e.g., dividend paying and nonpaying stocks). 10 Or, the
sentiment index may, despite our best efforts, be contaminated by economic fundamentals,
which should of course affect returns independently. The fact that sentiment actually helps to
predict returns, as we illustrate below, suggests that these considerations cannot fully account for
the patterns in Figure 4.

Aggregate Effects
Although our main focus is on cross-sectional differences, a positive correlation will exist
between aggregate market returns and sentiment changes if the average stock is affected by
sentiment. Indeed, the correlation between an equal-weighted market return index and the
sentiment changes index is a highly significant 0.43. The correlation between equal-weighted
returns and speculative demand estimated from fund flows is 0.26, and the correlation between
equal-weighted returns and general demand from fund flows is 0.48. Using capitalizationweighted market returns, which give more weight to large firms, the respective correlations are
0.32, 0.29, and 0.39, again all highly significant.

10

Excluding any particular component from the sentiment indexes, including the dividend premium, does not alter
our conclusions.

23

Using Sentiment to Predict Stock Returns

We have perhaps saved the best for last. The strongest tests of the effects of sentiment
involve return predictability. If high sentiment indeed causes overvaluation, we may be able to
document low future returns on sentiment-prone stocks as sentiment wanes and fundamentals are
revealed. But predictability is not a natural implication of, for example, the skeptical view that
the correlation between returns and sentiment arises because the latter is contaminated by
fundamentals, for example.

Cross-sectional Predictability
To test these ideas further, we create an empirical version of the sentiment seesaw and
compare it to the predictions in Figure 1. We use the same volatility-based characterization of
stocks to identify those that are speculative and difficult to arbitrage. Next, we split the time
series into high- and low- sentiment periods using the previous month’s measure of the sentiment
level. Finally, we compute average returns for each of the ten volatility portfolios, for the two
separate periods and overall. As with the calculation of sentiment betas, we control for the valueweighted market return.
The resulting picture, in Figure 5, is strikingly similar to the predictions of the seesaw
diagram. When sentiment is low, the average future returns of speculative stocks exceed those of
bond-like stocks. When sentiment is high, the average future returns of speculative stocks are on
average lower than the returns of bond-like stocks. This is a telling pattern—the fact that riskier
stocks (at least, stocks that are riskier by all outward appearances) sometimes have lower

24

expected returns is inconsistent with classical asset pricing in which investors bear risk because
they are compensated by higher expected return.
The unconditional average returns are slightly lower for speculative stocks, consistent
with behavioral models of disagreement among investors combined with short-sales constraints
such Hong and Stein (2003) and others they discuss in this volume. The market-adjusted returns
are on average positive because of the well-known size effect—in January, small capitalization
stocks earn high returns, on average—which increases the average return of our equallyweighted portfolios. Controlling for equal-weighted market returns instead of value-weighted
returns shifts the market-adjusted returns down across all ten portfolios, but the overall similarity
to Figure 1 remains intact.

Aggregate Predictability
When sentiment is high, subsequent market returns are low. Figure 6 shows that when the
sentiment level is more than one standard deviation above its historical average, monthly returns
average -0.34 percentage points for value-weighted market index returns and -0.41 percentage
points for equal-weighted returns. And when the investor sentiment level is very low, for
example more than one standard deviation below its historical average, monthly returns average
1.18 and 2.75 percentage points for value- and equal-weighted indexes, respectively. 11
Therefore, just as the correlation between sentiment changes and returns is higher for an equalweighted index of returns, so is the correlation between sentiment levels and subsequent equal-

11

Figure 6 breaks the historical time series into four sentiment states, while Figure 5 conditions breaks it into only
two. We made the latter choice to allow for an easier comparison to the seesaw diagram. If Figure 5 were to display
results for four sentiment states, it would display all of the expected patterns, e.g. when sentiment is very high, the
highest-volatility stocks subsequently earn particularly low returns, and so on.

25

weighted stock returns. The gap between equal-weighted and value-weighted market returns
again demonstrates that the impact of sentiment is stronger on small stocks, as predicted.
While Figure 6 indicates economically important gaps, the statistical significance is
modest, as is the case with other non-sentiment predictors of aggregate returns such as the
dividend-price ratio. Put another way, market crashes tend to occur in high sentiment periods,
but the timing of the crashes within these periods is very hard to predict.

Conclusion

This paper takes a “top down” approach to behavioral finance and the stock market,
whereby we take the origin of investor sentiment as exogenous and instead focus on its empirical
effects. We show that it is quite possible to measure investor sentiment, and that waves of
sentiment have clearly discernible, important, and regular effects on individual firms and on the
stock market as a whole. In particular, stocks that are difficult to arbitrage or to value are most
affected by sentiment. The seesaw diagram in Figure 1 summarizes our approach.
Looking forward, the investor sentiment approach faces a number of challenges:
characterizing and measuring uninformed demand or investor sentiment; understanding the
foundations and variation in investor sentiment over time; and determining which particular
stocks attract speculators or have limited arbitrage potential. Much remains to be done in terms
of spelling out this framework, but the potential payoffs of an improved understanding of
investor sentiment are substantial. For example, the standard methodology for estimating
fundamental market betas, an input to long-term capital budgeting and other important financial

26

decisions, does not account for sentiment; doing so might improve estimates and clarify their
interpretation. Finally, we have seen that sentiment affects the cost of capital. Therefore it may
have real consequences for the allocation of corporate investment capital across safer and more
speculative firms.

27

Acknowledgements

We thank Xavier Gabaix, Robin Greenwood, Jim Hines, Stefan Nagel, Ronnie Sadka, Andrei
Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, and Michael Waldmann for very helpful comments. We thank the
Investment Company Institute for data on mutual fund flows. Baker gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School.

28

References
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeremy Stein, 2004, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, Journal of
Financial Markets 7, 271-299.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004a, A catering theory of dividends, Journal of Finance
59, 1125-1165.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004b, Appearing and disappearing dividends: The link to
catering incentives, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 271-288.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.
Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, 2003, Systematic noise, Unversity of California at
Davis working paper.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics
68, 161-199.
Brown, John Dennis, 1991, 101 Years on Wall Street, Prentice Hall.
Brown, Gregory W., and Michael T. Cliff, 2004, Investor sentiment and the near-term stock
market, Journal of Empirical Finance 11, 1-27.
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, Takato Hiraki, Noriyoshi Shiraishi, and Masahiro
Watanabe, 2005, Investor sentiment in Japanese and U.S. daily mutual fund flows, New
York University working paper.
D’Avolio, Gene, 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
271-306.
Dreman, David, 1979, Contrarian Investment Strategy, Dreman Contrarian Group.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subramanyam. 1998, Investor psychology and
security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839-85.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990,
Noise trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98:4, 703-738.
Edmans, Alex, Diego Garcia, and Oyvind Norli, 2006, Sports sentiment and stock returns,
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Permanent and termporary components of stock
prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246-73.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-44.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2004, The capital asset pricing model: Theory and
evidence, Journal of Economic Perspectives 18:3, 25-46.
Glushkov, Denys, 2005, Sentiment betas, University of Texas working paper.
Graham, Benjamin, 1973, The Intelligent Investor, 4th ed., Harper & Row.
Greenwood, Robin, and Stefan Nagel, 2006, Inexperienced investors and bubbles, Harvard
University working paper.

29

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy Stein, 2003, Differences of opinion, short-sales constraints and
market crashes, Review of Financial Studies 16, 487-525.
Kamstra, Mark J., Lisa A. Kramer, and Maurice D. Levi, 2003, Winter blues: Seasonal Affective
Disorder (SAD) and stock market returns, American Economic Review 92, 1257-63.
Kumar, Alok, and Charles Lee, 2006, Retail investor sentiment and return comovement, Journal
of Finance, forthcoming.
Lee, Charles, Andrei Shleifer and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, Investor Sentiment and the
Closed-End Fund Puzzle, Journal of Finance, 46, 75-109.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, Vikram Nanda and Rajdeep Singh, 2006, Hot markets, investor
sentiment, and IPO pricing, Journal of Business, forthcoming.
Malkiel, Burton, 1999, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, W.W. Norton.
Neal, Robert and Simon M. Wheatley, (1998), Do Measures of Investor Sentiment Predict
Returns?, Journal of Financial & Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 33, Issue 4, 523-548.
Perold, Andre F., 2004, The capital asset pricing model, Journal of Economic Perspectives 18:3,
3-24.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111, 1135-51.
Poterba, James M., and Lawrench H. Summers, 1988, Mean reversion in stock prices: Evidence
and implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.
Ritter, Jay, 1984, The 'hot issue' market of 1980, The Journal of Business 57, 215-40.
Ritter, Jay, 2003, Investment banking and securities issuance, in Constantinides, George, Milton
Harris, and Rene Stulz, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier
Science.
Scheinkman, Jose, and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
Political Economy 111, 1183-1219.
Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1998, Investment Intelligence from Insider Trading, (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press).
Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.
Warther, Vincent A., 1995, Aggregate mutual fund flows and security returns, Journal of
Financial Economics 39, 209-235.
Whaley, Robert E., 2000, The investor fear gauge, Journal of Portfolio Management, Vol.
26, Issue 3.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Katia Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for
stocks?, Journal of Business 75, 583-608.
Zweig, Martin E., 1973, An investor expectations stock price predictive model using closed-end
fund premiums, Journal of Finance 28, 67-87.

30

Figure 1. Cross-sectional effects of investor sentiment. Stocks that are speculative and difficult to value and
arbitrage will have higher relative valuations when sentiment is high.
0.04

0.04

High Sentiment

0.03

Overall
P*
0.02

0.02

0.01

Low Sentiment

0.01

Speculative,
Difficult to
Arbitrage

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

0.00

Safe, Easy to
Arbitrage

Valuation Level

0.03

Figure 2. A sentiment index, January 1966 through December 2005. The first principal component of levels and
changes in six measures of sentiment: the closed-end fund discount (CEFD), detrended log turnover (TURN), the
number of IPOs (NIPO), the first-day return on IPOs (RIPO), the dividend premium (PDND), and the equity share
in new issues (S), each standardized and with the effect of macroeconomic conditions removed. In the levels index,
turnover, the first-day return on IPOs, and the dividend premium are lagged 12 months. Both indices are
standardized to have zero mean and unit variance over the 40 year period.
Panel A. Index of sentiment levels

SENT = −0.23CEFD + 0.23TURN + 0.24 NIPO + 0.29RIPO − 0.32PDND + 0.23S
4

Investor Sentiment Index

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3
1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

Panel B. Index of sentiment changes

ΔSENT = −0.17ΔCEFD + 0.32ΔTURN + 0.17ΔNIPO + 0.41ΔRIPO − 0.49ΔPDND − 0.28ΔS
4

Investor Sentiment Changes Index

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

Figure 3. Principal components of equity mutual fund flow changes, January 1990 through December 2005.
The contribution of a one standard deviation change in each equity-oriented mutual fund category to the first two
principal components of changes in mutual fund flows, which we label general and speculative demand components.
Each bar shows the impact of a one standard deviation change in mutual fund flow. For example, a one standard
deviation change in flows into Aggressive Growth funds increases the first principal component by 0.23 and the
second principal component by 0.29. Flows are net sales minus redemptions by category, scaled by total mutual
fund assets across categories.
Panel A. Generic demand: The first principal component of flow changes
0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

Income Equity

Income Mixed

Asset Allocation

Income Equity

Asset Allocation

Income Mixed

Sector

Growth and Income

Balanced

Growth

0.00

Aggressive Growth

0.05

Panel B. Speculative demand: The second principal component of flow changes
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
-0.10
-0.20
-0.30
-0.40

Balanced

Growth and Income

Sector

Aggressive Growth

-0.60

Growth

-0.50

Figure 4. The sensitivity of stock returns to investor sentiment. The monthly returns of volatility sorted
portfolios are regressed on general and speculative demand components of mutual fund flow changes (Panel A) and
the index of sentiment changes (Panel B). The coefficients, or sentiment betas, show the effect of a one standard
deviation difference in the sentiment measure on average returns in percentage points. The regressions control for
the value-weighted stock market return.
Panel A. Mutual fund flow betas
2.5

General Demand

Sentiment Beta

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5

Speculative Demand
Speculative,
Difficult to
Arbitrage

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

Safe, Easy to
Arbitrage

-1.0

Panel B. Sentiment index betas
2.5

Investor Sentiment

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Speculative,
Difficult to
Arbitrage

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

-0.5
Safe, Easy to
Arbitrage

Sentiment Beta

2.0

Figure 5. Sentiment and future returns. Average monthly returns over the value-weighted market index for
volatility sorted portfolios following a month with a positive sentiment level (short dash); a negative level (long
dash); and the overall average market-adjusted return. The latter are positive because of the small firm effect over
this period: the volatility portfolios are equal weighted while the market index is value weighted.

1.2
1.0
Low Sentiment in the
Previous Month

0.6
0.4
Overall

0.2
0.0
-0.2

High Sentiment in the
Previous Month

-0.4
-0.6

Speculative,
Difficult to
Arbitrage

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

-0.8
Safe, Easy to
Arbitrage

Average Monthly Return

0.8

Figure 6. Sentiment and market returns. Average monthly returns in percentage points on the equal- and valueweighted market portfolios. The sample is divided into four groups according to the sentiment level in the preceding
month.

3.0

2.5

Average Monthly Return

2.0

1.5

Equal Weighted
Value Weighted

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0
More Than One SD Below Between One SD Below
Average
Average and Average

Between Average and More Than One SD Above
One SD Above Average
Average

Investor Sentiment in the Preceding Month

