                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        LATIN AMERICA'S ACCESS TO INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MARKETS:
                  GOOD BEHAVIOR OR GLOBAL LIQUIDITY?

                                             Ana Fostel
                                      Graciela Laura Kaminsky

                                        Working Paper 13194
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13194


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




This paper was written for the Tenth Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile: Current Account
and External Financing, (Santiago, Chile), November 9-10, 2006. We thank Luis Catão, Juan Escrivá,
Norman Loayza, Rodrigo Valdés, and participants at the Conference organized by the Central Bank
of Chile for helpful comments. We also thank Pablo Vega-García for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Ana Fostel and Graciela Laura Kaminsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Latin America's Access to International Capital Markets:Good Behavior or Global Liquidity?
Ana Fostel and Graciela Laura Kaminsky
NBER Working Paper No. 13194
June 2007
JEL No. F3,F30,F32,F34,F36

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines Latin America's access to international capital markets from 1980 to 2005, with
particular attention to the role of domestic and external factors. To capture access to international markets,
we use primary gross issuance in international bond, equity, and syndicated-loan markets. Using panel
estimation, we find that sound fundamentals matter. For example, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile's superb
performance in capital markets during the early 1990s has been in large part driven by better fundamentals.
However, the upsurge in international lending to Latin America starting in 2003 has been mainly driven
by a dramatic increase in global liquidity.

Ana Fostel
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Old Main, Suite 226
1922 F Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052
afostel@gwu.edu

Graciela Laura Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
I. Introduction

       Latin America has had an active presence in international markets since independence in
the early 19th century.        Participation has been quite volatile though.     In the early 1800s,
international borrowing financed the wars of independence. But the boom that started in 1822
with a loan to Colombia ended in 1826 with Peru's default. Other periods of marked expansion
in international borrowing occurred in 1867-1872, 1893-1913, and 1920-1929. As in the 1820s,
most of these episodes ended with defaults.            In the aftermath of the crisis of the 1930s,
international capital markets all but disappeared, with Latin America becoming unable to borrow
again. Only by the 1970s, did Latin America start to participate once more in international
capital markets, with capital inflows reaching 51 billion dollars in 1981. However, when Mexico
defaulted in 1982, all Latin American countries lost access to international capital markets. The
Brady debt-relief program in 1989 allowed Latin America to tap international capital markets
again, with capital flows surging once more and reaching 112 billion dollars in 1997. But again
the boom turned into a bust in the late 1990s following the Russian default, with net capital
inflows turning into net outflows in the early 2000s.           Interestingly, and in contrast to the
prolonged inability to access international capital markets following the Debt crisis in 1982,
many Latin American countries started borrowing again in international markets within four
years of the Russian crisis.
       The boom-bust pattern in Latin America’s participation in international capital markets
raises the question of whether it is just erratic international capital markets or whether, in fact,
the volatile nature of the Latin American economies is at the heart of the problem. This is the
question we plan to answer in this paper. Previous research on this topic has focused on the
behavior of net capital flows. We argue in this paper that this is not a good indicator of access to
international capital markets.      While zero net capital inflows may reflect no international
financial integration, they may also reflect complete integration with international diversification
in which inflows are just offset by outflows.          Instead, we focus our analysis on international
primary gross issuance.
       We cast our net wide and collect issuance data for twenty Latin American countries. The
data collected paints a picture of three typical economies. The first group includes countries with
active participation in international capital markets. This group includes Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela.           The second typical economy is one with more


                                                   1
limited access to international capital markets.     This group includes Bolivia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay.
Finally, the third typical economy is one with no participation in international markets. This last
group includes Haiti, Nicaragua, and Paraguay, with no international issuance in bond, equity or
syndicated-loan markets. Since only the first group has participated almost intermittently in
international capital markets, we focus our attention in these six countries and examine whether
good country behavior or global liquidity is at the heart of the ins and outs of international
markets.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the behavior of the
trade account and the patterns of financing in high, medium, and low income countries. We pay
particular attention to the evolution of transfers as well as official and private capital flows.
Section III presents our new dataset of gross issuance in three international capital markets:
bonds, equities, and syndicated loans for the twenty countries in Latin America.       Section IV
examines in more detail the evolution of international gross issuance by Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela. Using panel estimation techniques, we examine the role of
domestic fundamentals and external factors. Section V concludes.

II. The Current Account and Net Capital Flows

       We first examine the evolution of net capital inflows and the current account since 1970.
Figure 1 shows total capital flows as well as official capital flows to Latin America, with the
difference between the two capturing private capital flows. As shown in this figure, on average
most of the capital flows to Latin America have been of a private nature, peaking at 45 billion
dollars in 1981 and at 105 billion dollars in 1997. The cycles in international capital flows have
become more pronounced in later periods. During the first capital-inflow episode, total capital
flows increased about 13 times, from about 4 billion dollars in 1970 to 51 billion dollars in 1981.
In the 1990s, total capital inflows increased about 22 times from about 5 billion dollars in 1983
to 112 billion dollars in 1997. Reversals also became more pronounced in the 1990s. While in
the 1980s the reversal reached 90 percent, in the 1990s the reversal was somewhat more
substantial as capital inflows turned into outflows. In this case, the reversal peaked at 102
percent. Importantly, both private and official capital flows cycles have been quite pronounced.
Official capital inflows increased to 14 billion dollars in 1983 from about 1 billion dollars in
1972 to dry out later in the 1980s, with official capital inflows turning into a 4-billion-dollar


                                                2
outflow in 1990.        During the 1990s, the behavior of total official flows to Latin America was
more irregular, in part due to the bailout packages to the larger economies in the region.1
         Figure 2 shows the average behavior of the current account (as a percent of GDP) for the
twenty countries in our sample. As in the case of capital flows, the current account shows
clearly pronounced cycles, with the late 1970s-beginning of the 1980s and the mid-1990s being
high-deficit episodes. However, unlike the behavior of capital flows, the boom-bust pattern in
current account deficits became less pronounced in the latter period. As shown in Figure 2, the
earlier 1980s showed the highest deficits, peaking at about 8 percent of GDP in 1981, while the
deficits in the mid-1990s just peaked at about 5 percent of GDP.                        The different boom-bust
pattern in the current account and capital flows underlies an important difference between the
two episodes of capital inflows. During the 1978-1981 capital-inflow episode, capital flows
financed mostly current account deficits, with the average reserve accumulation only peaking at
1.5 percent of GDP in 1979. In contrast, during the 1990-1997 episode, capital flows financed a
higher level of reserves accumulation. This time, reserves accumulation increased up to 2.1
percent of GDP in 1997.2
         Table 1 provides a higher resolution picture of the current account behavior of Latin
American countries. This table presents descriptive statistics for the current account for the
twenty countries in our sample. The table reports the mean, standard deviation, maximum and
minimum values for the current account from 1970 to 2005. This table provides a good picture
of the heterogeneity of the countries in the sample and over time. First, on average the current
account has oscillated in these countries from a deficit of 15 percent of GDP for Nicaragua to a
surplus of 4 percent of GDP for Venezuela. Nicaragua records the highest volatility in current
account balances over the sample, from a maximum of 26 to a minimum of -37 percent of GDP.
The current account of Venezuela is also quite volatile, oscillating between a maximum of 23 to
a minimum -12 percent of GDP. While still volatile, the richer countries in our sample show
smaller fluctuations over time.
         Tables 2-3 show the evolution of the current account and financial account behavior over

1
 For example, Argentina received 11 billion dollars of official capital flows in 2001 (about 40 percent of all official
capital flows to Latin America) and Brazil received 11 billion in 1998 (about 90 percent of all official flows to Latin
America) and 12 billion in 2002 (about 60 percent of all official flows to Latin America).
2
 On average, reserves accumulation during the 1978-1981 episode was 0.6 percent of GDP while during the 1990-
1997 episode, it increased to 1.1 percent of GDP. See also, Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1994)



                                                          3
the boom-bust cycles in international capital flows. To capture the heterogeneity in our sample
of twenty countries, we divide our sample in three groups according to income per capita.3 The
high-income group consists of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Uruguay. This
is also the group that has had more frequent access to international capital markets.                      The
medium-income group consists of Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela. Lastly, the low-income group consists of Bolivia, Guatemala,
Ecuador, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, and Nicaragua, with far less ability to tap international
capital markets. We also identify the episodes of booms and busts in capital flows. According
to the data shown in Figure 1, we identify two episodes of booms in capital inflows: 1976-1981
and 1990-1998. The episodes of 1971-75, 1982-1989, and 1999-2005 are identified as episodes
with less access to international capital markets.
        Table 2 shows the total current account and its components: the balance of goods and
services, net income, and transfers (private and public). It is important to point out some of the
regularities shown in this table. First, low-income countries have larger current account deficits,
on average about 4 percent of GDP. Current account deficits are just about 3 percent of GDP in
high-income and medium-income countries. Second, current account deficits in all groups are
the highest during the episode of high capital inflows during 1976-1981. Third, the large trade
imbalances in low income countries starting in 1990s are financed by sharp increases in private
transfers (workers remittances) and also by somewhat higher official transfers.
        Table 3 shows the financing of the current account. For reference purposes, the second
column of this table shows total transfers. This table brings attention to the heterogeneity across
Latin America countries with respect to the financing of the current account. First, net capital
flows are the largest for low income countries, about 5 percent of GDP since 1970, while they
average about 3 percent of GDP for high- and medium-income countries.                            Second, the
composition of capital flows is quite different across the three groups. Private capital flows to
high-income countries are about 75 percent of total flows. In contrast, the share of private
capital flows to medium- and low-income countries oscillates around 50 percent, suggesting that
it would be important to examine the behavior of official capital flows to these last two groups of

3
  The sample is divided according to the 2005 Gross National Income per capita (at PPP values) in dollars. High-
income countries include all countries with income per capita higher than 8000 dollars. Medium-income countries
are those countries with income per capita between 8000 and 5000 dollars. The Low-income group includes
countries with income per capita lower than 5000 dollars.



                                                       4
countries. In particular, it would be important to examine whether official capital flows to each
country tend to counterbalance the gyrations of international private capital markets, providing
more official funding in times of illiquid markets or whether they amplify the boom-bust pattern
of private capital flows.

III. International Gross Issuance

        The evidence provided by net capital inflows presents an incomplete picture of access to
international capital markets.         While zero net capital inflows may reflect no access to
international capital markets, they may also reflect complete integration with international
diversification in which inflows are just offset by outflows. The growth in the size and
complexity of international financial markets in the last decade has redirected economists'
attention to gross issuance in order to understand international balance sheets. For instance,
Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2006) have defined financial globalization as “the accumulation of
larger stocks of gross foreign assets and liabilities.” Following this approach and to have a better
grasp of financial integration, we look at gross issuance in three international markets: bonds,
equities, and syndicated-loan markets from 1980 to 2005. The data we use is obtained by
Dealogic, which compiles information on issuance (at the security level) in international bond,
equity, and syndicated loan markets. The database starts in 1980 (1983 for equity issuance).
        Figure 3 shows Latin America’s gross international issuance in the three markets.
Issuance in the international bond market includes Euro market offerings,4 global bonds,5 and
foreign offerings.6 International equity issuance includes issuance of common or preferred
equity in the international market, issuance targeted at a particular foreign market, and registered
stocks traded on foreign markets as domestic instruments (for example, American Depository
Receipts (ADRs)). Finally, international gross issuance in the syndicated-loan market includes
all the loans granted by two or more financial institutions with the nationality of at least one of


4
  Eurobonds are bonds issued and sold outside the country of the currency in which they are denominated, for
example, dollar-denominated bonds issued in Europe or Asia.
5
 Global bonds are single offerings structured to allow simultaneous placement in major markets: Europe, U.S., and
Asia.
6
  Foreign bonds are bonds issued by firms and governments outside of the issuers’ country, usually denominated in
the currency of the country in which they are issued. For example, Samurai bonds are yen-denominated bonds
issued in Tokyo by a non-Japanese company. Similarly, Yankee bonds are bonds denominated in U.S. dollars and
issued in the United States by foreign banks and corporations.



                                                       5
the syndicate banks being different from that of the borrower.7 As shown in this figure, during
the first international-capital-inflow-episode, access to the international capital market took the
form of syndicated-bank loans. Gross issuance in this market peaked at 37 billion dollars in
1981 but basically disappeared in the mid-1980s following the 1982 Debt Crisis. By 1986, Latin
American total gross issuance in international capital markets was just 5 percent of the issuance
in 1981.
         By the end of the 1980s, the Brady Plan ended with the isolation of developing countries
from international capital markets. First, this plan provided debt relief to emerging markets.
Second, it also created almost overnight a market for sovereign emerging market bonds with its
initiative to restructure defaulted loans into bonds collateralized by U.S. Treasury Bonds.8 As
investor confidence in emerging-market countries started to recover gradually, both the
government and the private sector started issuing bonds in international capital markets, with the
bond issuance by Latin American countries increasing from 1 billion dollars in 1990 to 53 billion
dollars in 1997. The Brady plan, with its initiative of restructuring distressed commercial bank
loans,9 also provided a new impetus to the syndicated loan market, with issuance rapidly
climbing to 54 billion in 1997. A new feature of financial integration in the 1990s was the
forceful development of an international equity market.                     In this decade, Latin American
corporations not only started to raise capital in the highly unregulated international bond and
syndicated loan markets, but also started to participate in regulated equity markets in various
financial centers. Many firms started to raise capital in the United States through the creation of
American Depository Receipt Programs, with ADRs being traded on US stock markets in lieu of
the foreign shares.10 Since 1990, Latin American international equity issuance averaged 3 billion



7
  The facilities included in our data consist of term loans, revolving credits, co-financing facilities, export credit
bridge facilities, construction loans, mezzanine loans, or multiple options facilities.
8
  Most of the bonds had the principal collateralized by especially issued U.S. Treasury 30-year zero-coupon bonds
purchased by the debtor country using funding from IMF, the World Bank, and the countries’ own foreign exchange
reserves. Interest payments on Brady bonds were in some cases also guaranteed by securities of at least double-A
rated credit quality held with the New York Federal Reserve Bank.
9
  With the Brady Plan, commercial banks were allowed to exchange their claims on developing countries into
tradable instruments, eliminating the debt from their balance sheets.
10
    See de La Torre and Schmukler (2004) for an excellent description of Latin America’s participation in
international capital markets.



                                                          6
dollars.11
         The crises in Asia and Russia in the late 1998s triggered a reversal in capital flows. This
time around, however, the reversal in gross issuance was less pronounced than that following the
1982 Debt Crisis. At that time, Latin America’s gross issuance in international markets crashed
to about 4 percent of the levels attained in the early 1980s. In contrast, in the late 1990s, total
issuance declined only to about 40 percent of its peak in 1997, suggesting a more continuous
access to international capital markets.12
         Tables 4 and 5 focus on access to international capital markets by the public and the
private sector. Table 4 reports the number of issues and Table 5 reports the value of total
issuance. There are some interesting features worth examining in these two tables. First, as
shown in Table 4, during the 1980s most of the issues were public issues, with most loans being
issued by either the central government or public firms. In this episode, about 65 percent of the
issues were public issues.           In contrast, since 1990, private corporations start issuing in
international capital markets, with private issues reaching on average 75 percent of total issues.
As shown in Table 5, in value terms, public issuance amounted to 75 percent during the 1980s
and only 50 percent since 1990.               Second, while private corporations have entered more
massively in international capital markets, private access to international capital markets has
experienced a more pronounced boom-bust behavior than the public sector.                             For example,
following the booms in the 1990s, total issuance collapsed from 113 billion dollars in 1997 to 40
billion dollars in 2002 (35 percent of the peak), but private issuance fell from 65 billion dollars to
18 billion dollars (28 percent of the peak).
         Figures 4 and 5 look at this data at the country level. Figure 4 reports number of issues
and Figure 5 reports total value of gross issuance. Three of the countries in the sample, Haiti,
Nicaragua, and Paraguay have not participated in these markets, so they are not included. We
can divide all the issuing countries into two groups. The first group includes Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela with 1043, 1903, 535, 358, 1522, and 486 issues,


11
  The magnitude of equity issues is not directly comparable to the magnitude of debt issues because, unlike equity,
bonds and loans have finite maturities. Firms typically roll over bonds and loans at maturity, and hence a part of the
debt issues go towards refinancing old debt and only the remaining part is new capital.
12
   The evidence from gross issuance stands in stark contrast with the evidence from net capital flows. While gross
issuance data suggests continuous access to international capital markets, that of capital flows indicates complete
loss of access to international capital markets following the Russian crisis as discussed in Section II.



                                                          7
respectively.    The second group comprises Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Panama, Peru and Uruguay with less than 200 issues
each. While the first group participates frequently (although with several interruptions) in
international capital markets, the second group has only started to participate somewhat more
frequently in the last ten years. Interestingly, even low income countries such as Guatemala and
Honduras have issued international bonds in the last 10 years. In the next section, we use panel
estimation to identify the fundamentals that affect international issuance.

IV. Good Behavior or Global Liquidity?

       The goal of this section is to understand the role of domestic factors (“good behavior”)
and external factors (“global liquidity”) on the ability of Latin American countries to access
international capital markets.
       Traditionally, capital flows to emerging markets are explained by stressing the demand
side (of funds), i.e., by showing how domestic fundamentals are responsible for the direction of
these flows. For example, the three generations of models of currency crises explain the reversal
in capital flows by pinpointing to fiscal and monetary causes (Krugman, 1979), to
unemployment and overall loss of competitiveness (Obstfeld, 1994), and to banking fragility and
overall excesses in financial markets (Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999, and Chang and Velasco,
2000). More recently, the economics profession has started to pay attention to global factors.
The focus of this new literature is on financial centers and how shocks in mature economies are
transmitted to emerging economies.           Examples of this supply (of funds) approach include
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2002), Calvo (1999), Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejía (2004), and
Fostel (2005).
       We incorporate this literature in the following simple model of supply and demand of
financial funds to emerging economies.

                         S = f (r , r *,θ *, l *, crises*, y, tot , mp , pr , op)
                                                                                                  (1)
                         D = g (r , op, σ , y, tot )

where the * identifies world fundamentals, r is the country return, r* is the world interest rate,
θ * is investors’ risk aversion, l* is world liquidity, crises* indicates crises in other countries, y
is domestic output growth, tot is terms of trade, mp is domestic macroeconomic policy, pr is
domestic political risk, op is the degree of openness of the economy, and σ is the real exchange


                                                       8
rate volatility.
           The effect of shocks in world capital markets on the supply of funds to emerging
economies is quite intuitive. Low world interest rates lead to higher supply, assuming the
emerging-market assets and world (financial centers) assets are substitutes. Also, the supply of
risky emerging-market assets will be negatively related to investors’ risk aversion and positively
related to world liquidity. Finally, the contagion literature (see, for example, Kaminsky and
Reinhart, 2000) suggests that crises may spread rapidly, affecting the ability of emerging markets
to access international capital markets, as investors rebalance their portfolio not only recalling
loans from crisis countries but also from other countries to which they have exposure.              The
literature on currency and sovereign debt crises suggests that certain fundamentals can be taken
as signals of reduced probability of a speculative attack or a default.13 High output growth or
better terms of trade signals better future repayment ability, macroeconomic policy stability
reduces the probability of crises, and low political risk indicates a low probability of default.    In
all cases, the supply of funds will increase. Finally, the more open the economy is, the more
integrated the country to international markets will be.             The costs of default in these
circumstances will increase, triggering a larger supply of world funds.
           On the demand side, the literature on currency mismatches (for example, Jeanne, 2003)
suggests that the more open the economy is, the higher its ability to generate foreign currency
denominated assets. With the likelihood of currency mismatches declining, demand for foreign
currency denominated liabilities will increase.        In contrast, currency mismatches will increase
when the volatility of the real exchange rate increases, making domestic firms less inclined to
borrow overseas.14 Finally, the effects of output growth and the terms of trade are ambiguous.
While higher output growth or better terms of trade could lead to more domestic savings,
crowding out the need of outside funding, it can also lead to a Fisherian motive for borrowing
today.
           In order to estimate the relative contribution of external and domestic factors, we solve
for the equilibrium in the system of equations described above to obtain a reduced form equation
that relates issuance with the rest of the variables. Hence, the equation to be estimated is


13
     See, for example, Bulow and Rogoff (1989).
14
     See also Catão, Fostel, and Kapur (2007).



                                                   9
                             Issuance / GDP = h(r *,θ *, l *, crises*, y, tot , mp , pr , op, σ )                    (2)

where the dependent variable is total issuance in international capital markets as a share of GDP
to control for country size.

A. Data

           As we just discussed, we use total gross international issuance as a percent of GDP15 to
capture Latin America’s access to international capital markets. Our focus is on Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela. The evolution of gross issuance is shown in
Figure 6. As examined in the previous section, these six countries have been the ones with most
access to international capital markets in Latin America.
           We capture the evolution of global liquidity/risk aversion with four indicators, shown in
Figure 7, and with an indicator of emerging market crises.
U.S. Real Interest Rate: We follow the literature and use the U.S. real interest rate to capture
the degree of liquidity of international capital markets.16 As shown in Figure 7, Latin America’s
loss of access to international capital markets in 1982 is clearly linked to the hike in U.S. real
interest rates. However, fluctuations in the world real interest rate cannot capture completely the
extent of liquidity in international capital markets. While the international capital market is quite
fragmented in the 1970s, during the 1990s it becomes quite developed with a dramatic increase
in the number of instruments offered. To capture this evolution, we construct three other
measures of liquidity.
World Issuance/World GDP: To capture liquidity in international capital markets, we use
world gross primary issuance in international capital markets as a share of world GDP.17 The
data on issuance (which includes bond, equity, and syndicated loans) is obtained from Dealogic.
As shown in Figure 7, world international issuance (as a share of world GDP) increased from 0.6
percent in 1980 to 8 percent in 2005. This dramatic increase in world liquidity is in large part the


15
   GDP is measured in dollars at PPP levels to avoid identifying the aftermath of large devaluation episodes as
periods with an increase in access to international capital markets.
16
   For example, Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993) link the evolution of foreign exchange reserves and the real
exchange rate of developing countries to fluctuations in the U.S. real interest rate and the U.S. output and find that
fluctuations in these indicators account for about 50 percent of the forecast error variance of official reserves and the
real exchange rate of ten Latin American countries.
17
     World Output is measured in dollars (based on PPP valuation of country GDP).



                                                          10
product of the collapse of the Bretton Woods System in 1973 and the capital account
liberalization process it triggered. With no need to defend the peg, countries can choose their
own monetary policy without the need to restrict capital mobility and thus a new era of financial
liberalization began.      As early as July 1973, the United States eliminated capital account
restrictions. The liberalization process also involved other industrial countries, with Germany
and Great Britain partially eliminating capital controls in 1973 and Japan joining the group in
1979. Latin American countries also opened their capital account in the mid 1970s, benefiting
from a large inflow of capital. Eventually, the debt crisis in 1982 closed this episode of financial
integration of Latin America for about a decade.                In the mid 1980s Latin America was
substituted by European countries in international capital markets as the wave of international
financial liberalization also embraced Western European countries as they moved towards the
European Monetary System.18 Financial integration was further energized in 1989 with the
Brady Plan and its initiative to restructure defaulted loans into bonds collateralized by U.S.
Treasuries. This program created, almost overnight, a market for sovereign emerging market
bonds. As investor confidence in emerging-market countries started to recover gradually, both
the government and the private sector started issuing bonds in international capital markets. This
time around, Asian countries joined Latin America and removed controls on capital mobility.19
Emerging markets’ issuance in international capital markets increased 8-fold from 42 billion
dollars in 1989 to about 350 billion in 1996.           While international capital markets suffered in
2001 with the worldwide crash in stock markets, they have recovered with total issuance
increasing to about 5 trillion dollars in 2005.
Term Premium: Liquidity in international capital markets can also be captured by the evolution
of investors’ term premium, which is estimated by the difference between the U.S. ten-year-note
yield minus the U.S. one-year Treasury Bill rate.
High Yield Spread: Investors’ risk aversion can also explain emerging markets issuance and
overall global liquidity. We will approximate this variable by the fluctuations in yields of risky
firms (relative to the yield on a safe asset). The indicator shown in Figure 7 is the yield spread


18
  World primary issuance in international capital markets increased more than 6-fold from 82 billion dollars in
1980 to 500 billion dollars in 1989.
19
   See Kaminsky and Schmukler (2003) for a chronology of financial liberalization in industrial and emerging
countries.



                                                      11
between U.S. high-yield bonds and the one-year U.S. Treasury Bill rate. This index is
constructed by Merril Lynch.20
Emerging Market Crises: Currency crises in emerging markets can trigger a liquidity crunch as
investors rebalance their portfolios by recalling loans from the crisis country but also from other
countries to which they have exposure. To evaluate whether Latin American issuance was
seriously disturbed by financial crises in other emerging markets, we include in our estimation an
indicator which takes the value of one during major currency crises, such as the Asian crisis in
1997 and the Russian crisis in 1998.21
          We now examine the indicators capturing domestic fundamentals.
Growth: As we discussed above, economic activity may signal stronger ability of future
repayment. Since GDP data is not available at the quarterly frequency, we use industrial
production from the International Financial Statistics (IFS) database.
Inflation: Macroeconomic stability may be at the heart of the countries’ ability to tap
international capital markets. The fiscal accounts certainly would provide an excellent indicator
of macroeconomic policy. Unfortunately, most countries in our sample do not have information
on the fiscal accounts on a quarterly basis. Similarly, market interest rates can help to identify
episodes of expansionary and contractionary monetary policy. Again, as with fiscal indicators,
market determined interest rates are not available for these countries because in the aftermath of
the debt crisis and until the early 1990s, all the countries in our sample had restrictions on
deposit and loan interest rates. Thus, to capture the stance of fiscal and monetary policies, we
use the consumer price index rate of inflation.
Openness: We calculate openness as the sum of exports and imports over GDP. The source is
quarterly data from the International Financial Statistics, IMF.
Political Risk: The quality of institutions, the extent of corruption, government’s ability to carry
out its declared programs, and its ability to stay in office may influence international issuance.
To capture this possibility, we use the Index of Political Risk published in the International
Country Risk Guide (ICRG). This is a composite index that assesses political stability and the

20
  Fostel (2005) studies the relationship between emerging market bond spreads and high-yield spreads in financial
centers. Her model explains why prices of risky assets in financial centers and in emerging economies move
together in the presence of liquidity constraints even when fundamentals in emerging countries and financial centers
are not correlated.
21
     See also Broner and Rigobon (2005).



                                                        12
quality of governance of the country. The political stability indicators provide rankings on
socioeconomic pressures at work in society that could constrain government action or fuel social
dissatisfaction, as well as rankings of domestic political violence or ethnic tensions.                  The
indicators on governance provide rankings on corruption within the political system as well as
assessments of the strength and impartiality of the legal system and of popular observance of the
law. There is also information on the institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy. A
country ranked in the 80-100 percent range is considered very low risk while a country ranked
below 50 percent is considered very high risk.
Real Exchange Rate Volatility: The real exchange is the effective real exchange rate from the
World Economic Outlook database. The volatility is measured by the standard deviation of the
real exchange rate (in logs). The standard deviation is computed over a moving window of eight
quarters.
Terms of Trade: To capture the ability to pay and thus access to international capital markets,
we also use data on terms of trade. Our data for terms of trade is obtained from the International
Financial Statistics, IMF.
Default: Some of the countries in the sample are in default during part of the period studied. To
capture the effect of default on the exclusion from international capital markets, we construct an
indicator that takes a value of one when the country is in default or arrears and zero otherwise.
The various episodes of default and arrears are taken from Catão, Fostel, and Kapur (2007).22

B. Estimation

        We estimate equation (2) using panel data models with fixed effects. Our data is sampled
at quarterly frequencies. The dependent variable, issuance/GDP, is shown in Figure 6. Issuance
includes bond, equity, and syndicated-loan issuance in international capital markets. To mitigate
potential endogeneity biases, some of the variables enter the regressions lagged one period. This
is the case of exchange rate volatility and inflation since capital inflows can create appreciation
and price movements via fluctuations in money supply. We also use openness lagged one period
since more issuance (especially trade credits) can also facilitate more trade. Since feedback from
issuance to political risk and output growth takes more than one period, we use current values of


22
   Default and arrears events in this study are based on Beim and Calomiris (2000), Lindert and Morton (1989),
Standard & Poor’s (2002), and events identified by the International Monetary Fund.



                                                     13
these variables as explanatory variables. Finally, since all the variables capturing external
factors are exogenous, we also use current values of these factors as explanatory variables in the
regressions.    In order to account for country-specific first-order auto-correlation and
heterocedasticity, we adjust standard errors using the Huber/White/Sandwich procedure.
        Table 6 reports the regression estimates for a variety of alternative specifications.
Regression I includes growth, inflation, political risk, real exchange volatility, the term premium,
and world issuance (as a percent of world GDP) as explanatory variables. All the variables have
the correct sign and, with the exception of inflation, they are significantly different from zero at
all conventional significance levels. Issuance increases with higher growth, better institutions (as
captured by a high political risk index), and higher world issuance. As expected, issuance
declines with higher real exchange rate volatility and higher term premium. Regression II adds a
control for the states of default. Increases in world liquidity will not affect the ability of the
country to borrow in international capital markets if the country is in default. That is why not
only do we include our measure of international liquidity as an explanatory variable but we also
interact international liquidity with the default index.     As expected, the variable that captures
the interaction effect between the default indicator and world issuance/world GDP has a negative
sign and it is significant at 1 percent confidence level. Regression III examines whether crises
are of the contagious nature. We find that major crises such as the 1997 Asian crisis and the
1998 Russian crisis have a negative (and significant) effect on Latin America issuance in
international capital markets. Regressions IV-VII include other controls, such as terms of trade,
the U.S. high yield spread, and the world real interest rate. As expected, higher international risk
aversion, as captured by the U.S. high yield spread, affects adversely Latin America’s issuance in
international capital markets. In contrast, the world real interest rate, captured by the U.S. real
interest rate, and the terms of trade do not have a significant effect on total issuance.
       Across all regressions, political risk is the domestic factor with the highest economic
significance. An increase in the index of about 20 points, which moves the median Latin
American country to the political standards of industrial countries, produces an increase in
issuance of about 1.2 percent of GDP. However, we think we should not interpret this variable
in a narrow way as an indicator of only “political institutions.” This index is highly correlated
with the economic and financial indices also published in the International Country Risk Guide,
suggesting that the fluctuations in the political risk index also encompasses information on a



                                                  14
broad range of economic and financial indicators. This may explain the lower significance of the
other domestic variables due to the presence of colinearity. The world factors with stronger
effect on the ability of Latin American countries to tap international markets are world liquidity,
as captured by world issuance/world GDP, and the term premium. A one-percentage point
increase in world issuance/world GDP or a similar decline in the term premium increases the
issuance by Latin American countries by 30 basis points of GDP.
        We should also mention that the model captures well the fluctuations in international
issuance with overall R 2 ranging between 0.50 and 0.60.                    Most of the explanatory power
originates from the time variation as captured by the R 2 within, which ranges from 0.48 to 0.57
while the R 2 between oscillates between 0.06 and 0.38.
        Figure 8 shows the actual dependent variable and the linear prediction of regression III
(our baseline regression from now on) including the fixed effects. Our model predicts well the
boom-bust pattern in international access of Latin American countries although it underpredicts
somewhat the boom in the mid-1990s.                   Also, with the exception of Colombia, our model
captures quite well the decline in issuance following the Russian crisis in 1998 and the recovery
in issuance starting in 2002.23
        To check for robustness of the results in regression III, we performed augmented Dickey-
Fuller unit root tests on the residuals, all of which rejected the null at the 10 percent significance
level. We also included quarter dummies to control for seasonality in issuance; all these variables
proved not significant. We also tested for dynamic effects by introducing various lags of all the
variables, but we found not significant effects. Finally, we tested for other non linearities, such
as interaction effects between the emerging market crisis indicator and the various indicators
capturing liquidity in international capital markets but they were not statistically significant.
        In light of the potential criticisms regarding the panel methodology itself, we estimated
all the regressions using two other methodologies. First, we used Pooled OLS estimation. The
results are shown in Table 7. The exercise proves robust to this specification. In this case, real
exchange rate volatility loses significance and inflation becomes more significant. But all

23
   Two countries in our sample do not participate in the recovery in international issuance starting in 2002. While
Argentina could not access international capital markets following the default in 2001, it is not clear why
Colombia’s issuance declined in the last three years of the sample. Interestingly, in those years, Colombia benefited
from a large increase in development assistance loans. These loans might have dramatically reduced its need to tap
international private capital markets.



                                                        15
variables still yield the right sign and significance consistent with the Fixed Effect estimation.
        Second, we estimated the regression using a censored Tobit model estimation procedure.
Unlike net issuance, gross issuance imposes a sign restriction on the dependent variable: issuance
cannot be negative. The results can be seen in Table 8. The results prove robust to the sign
constraint. All the variables yield coefficients with the right sign. All the most important
variables still prove significant.
        Now we resume our discussion about the relative importance of domestic and external
factors. In the context of this estimation, domestic factors include growth, inflation, openness,
political risk, real exchange rate volatility, terms of trade, and the interaction between world
issuance/world GDP with the default indicator. External factors include emerging market crises,
the high yield spread, the term premium, the U.S. real interest rate, and world issuance/world
GDP. Using the coefficients of regression III, we calculate the path of the domestic component
for each country and the evolution of the common external factor. They are shown in Figure 9.
A quick glance to this figure reveals two interesting patterns. First, countries differ greatly
regarding domestic characteristics. With the exception of Colombia, all the countries in our
sample show a strong improvement in domestic fundamentals in the early 1990s. But only Chile
shows continuous strong improvement in domestic performance in the late 1990s. While Brazil
and Mexico continue to show sound domestic fundamentals, improvement slows down in the late
1990s. Finally, Argentina and Venezuela quickly deteriorate in the latter part of the sample.
Second, the influence of the external factors has increased after the mid-1990s.
        We now study in more detail the relative contribution of the domestic and external factors
in the booms and busts in international issuance starting in 1990. We examine separately three
episodes: 1990-1998, 1999-2001, and 2002-2005. The first and the third episodes are periods of
a boom in international issuance, whereas the second one is an episode of pronounced decline in
issuance. Table 9 shows, for each country, the total predicted growth rate in issuance as well as
the growth rate of the domestic and external components.
        Interestingly, the boom of the early 1990s in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile is mostly
driven by superb domestic fundamentals. Domestic fundamentals have a less important role in
Mexico and Venezuela during this episode.           Finally, domestic fundamentals deteriorate in
Colombia, fueling a decline in international issuance during the early 1990s. In contrast, with
the exception of Argentina, the booms and bust in international issuance starting in 1999 are



                                                 16
driven mostly by external factors. This finding is consistent with other empirical studies that
focus on spreads instead of on issuance, suggesting that external factors are also very important
in determining emerging market spreads especially since 2002. To conclude, “good behavior”
seems to be at the core of the boom in Latin America’s participation in international capital
markets in the early 1990s, but the evidence from the later periods suggests that “global
liquidity” has played a more important role.

V. Conclusions

       We have studied the participation of the Latin American countries in international capital
markets using data for twenty countries for the period 1970-2005. We first looked at the main
stylized facts on net capital flows. Second, we turned our attention to data on gross issuance
since 1980. Much more analysis needs to be undertaken to refine our understanding of the links
between domestic economic conditions, global market liquidity, and access to international
capital markets. We have not even attempted to address in estimations the issue of access to
international markets of the less integrated group mostly because of the endemic data limitations.
With these considerations in mind, our main findings can be summarized as follows:
       Looking at gross issuance data may be a more accurate approach to study Latin
America's financial integration to world capital markets. As discussed above, whereas data on
net capital flows suggests a loss of market access after the Russian and Asian crises, data on
gross issuance paints a much less dark picture, suggesting an increase in globalization even in
times of lower global liquidity.
       Overall, the small economies of Latin America have basically not had access to
international capital markets, suggesting the presence of a size effect. There seems to be a
minimum required liquidity to attract international investors.
       For the larger economies of Latin America, the evidence in the 2000s suggests that the
boom-bust pattern in international issuance has been mainly driven by fluctuations in global
liquidity and investors’ changing risk behavior. This is specially the case in the resurgence of
international issuance since 2002.
       Still, good behavior matters. Argentina, Brazil, and Chile superb performance in capital
markets during the 1990's has been in large part driven by better fundamentals, from better
governance, to higher growth, and to macroeconomic stabilization. This is also the case for the
more moderate Mexican performance during the same period. Finally, Argentina’s dramatic fall


                                                17
in 1999-2001 can be explained by a pronounced deterioration in institutions and, most
importantly, by the sovereign default in 2001.




                                                 18
                                        References

Beim, David O., and Charles W. Calomiris, 2000, Emerging Financial Markets (New York:
      McGraw-Hill/Irwin).

Broner, Fernando and Roberto Rigobon, 2005. “Why Are Capital Flows so Much More Volatile
       in Emerging than in Developed Countries?” Central Bank of Chile, Working Paper No.
       328.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff, 1989, “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
      Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No.1, February, 155-178.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2002, “A Dual Liquidity Model of Emerging
       Markets,” American Economic Review, 2, May, 33-37.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, “Capital Inflows and Real
       Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors,” IMF Staff
       Papers, Vol. 40, No. 1, March, 108-151.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart, 1994, “Capital Inflows to Latin
       America: The 1970s and 1990s,” in Edmar Bacha, (ed) Economics in a Changing World,
       Vol. 4 Development, Trade and the Environment, (London: Macmillan Press), 123-148.

Calvo, Guillermo, 1999, “Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier,”
       mimeo, in http://www.bsos.umd.edu/econ/ciecrp8.pdf

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis Mejía, 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden
       Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Paper No. 10520.

Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco, 2000, “The Asian Financial Crisis in Perspective,” in
      Private Capital Flows in the Age of Globalization: The Aftermath of the Asian Crisis,
      New York: Edgar Publishers.

Catão, Luis, Ana Fostel, and Sandeep Kapur, 2006, “Persistent Gaps and Default Traps,” George
       Washington University, mimeo.

De la Torre, Augusto and Sergio Schmukler, 2004, “Whither Latin American Capital Markets?”
       Office of the Chief Economist Latin America and the Caribbean Region, The World
       Bank, October.

Fostel, Ana, 2005, “A Supply Story: Emerging Markets, High Yield and Market Closures,” Yale
        University. Ph.D. Dissertation.

Jeanne, Olivier, 2003, “Why Do Emerging Market Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?”
       IMF Working Paper

Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,”


                                             19
      Journal of International Economics, Vol. 51 No. 1, June, 145-168.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: Causes of Banking and
      Balance of Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89 Issue 3, June, 473-
      500.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmukler, 2003, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects
      of Liberalization on Financial Markets,” National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper No 9787, June.

Krugman Paul, 1979, “A Theory of Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and
     Banking, Vol. 11, 311-325.

Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2006. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
       Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” IMF
       Working Paper

Lindert, Peter and Peter Morton, 1989, “How Sovereign Debt Has Worked,” in Jeffrey Sachs
       (ed) Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance, (Chicago Press: National
       Bureau of Economic Research).

Obsfeld Maurice, 1994, “The Logic of Currency Crises,” Cahiers Economiques et Monetaires,
       No. 43.




                                            20
                                                   Figure 1
                               Net Capital Flows: Latin America, 1970-2005
                                            (Billions of Dollars)


  120



    80



    40



     0



   -40
         1970




                        1975




                                         1980




                                                     1985




                                                                    1990




                                                                                   1995




                                                                                                  2000




                                                                                                                  2005
Notes: Total capital flows is the sum of official and private capital flows to twenty Latin American countries:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
Source: World Economic Outlook Database, International Monetary Fund.



                Total Capital Flows
                Official Capital Flows
                                               Figure 2
                            The Current Account: Latin America, 1970-2005
                                         (in Percent of GDP)


   0

       1970




                     1975




                                    1980




                                                   1985




                                                                  1990




                                                                                 1995




                                                                                                2000




                                                                                                                2005
  -3




  -6




  -9



Notes: The CA/GDP ratio is the average for twenty Latin American countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile
Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
Source: World Economic Outlook Database, International Monetary Fund
                                                     Figure 3
                          Latin America Gross Issuance in International Capital Markets
                                              (Billions of Dollars)


  60


  50


  40


  30


  20


  10


    0
        1980


                   1982


                              1984


                                     1986


                                            1988


                                                   1990


                                                          1992


                                                                 1994


                                                                        1996


                                                                               1998


                                                                                      2000


                                                                                             2002


                                                                                                    2004
               bonds
               equity
               syndicated loans


Source: Dealogic
       0
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




           20
                                                       40
                                                                                     60
                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80




                                                                                                                                      120
                                                                                                                                            160
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          160
1980                                                                                                                                                        1980                                  1980
                                                                                                                 1980                                                                                                                                         1980

1982                                                                                                                                                        1982                                  1982
                                                                                                                 1982                                                                                                                                         1982

1984                                                                                                             1984                                       1984                                  1984                                                        1984

1986                                                                                                             1986                                       1986                                  1986                                                        1986

1988                                                                                                             1988                                       1988                                  1988                                                        1988

1990                                                                                                             1990                                       1990                                  1990                                                        1990

1992                                                                                                                                                        1992                                  1992




                                                                                                                                                  Mexico
                                                                                                                 1992                                                                                                                                         1992




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Argentina




                                                                                                 Venezuela
                                                                                                                                                                                    El Salvador
1994                                                                                                             1994                                       1994                                  1994                                                        1994

1996                                                                                                             1996                                       1996                                  1996                                                        1996

1998                                                                                                             1998                                       1998                                  1998                                                        1998

2000                                                                                                             2000                                       2000                                  2000                                                        2000

2002                                                                                                             2002                                       2002                                  2002                                                        2002

2004                                                                                                             2004                                       2004                                  2004                                                        2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                            24
                                                                                                                                                                               12




       0
           200
                                                      400
                                                                                     600
                                                                                           800
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1980                                                        1980
                                                                                                                 1980                                       1980
1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1982
                                                                                                                 1982                                       1982                                  1982
1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1984
1984                                                                                                             1984                                       1984                                  1984

                                                                                                                 1986                                       1986                                                                                              1986
1986                                                                                                                                                                                              1986

                                                                                                                 1988                                       1988                                                                                              1988
1988                                                                                                                                                                                              1988

                                                                                                                 1990                                       1990                                                                                              1990
1990                                                                                                                                                                                              1990

                                                                                                                 1992                                       1992                                                                                              1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bolivia




1992




                                                                                                                                                  Panama
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                                    Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Costa Rica




                                                                                                 Latin America
                                                                                                                 1994                                       1994                                                                                              1994
1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1994

1996                                                                                                             1996                                       1996                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
1998                                                                                                             1998                                       1998                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
2000                                                                                                             2000                                       2000                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000
2002                                                                                                             2002                                       2002                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
2004                                                                                                             2004                                       2004                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of Issues




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                           8




                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          200




                                                                                                                 1980                                       1980                                  1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1980

                                                                                                                 1982                                       1982                                  1982                                                        1982

                                                                                                                 1984                                       1984                                  1984                                                        1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Total Gross Issuance in International Capital Markets




                                                                                                                 1986                                       1986                                  1986                                                        1986

                                                                                                                 1988                                       1988                                  1988                                                        1988

                                                                                                                 1990                                       1990                                  1990                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                                  Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Brazil




                                                                                                                 1992                                       1992                                  1992                                                        1992
                                                                                                                                                                                    Honduras




                                                                                                                 1994                                       1994                                  1994                                                        1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dominican Republic




                                                                                                                 1996                                       1996                                  1996                                                        1996

                                                                                                                 1998                                       1998                                  1998                                                        1998

                                                                                                                 2000                                       2000                                  2000                                                        2000

                                                                                                                 2002                                       2002                                  2002                                                        2002

                                                                                                                 2004                                       2004                                  2004                                                        2004
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                            16
                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16




                                                                                                                 1980                                       1980                                  1980                                                        1980

                                                                                                                 1982                                       1982                                  1982                                                        1982

                                                                                                                 1984                                       1984                                  1984                                                        1984

                                                                                                                 1986                                       1986                                  1986                                                        1986

                                                                                                                 1988                                       1988                                  1988                                                        1988
                  Haiti, Nicaragua, and Paraguay have not issued in these markets.
                 Total Issuance includes bond, equity and syndicated-loan issuance




                                                                                                                 1990                                       1990                                  1990                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Chile




                                                                                                                 1992                                       1992                                  1992                                                        1992
                                                                                                                                                                                    Jamaica




                                                                                                                                                  Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ecuador




                                                                                                                 1994                                       1994                                  1994                                                        1994

                                                                                                                 1996                                       1996                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996

                                                                                                                 1998                                       1998                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998

                                                                                                                 2000                                       2000                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000

                                                                                                                 2002                                       2002                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002

                                                                                                                 2004                                       2004                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8.0




       0.0
                                                      5.0
                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.0




                                                                                            10.0
                                                                                                                                             16.0
                                                                                                                                                          24.0
                                                                                                                                                                 32.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         32.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  1980                                               1980
1980                                                                                                                1980                                                                                                                                                           1980

                                                                                                                                                                                  1982                                               1982
1982                                                                                                                1982                                                                                                                                                           1982

1984                                                                                                                1984                                                          1984                                               1984                                          1984

1986                                                                                                                1986                                                          1986                                               1986                                          1986

1988                                                                                                                1988                                                          1988                                               1988                                          1988

1990                                                                                                                1990                                                          1990                                               1990                                          1990

                                                                                                                                                                                  1992                                               1992




                                                                                                                                                                        Mexico
1992                                                                                                                1992                                                                                                                                                           1992




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Argentina




                                                                                                    Venezuela
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       El Salvador
1994                                                                                                                1994                                                          1994                                               1994                                          1994

1996                                                                                                                1996                                                          1996                                               1996                                          1996

1998                                                                                                                1998                                                          1998                                               1998                                          1998

2000                                                                                                                2000                                                          2000                                               2000                                          2000

2002                                                                                                                2002                                                          2002                                               2002                                          2002

2004                                                                                                                2004                                                          2004                                               2004                                          2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.0




                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                    2.0
                                                                                                                                                                 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0




       0.0
             40.0
                                                                                     80.0
                                                                                            120.0
                                                                                                                    1980                                                          1980                                               1980                                          1980
1980
                                                                                                                    1982                                                          1982                                               1982                                          1982
1982
                                                                                                                    1984                                                          1984                                               1984                                          1984
1984
                                                                                                                    1986                                                          1986                                               1986                                          1986
1986
                                                                                                                    1988                                                          1988                                               1988                                          1988
1988
                                                                                                                    1990                                                          1990                                               1990                                          1990
1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bolivia




                                                                                                                    1992                                                          1992                                               1992




                                                                                                                                                                        Panama
1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Costa Rica




                                                                                                    Latin America
                                                                                                                    1994                                                          1994                                               1994                                          1994
1994

1996                                                                                                                1996                                                          1996                                               1996                                          1996

1998                                                                                                                1998                                                          1998                                               1998                                          1998

2000                                                                                                                2000                                                          2000                                               2000                                          2000

2002                                                                                                                2002                                                          2002                                               2002                                          2002

2004                                                                                                                2004                                                          2004                                               2004                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (Billion Dollars)




                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                             1.3
                                                                                                                                                                 2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  32.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40.0




                                                                                                                    1980                                                          1980                                               1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1980

                                                                                                                    1982                                                          1982                                               1982                                          1982

                                                                                                                    1984                                                          1984                                               1984                                          1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Total Gross Issuance in International Capital Markets




                                                                                                                    1986                                                          1986                                               1986                                          1986

                                                                                                                    1988                                                          1988                                               1988                                          1988

                                                                                                                    1990                                                          1990                                               1990                                          1990
                                                                                                                                                                        Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Brazil




                                                                                                                    1992                                                          1992                                               1992                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Honduras




                                                                                                                    1994                                                          1994                                               1994                                          1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dominican Republic




                                                                                                                    1996                                                          1996                                               1996                                          1996

                                                                                                                    1998                                                          1998                                               1998                                          1998

                                                                                                                    2000                                                          2000                                               2000                                          2000

                                                                                                                    2002                                                          2002                                               2002                                          2002

                                                                                                                    2004                                                          2004                                               2004                                          2004
                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12.0




                                                                                                                    1980                                                          1980                                               1980                                          1980

                                                                                                                    1982                                                          1982                                               1982                                          1982

                                                                                                                    1984                                                          1984                                               1984                                          1984

                                                                                                                    1986                                                          1986                                               1986                                          1986

                                                                                                                    1988                                                          1988                                               1988                                          1988
                 Haiti, Nicaragua, and Paraguay have not issued in these markets.
                Total Issuance includes bond, equity, and syndicated-loan issuance




                                                                                                                    1990                                                          1990                                               1990                                          1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Chile




                                                                                                                    1992                                                          1992                                               1992                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jamaica




                                                                                                                                                                        Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ecuador




                                                                                                                    1994                                                          1994                                               1994                                          1994

                                                                                                                    1996                                                          1996                                               1996                                          1996

                                                                                                                    1998                                                          1998                                               1998                                          1998

                                                                                                                    2000                                                          2000                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                                    2002                                                          2002                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2002

                                                                                                                    2004                                                          2004                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1980:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1982:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1982:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1984:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1984:1

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1986:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1986:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1988:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1988:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1990:1                                     1990:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992:1                                     1992:1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1994:1                                     1994:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996:1                                     1996:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998:1                                     1998:1




Sources: Dealogic and World Economic Outlook Database, IMF.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000:1                                     2000:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:1                                     2002:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004:1                                     2004:1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1980:1                                     1980:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1982:1                                     1982:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1984:1                                     1984:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1986:1                                     1986:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1988:1                                     1988:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1990:1                                     1990:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992:1                                     1992:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1994:1                                     1994:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (in Percent of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996:1                                     1996:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998:1                                     1998:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000:1                                     2000:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Total Gross Issuance in International Capital Markets




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:1                                     2002:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004:1                                     2004:1
Notes: For each quarter, total issuance is the sum of issuance in the quarter plus the issuance in the three previous quarters divided by annual GDP in dollars evaluated at PPP exchange rates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1980:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1982:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1982:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1984:1                                     1984:1



                                                                                                                                                                                                  1986:1                                     1986:1



                                                                                                                                                                                                  1988:1                                     1988:1



                                                                                                                                                                                                  1990:1                                     1990:1



                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992:1                                     1992:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Venezuela




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1994:1                                     1994:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996:1                                     1996:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998:1                                     1998:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000:1                                     2000:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002:1                                     2002:1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004:1                                     2004:1
                                                                                                      Figure 7
                                                                                                 External Indicators




                                    World Real Interest Rate                                                                                         World International Issuance
                                          (in Percent)                                                                                                 (Percent of World GDP)

  14                                                                                                                9

  12                                                                                                                8

  10                                                                                                                7

   8                                                                                                                6

   6                                                                                                                5

   4                                                                                                                4

   2                                                                                                                3

   0                                                                                                                2

  -2                                                                                                                1

  -4                                                                                                                0
   1980:1 1982:1 1984:1 1986:1 1988:1 1990:1 1992:1 1994:1 1996:1 1998:1 2000:1 2002:1 2004:1                        1980:1 1982:1 1984:1 1986:1 1988:1 1990:1 1992:1 1994:1 1996:1 1998:1 2000:1 2002:1 2004:1




                                          Term Premium                                                                                                  U.S. High Yield Spread
                                           (in Percent)                                                                                                       (in Percent)

  4                                                                                                                 14

  3                                                                                                                 12

  2                                                                                                                 10

  1                                                                                                                   8

  0                                                                                                                   6

  -1                                                                                                                  4

  -2                                                                                                                  2

  -3                                                                                                                  0
   1980:1 1982:1 1984:1 1986:1 1988:1 1990:1 1992:1 1994:1 1996:1 1998:1 2000:1 2002:1 2004:1                           1980:1 1982:1 1984:1 1986:1 1988:1 1990:1 1992:1 1994:1 1996:1 1998:1 2000:1 2002:1 2004:1




Notes: The World Interest Rate is captured with the One-Year U.S. Real Interest Rate. World International Issuance/World GDP is Total Issuance in Bond, Equity, and Syndicated-Loan Markets as a percent of World GDP
evaluated at PPP. The Term Premium is the difference between the U.S. ten-year-note yield minus the U.S. one-year Treasury Bill rate. The High-Yield Spread is the difference between the yield of U.S. high-yield bonds
and the one-year U.S. Treasury Bill Rate.
Sources: Dealogic, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Database, International Financial Statistics (IMF), and Merril Lynch.
                                                                                                       Figure 8
                                                                        Total Gross Issuance in International Capital Markets (Percent of GDP)
                                                                                            Actual and Predicted Values


                                                  Argentina                                                                                                         Brazil


12                                                                                                                 4



 8
                                                                                                                   2

 4

                                                                                                                   0
 0



-4                                                                                                                -2
    1984:1   1986:1    1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1           1984:1      1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1




                                                    Chile                                                                                                          Colombia


8                                                                                                                 4




4

                                                                                                                  2


0




                                                                                                                  0
-4
                                                                                                                  1984:1       1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1   1994:1     1996:1    1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1
1984:1       1986:1    1988:1   1990:1   1992:1   1994:1      1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1




                                                   Mexico                                                                                                          Venezuela


6                                                                                                                 12




4                                                                                                                  8




2                                                                                                                  4




0                                                                                                                  0
1984:1       1986:1    1988:1   1990:1   1992:1   1994:1      1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1              1984:1   1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1



              Actual
              Predicted
                                                                                                     Figure 9
                                                                                       Estimated Domestic and External Factors

                                                                                                        Domestic Factors


                                               Argentina                                                                                                                    Brazil


  4                                                                                                                         2




  2                                                                                                                         1




  0                                                                                                                         0




  -2                                                                                                                        -1
  1984:1   1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1                       1984:1    1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1




                                                 Chile                                                                                                                    Colombia


  3                                                                                                                         2



  2
                                                                                                                            1

  1

                                                                                                                            0
  0



  -1                                                                                                                        -1
  1984:1   1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1                       1984:1    1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1     1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1




                                                Mexico                                                                                                                    Venezuela


  3                                                                                                                         3




  2                                                                                                                         2




  1                                                                                                                         1




  0                                                                                                                         0
  1984:1   1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1   1994:1      1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1                       1984:1   1986:1    1988:1   1990:1   1992:1   1994:1      1996:1   1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1




                                                                                                          External Factor


                                                               3



                                                               2



                                                               1



                                                               0



                                                              -1
                                                               1984:1   1986:1   1988:1   1990:1   1992:1    1994:1    1996:1    1998:1   2000:1   2002:1   2004:1



Note: Domestic and Foreign Factors are predicted issuance as a percent of GDP.
                            Table 1
           Current Account: Latin America, 1970-2005
                       (Percent of GDP)

                                   Standard
      Country            Mean      Deviation    Minimum   Maximum
     Argentina            -0.63       3.06        -4.84     8.87
       Bolivia            -3.45       4.39       -10.83     9.55
       Brazil             -3.10       3.33       -10.40     1.94
        Chile             -3.64       3.47       -14.50     1.78
     Colombia             -1.50       2.80        -6.36     4.74
    Costa Rica            -7.16       3.54       -16.01     -1.68
 Dominican Republic       -4.49       4.28       -14.22     6.03
      Ecuador             -3.81       3.84       -12.35     5.28
    El Salvador           -0.26       3.67        -5.51     7.16
    Guatemala             -3.73       2.01        -7.53     0.31
        Haiti             -1.55       1.97        -6.28     1.13
     Honduras             -5.67       2.76       -12.34     -1.51
      Jamaica             -5.81       4.18       -15.20     0.25
       Mexico             -2.58       2.43        -7.05     3.75
     Nicaragua           -14.90      12.55       -36.50    25.73
      Panama              -7.46       8.24       -31.12     6.31
     Paraguay             -3.03       4.08       -11.62     7.31
        Peru              -5.08       3.54       -14.27     1.36
      Uruguay             -1.74       2.29        -7.00     3.16
    Venezuela              3.55       7.70       -11.96    22.66

Source: World Economic Outlook Database, IMF.
                                            Table 2
                   Components of the Current Account, Latin America, 1970-2005
                                      (in Percent of GDP)

                                   Balance of
  Periods     Current Account   Goods & Services      Net Income     Official Transfers   Private Transfers

                                                High Income Countries

 1971-1975         -4.14              -2.69              -1.67             0.04                 0.15
 1976-1981         -5.27              -2.55              -2.95             0.00                 0.20
 1982-1989         -2.77               2.64              -6.22             0.51                 0.40
 1990-1998         -2.82              -0.93              -2.62             0.25                 0.48
 1999-2005         -1.51               1.45              -3.75             0.10                 0.69
 1970-2005         -3.02              -0.20              -3.40             0.21                 0.39

                                                Middle Income Countries

 1971-1975         -3.91              -2.41              -1.98             0.68                 -0.18
 1976-1981         -5.24              -4.07              -1.90             0.22                  0.56
 1982-1989         -2.31              -2.80              -3.38             1.70                  2.18
 1990-1998         -1.90              -3.57              -2.75             0.75                  3.67
 1999-2005         -0.42              -2.57              -2.81             0.29                  4.67
 1970-2005         -2.78              -2.74              -2.94             0.85                  2.11

                                                 Low Income Countries

 1971-1975         -2.58               -1.50             -2.73             0.70                 1.26
 1976-1981         -5.47               -3.69             -3.90             0.79                 1.53
 1982-1989         -4.83               -1.69             -6.49             1.01                 1.81
 1990-1998         -3.78               -5.64             -3.81             2.11                 3.31
 1999-2005         -3.20              -12.35             -3.08             2.35                 9.88
 1970-2005         -3.97               -4.83             -4.02             1.61                 3.37

Source: World Economic Outlook Database, IMF.
                                                    Table 3
                              The Balance of Payments: Latin America, 1970-2005
                                              (in Percent of GDP)

   Periods       Current         Total          Errors and       Capital               Capital Flows        Changes in
                 Account       Transfers        Omissions        Account          Official        Private    Reserves

                                                          High Income Countries

  1971-1975        -4.14          0.22            -0.86            0.00             1.03           2.35         1.63
  1976-1981        -5.27          0.23            -0.35            0.00             0.67           5.33        -0.37
  1982-1989        -2.77          0.82             1.53            0.00             1.39           0.04        -0.19
  1990-1998        -2.82          0.73             0.52            0.00             0.11           3.21        -1.08
  1999-2005        -1.51          0.79             0.22            0.01             0.73           0.67        -0.11
  1970-2005        -3.02          0.57            -0.24            0.03             0.71           2.21         0.30

                                                          Middle Income Countries

  1971-1975        -3.91          0.47            -0.52            0.00             1.38           4.49        -1.48
  1976-1981        -5.24          0.73             1.71            0.00             1.80           3.55        -1.82
  1982-1989        -2.31          3.87            -0.36            0.00             1.97          -0.01         0.77
  1990-1998        -1.90          4.42             1.23            0.25             0.65           1.19        -1.51
  1999-2005        -0.42          4.96            -0.36            0.56             1.55          -1.03        -0.49
  1970-2005        -2.78          2.85             0.37            0.14             1.38           1.32        -0.65

                                                           Low Income Countries

  1971-1975        -2.58          1.65            -1.66            0.00             2.25           2.92        -0.94
  1976-1981        -5.47          2.12            -0.38            0.00             4.16           2.01        -0.32
  1982-1989        -4.83          3.36             0.67            0.10             3.28           0.13         0.66
  1990-1998        -3.78          5.67            -0.13            1.01             1.46           2.69        -1.25
  1999-2005        -3.20         12.22            -0.78            0.50             1.51           3.93        -1.62
  1970-2005        -3.97          4.88            -0.33            0.31             2.41           2.35        -0.54

Source: World Economic Outlook Database, IMF.
                                Table 4
          Latin America Access to International Capital Markets

                                  Total Issuance
                                 (Number of Issues)
   Year            Bonds               Equities         Syndicated Loans
             Public    Private    Public      Private   Public    Private
   1980       12           7        0            0       147         97
   1981       13          14        0            0       234        174
   1982       12           5        0            0       214         95
   1983        0           0        0            0        40         21
   1984        0           0        0            0       117         16
   1985        0           1        0            0        65          9
   1986        1           2        0            1        14          8
   1987        2           0        0            0        25          9
   1988        8           0        0            0        16         19
   1989        0           2        0            0        15         18
   1990        7           6        0            2        29         41
   1991       22          17        0           29        42         53
   1992       18          71        0           39        61         78
   1993       46         149        0           52        64         78
   1994       28          95        4           79        27        106
   1995       37          77        0           13        34        147
   1996       71         108        1           43        56        162
   1997       72         135        3           35        62        291
   1998       63          69        1            4        50        244
   1999       77          57        0            6        31        236
   2000       51          50        2           13        36        313
   2001       61          38        1            2        33        254
   2002       29          14        0            4        45        153
   2003       40          40        0            7        56        134
   2004       40          35        0           16        80        243

Source: Dealogic
                                Table 5
          Latin America Access to International Capital Markets

                                   Total Issuance
                                  (Billion Dollars)
   Year            Bonds               Equities         Syndicated Loans
             Public    Private   Public       Private   Public    Private
   1980        0.6        0.3      0.0          0.0      17.7        5.3
   1981        1.1        0.7      0.0          0.0      28.3        8.3
   1982        1.0        0.3      0.0          0.0      24.2        6.3
   1983        0.0        0.0      0.0          0.0       6.4        1.2
   1984        0.0        0.0      0.0          0.0      11.4        0.6
   1985        0.0        0.1      0.0          0.0       4.3        0.9
   1986        0.2        0.1      0.0          0.0       0.8        0.8
   1987        0.2        0.0      0.0          0.0       1.7        0.9
   1988        2.3        0.0      0.0          0.0       2.2        2.2
   1989        0.0        0.3      0.0          0.0       5.7        1.8
   1990        0.6        0.3      0.0          0.1       3.4        2.4
   1991        3.3        1.6      0.0          3.9       8.4        4.0
   1992        2.7        5.9      0.0          4.0       5.2        6.0
   1993        7.0       12.6      0.0          6.1       6.4        5.0
   1994        6.1        8.3      0.4          4.3       3.8        6.9
   1995       13.3        6.6      0.0          0.6       6.1       13.1
   1996       28.2       10.4      0.1          3.7      15.3       16.3
   1997       34.0       18.9      0.9          5.0      13.7       40.7
   1998       25.4        8.7      0.1          0.4       9.6       37.3
   1999       26.9        5.3      0.0          0.6       5.6       30.2
   2000       24.6        6.2      2.6          4.2       5.1       39.0
   2001       26.9        6.0      0.7          0.6       4.9       29.9
   2002       16.1        1.5      0.0          2.0       5.7       14.3
   2003       25.2        8.5      0.0          1.2       8.7       12.3
   2004       28.6        7.9      0.0          2.7       7.7       23.3

Source: Dealogic
                                                               Table 6
                                                 Panel Estimation with Fixed Effects
                                                            (1984-2005)


Explanatory Variables                                     I            II          III          IV            V           VI           VII



Growth                                                   0.01        0.01         0.01         0.01         0.01         0.01         0.01
                                                       (2.06)**     (1.62)       (1.58)       (1.59)       (1.73)       (1.15)       (1.80)
Inflation                                                -0.18       -0.19        -0.02        -0.02        -0.02        -0.01        -0.02
                                                        (-1.43)     (-1.11)      (-1.60)      (-1.02)      (-1.16)      (-0.70)      (-0.82)
Openness                                                                                       -0.02
                                                                                              (-1.05)
Political Risk                                          0.07         0.06         0.06         0.06         0.06         0.06         0.06
                                                      (4.00)***    (4.67)***    (4.66)***    (5.23)***    (3.92)***    (4.42)***    (4.26)***
Real Exchange Rate Volatility                            -8.3        -2.73        -2.90        -3.34        -3.47        -2.35        -3.25
                                                      (-3.00)**     (-1.13)      (-1.19)      (-1.75)      (-1.74)      (-1.14)      (-1.22)
Terms of Trade                                                                                              -0.01
                                                                                                           (-0.80)
Emerging Market Crises                                                             -0.24        -0.25       -0.27         -0.24       -0.20
                                                                                 (-1.99)*     (-2.08)*    (-2.28)**     (-1.98)*     (-1.66)
High Yield Spread                                                                                                         -0.14
                                                                                                                       (4.85)***
Term Premium                                             -0.27       -0.27        -0.27        -0.28        -0.27
                                                       (-1.95)*    (-2.59)**    (-2.60)**    (-2.54)**    (-2.46)**
U.S. Real Interest Rate                                                                                                                 0.12
                                                                                                                                       (1.70)
World Issuance/ World GDP                               0.29          0.26         0.26         0.29         0.26         0.30          0.35
                                                      (4.37)***    (4.81)***    (4.84)***    (4.15)***    (4.91)***    (5.03)***    (5.46)***
(World Issuance/World GDP)*Default                                   -0.42        -0.40         -0.43        -0.41        -0.40        -0.40
                                                                   (-5.33)***   (-5.24)***   (-4.91)***   (-5.69)***   (-6.50)***   (-4.57)***
Constant                                                -3.19        -2.25        -2.30         -2.18        -1.70        -2.17        -3.50
                                                      (-4.20)***   (-3.07)***   (-3.05)***     (-2.45)      (-1.65)      (-2.60)      (-3.20)



Number of Observations                                  510          510          510          510          510          510          510
R2 within                                               0.50         0.58         0.58         0.58         0.59         0.59         0.58
R2 between                                              0.39         0.10         0.11         0.05         0.15         0.12         0.12
R2 overall                                              0.50         0.53         0.53         0.50         0.54         0.54         0.53



Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                                                         Table 7
                                                                  Pooled OLS Estimates
                                                                       (1984-2005)


Explanatory Variables                                         I             II            III            IV           V            VI            VII



Growth                                                       0.01           0.01           0.06           0.01         0.01         0.00          0.01
                                                            -1.78         (1.15)         (1.11)         (0.97)       (1.15)       (0.42)        (1.32)
Inflation                                                   -0.03          -0.03          -0.03          -0.02        -0.02        -0.02         -0.02
                                                          (-9.28)***   (-10.32)***    (-11.35)***     (-3.08)**   (-10.44)***   (-3.15)**    (-10.28)***
Openness                                                                                                  0.01
                                                                                                        (0.57)
Political Risk                                               0.07          0.07           0.07            0.07         0.07        0.07          0.07
                                                          (4.33)***     (4.53)***      (4.52)***      (3..42)**    (4.13)***    (4.84)***     (4.41)***
Real Exchange Rate Volatility                               -5.93         -0.74          -0.87           -0.88        -1.28       -0.54         -1.32
                                                          (-2.43)**      (-0.29)        (-0.34)        (-0.38)       (-0.45)     (-0.23)       (-0.46)
Terms of Trade                                                                                                        -0.01
                                                                                                                   (-2.41)**
Emerging Market Crises                                                                   -0.21         -0.20          -0.26       -0.21         -0.15
                                                                                        (-1.58)       (-1.50)       (-1.96)*     (-1.55)       (-1.29)
High Yield Spread                                                                                                                 -0.14
                                                                                                                                (3.87)**
Term Premium                                                 -0.29         -0.3          -0.29          -0.28        -0.28
                                                           (-1.99)*     (-2.39)**      (-2.39)**      (-2.31)**    (-2.19)**
U.S. Real Interest Rate                                                                                                                          0.13
                                                                                                                                                -1.71
World Issuance/World GDP                                    0.26           0.25           0.25           0.25         0.25          0.28         0.33
                                                          (4.00)***     (4.06)***      (4.08)***      (3.53)**     (3.88)***    (4.29)***     (5.00)***
(World Issuance/World GDP)*Default                                        -0.31          -0.31           -0.3         -0.3          -0.3         -0.3
                                                                        (-3.71)**      (-3.68)**      (-3.8)**     (-3.61)**    (-4.15)***    (-3.23)**
Constant                                                    -3.24         -3.09          -3.10          -3.90        -2.62         -2.80        -4.29
                                                           (-4.94)       (-3.74)         (-3.7)        (-3.96)      (-2.68)       (-3.55)      (-3.44)



Observations                                                510           510            510            510          510          510           510
R-squared                                                   0.50          0.54           0.54           0.55         0.55         0.55          0.54



Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                                                     Table 8
                                                                 Tobit Estimation
                                                                   (1984-2005)


Explanatory Variables                                        I            II           III            IV         V           VI           VII



Growth                                                      0.01          0.01         0.01          0.01        0.01         0.01         0.01
                                                          (1.73)        (1.42)       (1.38)        (1.30)      (1.70)       (0.78)       (1.33)
Inflation                                                  -0.04         -0.03        -0.03         -0.03       -0.02        -0.03        -0.03
                                                        (-4.64)***    (-4.42)***   (-4.40)***    (-3.81)**   (-3.86)**    (-3.48)**    (-3.94)**
Openness                                                                                             0.01
                                                                                                  (1.83)*
Political Risk                                              0.08          0.07         0.07          0.07        0.07         0.08         0.08
                                                        (11.39)***    (11.79)***   (12.13)***   (11.34)***   (12.14)***   (12.72)***   (12.37)***
Real Exchange Rate Volatility                              -5.97         -0.64        -0.76         -0.76       -1.25        -0.58        -1.32
                                                         (-3.34)**      (-0.34)      (-0.41)      (-0.41)      (-0.68)      (-0.31)      (-0.71)
Terms of Trade                                                                                                  -0.01        -0.01
                                                                                                             (-4.13)***   (-4.25)***
Emerging Markets Crises                                                              -0.20        -0.20         -0.24        -0.19       -0.13
                                                                                    (-0.84)      (-0.82)       (-1.08)      (-0.83)     (-0.60)
High Yield Spread                                                                                                            -0.13
                                                                                                                          (-5.79)***
Term Premium                                              -0.29         -0.29        -0.29        -0.29        -0.28
                                                        (-5.45)***    (-5.71)***   (-5.73)***   (-5.68)***   (-5.61)***
U.S. Real Interest Rate                                                                                                                    0.12
                                                                                                                                        (4.00)**
World Issuance/World GDP                                   0.29           0.26         0.26         0.26         0.26         0.28         0.34
                                                        (11.00)***    (10.77)***   (10.80)***   (10.44)***   (10.82)***   (11.77)***   (12.57)***
(World Issuance/World GDP)*Default                                       -0.30        -0.32        -0.31        -0.31        -0.31        -0.30
                                                                      (-7.01)***   (-7.02)***   (-6.87)***   (-6.94)***   (-6.87)***   (-6.63)***
Constant                                                  -3.50          -3.30        -3.30        -3.30        -2.82        -3.10        -4.48
                                                         (-8.03)        (-8.04)      (-8.06)      (-8.05)      (-6.53)      (-7.25)     (-10.38)



Observations                                               510          510          510          510          510          510          510
Pseudo R2                                                  0.20         0.21         0.22         0.21         0.23         0.22         0.21



Notes: t-statistics in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                     Table 9
     The Role of Domestic and External Factors

                         Factors                   Total
  Episodes        External     Domestic           Change
                             Argentina
  1990-1998         0.93           2.74              3.67
  1999-2001        -0.37          -0.44             -0.81
  2002-2005         1.03          -3.60             -2.57
                                 Brazil
  1990-1998         0.93           1.46              2.39
  1999-2001        -0.57          -0.12             -0.69
  2002-2005         1.23           0.03              1.25
                                  Chile
  1990-1998         0.93           1.57              2.50
  1999-2001        -0.57          -0.23             -0.79
  2002-2005         1.23           0.25              1.48
                               Colombia
  1990-1998         0.93          -0.70              0.23
  1999-2001        -0.57           0.55             -0.01
  2002-2005         1.23           0.35              1.58
                                 Mexico
  1990-1998         0.93           0.50              1.43
  1999-2001        -0.57           0.26             -0.31
  2002-2005         1.23           0.24              1.47
                               Venezuela
  1990-1998         0.93           0.59              1.51
  1999-2001        -0.57          -1.03             -1.59
  2002-2005         1.23           0.50              1.73



Notes: The last column shows the total change in gross
issuance (as a percent of GDP) for each episode. The first
two columns show the part explained by external and
domestic factors.
