NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCHOOL DESEGREGATION AND EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT FOR BLACKS
Sarah J. Reber
Working Paper 13193
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13193

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

I am grateful to Elizabeth Cascio, Ken Chay, Nora Gordon, and Seema Jayachandran for helpful discussions
and advice and to the Louisiana Department of Education, Louisiana State Library, and New Orleans
Public Library for assistance in compiling the data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Sarah J. Reber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

School Desegregation and Educational Attainment for Blacks
Sarah J. Reber
NBER Working Paper No. 13193
June 2007
JEL No. I2,J18
ABSTRACT
The desegregation of Southern schools following the Supreme Court's 1954 Brown decision was perhaps
the most important innovation in U.S. education policy in the 20th century. This paper assesses the
effects of desegregation on its intended beneficiaries, black students. In Louisiana, substantial reductions
in segregation between 1965 and 1970 were accompanied by large increases in per-pupil funding.
This additional funding was used to "level up" school spending in integrated schools to the level previously
experienced only in the white schools. The effects of desegregation on the educational experiences
of black students differed substantially depending on the black share of enrollment in the district. For
historical reasons, blacks in districts with higher black enrollment shares experienced larger increases
in funding, compared to their counterparts in lower black enrollment share districts. On the other hand,
blacks in high black enrollment share districts saw smaller increases in exposure to whites (who were
higher-income). Blacks in high black enrollment share districts experienced larger improvements in
educational attainment, suggesting that the increase in funding associated with desegregation was more
important than the increased exposure to whites. A simple cost-benefit calculation suggests that the
additional school spending was more than offset by higher earnings due to increased educational attainment.
Using a different source of variation and methodology, the results of this paper are consistent with
earlier work suggesting that desegregation improved educational attainment for blacks and sheds new
light on the potential mechanism behind this improvement in Louisiana: increased funding for blacks'
schools.
Sarah J. Reber
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Public Policy
School of Public Affairs
3250 Public Policy Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
sreber@ucla.edu

The Supreme Court’s 1954 decision in Brown v. Board of Education—and the
desegregation of schools that followed—was perhaps the most important development in
U.S. education policy of the last century. Before Brown, Southern schools were explicitly and
completely segregated by law, and many blacks attended schools that received fewer
resources than those attended by their white counterparts.1 Previous work has shown that
desegregation policy reduced segregation and increased blacks’ exposure to whites in school.
In the case of Louisiana, school desegregation was also accompanied by dramatic changes in
the state’s system of school finance that, together with large increases in federal funding,
substantially increased the average spending in the schools blacks attended. Desegregation in
Louisiana virtually eliminated black-white gaps in student-teacher ratios within districts.
Historically, those gaps had been largest in districts with high black enrollment shares, so
blacks in high black enrollment share districts saw particularly large improvements in perpupil spending over the short period when schools desegregated. The desegregation
experience in Louisiana provides a unique setting in which to study the effects of large
increases in school funding over a short period, contributing both to the literature on the
effects of desegregation and the literature on the effects of school resources on educational
outcomes.
After years of resistance, segregation in Louisiana’s schools fell dramatically
between 1965 and 1970. At the same time, average per-pupil revenue for schools increased
by about $1,000 to more than $3,700 (constant 2003 dollars). But this new money was not
distributed equally to all districts. Instead, districts with high black enrollment shares

1 The Coleman Report (1966) and Card and Krueger (1992) suggest that black-white school resource gaps had
closed substantially over the first half of the 20th century, but were still present. According to Card and Krueger
(1992), in 1954 the average student-teacher ratio for blacks was about 10 percent higher for blacks in Southern
and Border states, compared to their white counterparts. Data for Louisiana show that in 1955 the average
district’s instructional spending for blacks was only about 71 percent of instructional spending for whites.

-2-

garnered substantially larger increases in funding. In Reber (2006), I show that these
disproportionate increases in revenue for higher black enrollment share districts were
necessary to prevent whites in those districts from seeing their school quality fall and were at
least partly caused by desegregation policy. On the other hand, blacks in districts with higher
black enrollment shares saw smaller increases in exposure to whites (since there were fewer
whites in those districts).
In this paper, I examine the effects of these two changes—increases in black
exposure to whites and increases in funding for blacks’ schools—on educational attainment
using variation in changes in these variables related to differences in districts’ initial black
enrollment share. Because changes in spending and exposure are both so closely tied to the
black enrollment share (positively and negatively, respectively), I cannot separately identify
the effects of these two factors. Instead, I estimate the net effect of desegregation-induced
changes in funding and peers. Newly collected annual data on school registration
(enrollment) by race and grade and the number of high school graduates by race for
Louisiana school districts allow me to estimate the fraction of black 8th grade students
continuing to 10th, 11th, and 12th grade and graduating from high school for cohorts of
students attending school before and after desegregation.
The results indicate that the rate of continuing to the 11th and 12th grade, as well as
high school graduation rates, increased more in higher black enrollment share districts after
desegregation, suggesting that the additional funding that came with desegregation was more
important than increased exposure to whites in increasing black educational attainment. It
would also be interesting to estimate the effect of desegregation on educational attainment
for white students. Unfortunately, non-random migration of white students—in particular,

-3-

“white flight” from districts with high black enrollment shares to “whiter” districts—
precludes conducting a similar analysis for whites.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section II provides background on the legal history
of desegregation, Louisiana’s experience with desegregation, and the existing literature on the
effects of desegregation; Section III discusses the effects of desegregation on funding and
black exposure to whites; in Section IV, I discuss the methods and data; the results are
presented in Section VI. Section VI concludes.
II. Background and Previous Literature
A. Desegregation Policy and Trends in Segregation
In 1954, the Supreme Court declared separate schools for black and white children
to be “inherently unequal.” But neither the 1954 Brown decision nor the 1955 Brown II
decision was specific about what districts were required to do to comply with this new
doctrine, and little progress was made for several years. Figure 1 shows trends in two
commonly used measures of segregation: black exposure to whites and white exposure to
blacks.2 Black exposure to whites can be interpreted as the white enrollment share of the
average black’s school (and vice-versa for white exposure to blacks); increases in black
exposure to whites indicate that blacks are in school with more whites, indicating a decline in
segregation.
The data reveal three major turning points for segregation, corresponding to changes
in legislation and the courts’ interpretation of the Brown decision. Before the 1965 school
year (all years refer to the fall of the school year), there was very little progress toward
desegregation; in 1964, only about 1.2 percent of black students statewide were in school

2 For school years before 1967, black exposure to whites was imputed based on the share of blacks in school
with any whites. See Appendix A for information on sources of segregation data and the method for
imputation.

-4-

with any whites, and 61 of 64 counties in Louisiana still had completely segregated schools.
The 1964 Civil Rights Act (CRA) gave the Justice Department the authority to join
desegregation cases, and denied Federal funding to segregated districts, while the 1965
Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) expanded Federal funding for education
significantly. Together, these policies are thought to have brought about the first moves
towards desegregation in many Southern districts between 1965 and 1968.3 By 1968, only 11
of 64 counties in Louisiana were still completely segregated, but the average black was still in
a school that was only about 8 percent white, while whites comprised over 60 percent of
enrollment. Finally, following a 1968 Supreme Court decision4, larger-scale desegregation
plans began to be required. By 1970, the average black Louisianan was in a school that was
more than 30 percent white, and segregation stayed around that level through at least 1976.
This pattern is similar to trends in segregation for other states in the former Confederacy.
In the analysis, I use data for 1960-1975, dividing the years into three periods: 19601965 (before desegregation), 1966-1969 (transition), and 1970-1975 (after desegregation).
B. Desegregation and Black Educational Attainment: Mechanisms
This paper examines educational attainment as the primary outcome of interest. In a
standard model of human capital accumulation, individuals attend an additional year of
school if the return on the labor market is greater than the discount rate. Desegregation
could increase the return to schooling by changing school quality for blacks through two
main channels. First, desegregation clearly changed the composition of students in blacks’
schools, as black exposure to whites increased. Previous work (discussed below) has found a
negative relationship between the black share of enrollment and educational outcomes, but it

3 See, for example, Card and Krueger (1992); Boozer, et al (1992); and Cascio, Gordon, Lewis, and Reber
(2006).
4 Green vs. New Kent County Board of Education, 391 U.S. 430 (1968).

-5-

is unclear whether this relationship is causal or if school quality on other dimensions and
student background varies with black enrollment share. In fact, it is not obvious a priori
whether more white peers would be good or bad for school quality from blacks’ perspective,
although white peers are typically assumed to have a positive effect on outcomes, in part
because whites tended to have higher socioeconomic status and better scores on
achievement tests.
Second, desegregation changed the average spending—and possibly other, lesstangible aspects of school quality—in schools blacks attended by moving them to higherspending formerly white schools. In the case of Louisiana, desegregation also increased
overall average school spending so that spending could be equalized by “leveling up” to the
levels previously experienced only in the white schools, rather than “leveling down” closer to
that of the formerly black schools.
C. Previous Literature: The Effects of Desegregation on Education Outcomes
Many studies have examined the effects of desegregation in a particular district or a
small number of districts, and have come to varying conclusions about the benefits of
desegregation.5 A number of larger-scale studies have examined the relationship between the
racial composition of students’ schools or classes and educational outcomes, but have been
less able to focus on changes in the racial composition due to desegregation policy, as
opposed to self-selection into districts with different racial composition. Guryan (2004) is a
recent exception, which I discuss further below.
The Equality of Educational Opportunity study, also known as the Coleman Report
(1966) was the first to document a negative relationship between being in predominately
black schools and lower student test scores. Boozer, et al. (1992) use the National Survey of
5

St. John (1975), Crain and Mahard (1981), Cook (1984), and Armor (2002) (also reviewed in Guryan (2004)).

-6-

Black Americans data from 1979-1980 to show that blacks who attended segregated high
schools had lower educational attainment and lower wages. Rivkin (2000) similarly finds that
among a cohort of students who were sophomores in 1980, those who went to schools with
higher black enrollment shares had lower test scores, educational attainment, and earnings.
To assess the role of desegregation policy more directly, Boozer, et al. instrument for being
in a segregated high school with an interaction of the state where an individual grew up and
whether they went to high school after 1964 (when there appear to have been reductions in
segregation in Southern and Border states); the point estimates suggest that being in a
segregated school is bad for blacks’ outcomes, but the estimates are quite imprecise.
Card and Krueger (1992, 1996a) examine the effects of pre-Brown narrowing of
black-white school quality gaps in Southern and Border states and North and South Carolina
on wages. They conclude that improvements in resources in the black schools relative to
white schools improved wages for blacks and contributed to the subsequent narrowing of
the black-white wage gap. This paper shows that black-white school quality gaps persisted in
Louisiana after the period examined by Card and Krueger and examines the effects of the
virtual elimination of these gaps due to desegregation in the late 1960s.
Guryan (2004) provides the best-identified effects of desegregation plans. He exploits
variation in the timing of implementation of desegregation plans across districts, using
Census data to assess the effects of desegregation on black high school drop-out rates for a
national sample of large school districts implementing major court-ordered desegregation
plans. He compares changes in dropout rates between the 1970 and 1980 Censuses for
districts that implemented a plan during that decade to changes for those that implemented
plans before 1970 and after 1980. He estimates that implementation of a desegregation plan
reduced dropout rates for blacks by about 3 percentage points. This paper complements

-7-

Guryan’s by using a different methodology and source of variation to examine the effects of
desegregation on educational outcomes. In addition, I am able to examine the
mechanisms—namely changes in funding and peers—by which desegregation may affect
outcomes.
III. How did Desegregation Change Blacks’ Schools? Effects on Peers and
Resources
Desegregation had dramatic effects on the characteristics of the schools that black
Louisianans attended. The two major classes of inputs—peers and money—changed
significantly statewide, but blacks in some districts saw bigger changes than others. These
differential changes across districts arose due to the historical differences in the way districts
with different black enrollment shares financed education.
A. Effects of Desegregation on School Spending
One potentially important input to school quality is money,6 which allows schools to
reduce student-teacher ratios and buy other inputs. In this section, I will focus on changes in
student-teacher ratios, both because teachers represent a large portion of the school budget
and, more pragmatically, the student-teacher ratio can be measured separately for blacks and
whites. (Measures such as per-pupil revenue and expenditure are generally reported only at
the school district level; cross-district changes in revenue and expenditure are consistent with
those reported for student-teacher ratios.)
In previous work (Reber, 2006), I explore changes in the financing of Louisiana
schools brought by desegregation in detail. Because understanding changes in funding is
important for the analysis of educational attainment, I summarize the key findings here. To

6 The role of school spending (and other measures of resources available to schools) in improving educational
outcomes is controversial. See Hanushek (1986) and Card and Krueger (1996a, 1996b) for a summary of the
extensive literature on this topic.

-8-

understand the changes in districts’ finances, one must first understand the predesegregation school finance regime in the South, in particular the importance of a district’s
black share of enrollment in its finances. Before desegregation, black-white spending gaps
were largest in states, counties, and school districts with higher black enrollment shares.
Research on school finance in the South during this period7 suggests an explanation for this
relationship: Southern state governments generally distributed aid on a per-pupil basis, but
local school officials had discretion over how to distribute aid among black and white
schools. 8 Under this system, whites in districts with large black populations could satisfy
their increasing demand for school quality by directing state money allocated for black
students to white schools, resulting in larger gaps between student-teacher ratios in “blacker”
districts. 9
Despite the “separate but equal” requirement of Plessy (never mind the desegregation
requirements of Brown), significant gaps between resources available in black and white
schools in Louisiana persisted in the 1960s.10 From 1960-1965 (the “before” period), the
average student-teacher ratio in Louisiana’s black schools was 29, compared to 24 for
whites.11 These gaps were significantly larger in districts with higher black enrollment shares.
See Bond (1934), Margo (1990), and Card and Krueger (1992).
For the results on educational attainment, it is not necessary to know the precise mechanism behind the
relationship between black enrollment share and black-white student teacher ratios. In any case, the data
indicate a strong positive relationship that was eliminated during the period of desegregation.
9 There is a political economy explanation for the persistence of this system of school finance. Representatives
to the state legislature were allocated based on total population, but blacks were generally not permitted to vote.
Whites in districts with high black enrollment shares were over-represented in the legislature relative to whites
in low black enrollment share districts. This may account for the between-district inequality of funding across
districts among whites that the system perpetuated.
10 Trends in funding for other Southern states after 1950 have not been documented to my knowledge.
11 Normally, school-level data would be required to calculate the average student-teacher ratio separately for
blacks and whites. When students and teachers are completely segregated by race (black teachers only teach
black students), the student-teacher ratio for blacks in the district can be calculated using the total number of
black students and black teachers (and similarly for whites). According to the Southern Education Reporting
Service, students and teachers in Louisiana were still completely segregated through at least 1966, with the
exception of the Orleans Parish school district. The Louisiana Department of Education’s Annual Financial and
Statistical Report, from which these data were collected, also published instructional spending separately for
blacks and whites through 1959-60, when the average district spent 72 cents per pupil in the black schools for
7
8

-9-

The left panel of Figure 2 shows the relationship between the 196012 black enrollment share
and the black-white gap in student-teacher ratios (black student-teacher ratio less white
student-teacher ratio) for 1960-1965, before significant desegregation had occurred. The
slope of the regression line in the left panel of Figure 2 is 9.4 with a t-statistic of 4.1,
indicating that a 10 percentage point increase in black enrollment share was associated with
an increase in the black-white student-teacher ratio gap of about 0.94 students. The 1960
black enrollment share is fairly evenly distributed between 10 and 70 percent.
By requiring blacks and whites to attend the same schools, desegregation reduced
whites’ ability to divert funding for black children to their own schools.13 As a result, overall
school funding was increased during the period of desegregation so that whites were
approximately “held harmless” and did not see student-teacher ratios rise as their schools
combined with blacks’ schools. Because pre-existing black-white gaps were larger in higher
black enrollment share districts, blacks in those districts saw larger improvements in the
student-teacher ratios as a result of equalization. The right panel of Figure 2 shows the
relationship between 1960 black enrollment share and the average black-white studentteacher ratio gap for 1970-1972 on the same scale as that for the left panel.14 The black-white
gap in student-teacher ratios was virtually eliminated and the relationship between the blackwhite gap and black enrollment share disappeared.15

every dollar in the white schools. According to Margo (1990), this ratio was less than 20 cents per dollar around
1910.
12 Throughout the analysis, I use the black enrollment share for 1960 because 1960 is early enough that the
black enrollment share was plausibly unaffected by desegregation policy. In fact, districts’ black enrollment
share is very stable over time, and the results are very similar if the black enrollment share from another year is
used.
13 Some ability to direct resources within schools to whites, especially through tracking in high school, most
likely offset some of the reduction in between-school inequality.
14 The OCR survey stopped collecting school-level data on teachers after 1972.
15 See Appendix B for more information about how student-teacher ratios by race were calculated.

- 10 -

Figure 3 shows how changes in the two major classes of inputs—student-teacher
ratios and peers—related to initial black enrollment share. The left panel shows the change in
the black student-teacher ratio from 1960-1965 to 1970-1972 against the initial black
enrollment share. The slope of the regression line is -7.4 (with a t-statistic of 3), indicating
that blacks in districts with a 10 percentage point higher initial black enrollment share saw a
0.74 student larger decline in student-teacher ratios, on average, from before to after
desegregation.16 The large reductions in student-teacher ratios in higher black enrollment
share districts was due to the closing of the relatively large black-white student-teacher ratio
gaps that existed before desegregation.
B. Effects of Desegregation on Peers
That changes in blacks’ exposure to whites upon desegregation would vary with the
share of enrollment that is white—and therefore the black enrollment share—is
straightforward. Before desegregation, blacks in all districts had the same level of exposure
to blacks—none. But after desegregation, whites in districts that initially had low black
enrollment shares had significantly higher exposure to whites. This is expected, as even if
schools within districts are integrated, blacks cannot be exposed to many whites if there are
not many whites in their district. The right panel shows the strong negative relationship
between initial black enrollment share and the change in black exposure to whites—the
regression line has a slope of -1.05 (t=13.3).
IV. Methods and Data
16 In Reber (2006), I examine changes in school finance in more detail and argue that the observed changes
were caused by, not just coincident with, desegregation policy. Using annual data on per-pupil revenue by
source, I show that the timing of increased spending corresponds very well with desegregation, rather than
reflecting a gradual increase in revenue over time. Data limitations prevent a similar analysis of annual studentteacher ratios, but teachers appear to be the primary category on which additional revenue was spent, so results
would most likely be similar. For this study, it is not critical that the changes in student-teacher ratios and
exposure to whites were caused by desegregation as it is that they were large and rapid. Some readers may
rather interpret the results as the effect of increased spending and changes in peers, rather than the effects of
desegregation policy, per se.

- 11 -

A. Empirical Approach
Changes in peers and resources varied systematically with initial black enrollment share,
so I examine how changes in educational attainment related to initial black enrollment share.
Whether blacks in higher enrollment share districts are expected to have more or less
improvement in educational outcomes as a result of desegregation depends on whether
exposure to whites (who probably also had higher achievement) per se or exposure to more
resources is more important. Because changes in both spending and revenue are so closely
tied to the initial black enrollment share, their effects cannot be separately identified, and the
estimated differential change in educational attainment represents the net effect of changes
in peers and changes in funding.
The simplest specification relates the change in attainment from before to after
desegregation to the initial black enrollment share. In this case, the dependent variable of
interest is simply the average attainment for 1970-1975, less the average attainment for 19601965 (omitting the transition years): Δattain c =

1 1975
1 1965
attain
−
attain ct . The most basic
∑ ct 6 t =∑
6 t =1970
1960

specification is a univariate regression:
(1a)

Δattain ct = β 0 + β11960%blackc + ε c ,

where Δattain is described above, 1960%black is the black share of enrollment for county17 c
in 196018 and ε c is an error term. The estimate of β1 indicates the extent to which subsequent
changes in attainment varied with initial black enrollment share. If increases in resources

17 Because some data are available only at the county level, I estimate the regression at the county, rather than
district, level. Louisiana had three City districts; these were combined with their county for analysis.
18 The black enrollment share of a county is fairly stable over time; results are similar if the black enrollment
share from another year is used. I use data from 1960 because it is early enough that it is unlikely to have been
influenced by desegregation.

- 12 -

were more important than increased exposure to whites, β1 is expected to be positive and
vice-versa if exposure to whites is more important than increased funding.
Controls for other characteristics of counties that might be related to both

1960%black and changes in attainment can also be included in the regression:

(1b)

~ ~
~
~
Δattain c = β 0 + β11960%blackc + β 3 Δemploy c + Xβ 4 + μ c ,

Where Δemploy is the proportional change in employment in the county and X is a vector of
pre-existing county characteristics. I discuss the control variables in more detail when I
present the results below.
If differential changes in attainment by black enrollment share are caused by changes
in schools related to desegregation, we would expect the changes in attainment to be closely
timed with the observed differential changes in black exposure to whites and funding19 rather
than a gradual trend over the whole period (which would show up as a statistically significant

~
estimate of β1 in equation (1a) and β1 in equation (1b)). In order to observe the timing of
differential changes in attainment by black enrollment share, I estimate the equations of the
following form:
(2)

attain ct = θ t + 1960%blackc × γ t + ν ct ,

where 1960%black is the 1960 black enrollment share (as above) and separate intercepts ( θ t )
and coefficients ( γ t ) are estimated for each year between 1960 and 1975. This is equivalent
to estimating univariate regressions of attain on 1960%black separately for each year (the
constant and main 1960%black effect are excluded in favor of a full set of year effects and
interactions). If γ t is increasing with t, this indicates that attainment grew faster in higher
As discussed above, student-teacher ratios are a better measure of race-specific resources than county-level
per-pupil revenue and expenditure, but student-teacher ratios are not available annually.
19

- 13 -

black enrollment share districts over time, and vice-versa if γ t is declining with t. The
pattern of γ t ’s shows the timing of differential changes in attainment by black enrollment
share. I present the results of estimating equation (2) graphically.20
B. Measuring Educational Attainment
High-frequency individual-level data with county identifiers on completed attainment
or school enrollment status are unavailable for this period. A proxy for the dropout rate for
each cohort-district-year can be created using Louisiana administrative data on the number
of students enrolling in school by grade, district, year, and race. To check the validity of the
attainment estimates, I first present estimates of state-wide trends in the educational
attainment variables for 1960-1975 based on the Louisiana administrative data and compare
these to trends estimated from the 1980 Census IPUMS. I will apply a similar methodology
below to estimate educational attainment variables at the district level using the
administrative data.
If families did not move into or out of the state (and there were no mortality), I
could infer the share of each cohort continuing to each grade by following a cohort through
its entire school career, estimating dropout rates at every grade. For example, for the cohort
entering 1st grade in the Fall of 1961, 1st grade data would be taken from the 1961 report, 2nd
grade data from the 1962 report, and so on; the share of the cohort reaching at least 12th
grade would be the ratio of 12th grade registration in 1972 to 1st grade registration in 1961.21
Of course, in practice, the change in a cohort’s size between 1st and 12th grade also
reflects movements of families into and out of the state. In order to reduce the scope for
such movements to affect the estimated 12th grade enrollment rates, I divide 12th grade
Similar to equation (1b), controls for pre-existing characteristics of counties could be included by estimating
a separate coefficient on each characteristic for each year (or groups of years). Because the control variables
have little substantive effect on the coefficients, I do not present the results.
21 This also assumes that patterns of grade repetition are not changing over time.
20

- 14 -

registration by 8th grade registration 4 years prior (rather than 1st grade), assuming that there
is no “true” dropping out until after the fall of 8th grade. I refer to the share of a cohort that
registers for 12th grade as the 12th grade “continuation rate,” and similarly for 10th and 11th
grade; the estimated share of a cohort completing high school is referred to as the graduation
rate. If migration of families with older and younger children is similar, changes in cohort
size for younger grades can be used to net out the effects of migration. Thus, I construct the
12th grade continuation rate, net of the average 4-year change for cohorts in 5th-8th grades in
the same year as follows: contrate t12 =

reg t12 1 8 reg tg
, where reg tg is total black registration
− ∑
reg t8−4 4 g =5 reg tg−−44

for grade g in year t. Continuation rates for 10th and 11th grade and high school graduation
rates are constructed similarly.22
For comparison, I estimate trends in the fraction of blacks born in Louisiana who
attended at least some 10th, 11th, and 12th grade23 or graduated from high school using the 1980
Census IPUMS.24 If the estimates based on the administrative data are not contaminated by
differential migration of families with younger and older children, these two series should
track each other. Figure 4 presents the series based on the Census and the administrative
data from Louisiana for each of the continuation rates. To better compare the trends (and
because only the trends and not the levels of continuation and graduation rates are
meaningful), I rescale continuation and graduation rates from the administrative data to
22

Calculations for 10th and 11th grade ratios and high school graduates are as follows:

contrate t10 =
gradratet =

reg t10 1 8 reg tg
− ∑
, rerate
reg t8− 2 4 g =5 reg tg−−22
8

g
t
g −2
t −2

grads t 1
reg
− ∑
8
reg t −4 4 g =5 reg

11
t

=

reg t11
1
−
8
reg t − 3 4

8

∑

g =5

reg tg
,
reg tg−−33

.

23 The category “did not finish 10th grade” and higher indicates that an individual started, but did not finish,
10th grade and most closely corresponds to the 10th grade continuation rate, which measures the number of
students registered for 10th grade in the fall (and similarly for 11th and 12th grade).
24 See Appendix B for more information on how attainment was estimated from the Census.

- 15 -

equal the estimate from the Census for 1960. Trends from the two sources track reasonably
well, especially for 12th grade continuation rate and high school graduation rate.
Recall that increases in black exposure to whites and the accompanying increases in
funding were concentrated in 1965-1970, especially 1968-1970 (Figure 1). The state-wide
average trends in educational attainment for blacks in Louisiana do not appear to be wellexplained by the timing of desegregation policy. Attainment rose through about 1968,
leveling off or declining slightly in the early 1970s. Other factors may have influenced these
trends, however, potentially masking improvements due to desegregation.
There is no readily available control group, but comparisons to trends for blacks in
other regions (where desegregation did not occur or took a different form) and whites are
suggestive of improvements in educational attainment in the post-desegregation period.
Figure 5 shows trends in educational attainment for those born in Louisiana, the states of
the former Confederacy, the Border states, and the rest of the country25 separately for blacks
and whites. Graduation rates for whites in all regions and blacks outside the Confederate
states were declining after 1970, while graduation rates were flat or increasing for blacks in
Louisiana and the Confederate states as a whole.26 While far from definitive, this is
suggestive that desegregation may have improved educational attainment for Southern
blacks. On the other hand, the largest improvements in Louisiana-born blacks’ graduation
rates (absolutely and relative to other groups) occurred around 1964 or 1965, before the
effects of desegregation policy on spending and black exposure to whites kicked in.
Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon (2006) pursue this approach more systematically, comparing
The usual Census region “South” is subdivided into Confederate and Border states due to their slightly
different history with desegregation. The Census Bureau also classifies Missouri as in the Midwest region; I
have reclassified it as part of the Border region here. Trends for the three non-Southern regions (West,
Midwest, and Northeast) are similar, so they are combined in “Non-South”.
26 The downward trend in the early 1970s could result from the acquisition of GEDs for earlier cohorts, while
later dropouts have not had as much time to acquire a GED. Estimates of trends in dropouts for these cohorts
based on the 1990 Census are similar, but do show a slightly smaller decline in the early 1970s.
25

- 16 -

educational attainment and wages for different cohorts of blacks and whites born in
different regions. They conclude that the desegregation effort did contribute to
improvements in educational attainment and wages for blacks.
I construct continuation rates at the district level using the same methodology and
administrative data below. The district-level estimates cannot be compared to Census data,
but it is reassuring that the statewide trends for the two data sources match reasonably well.
C. Data Sources
Louisiana has 64 county (Parish) school districts; at the beginning of the period,
there were also three city districts. One of the city districts combined with its county in the
late 1960s. Because some of the variables are available only at the county level, I combine the
city districts with their respective counties and conduct the analysis at the county level.27 The
key variables in the analysis were collected from the Louisiana Department of Education
Annual Financial and Statistical Reports for 1954-1975, which report information on a variety of
variables at the school district level, including the number of teachers by race (used to
construct student-teacher ratios for 1960-1965), fall registration by grade and race (used to
construct continuation rates), the number of high school graduates by race, total revenue and
total expenditure.
Proxies for pre-existing socioeconomic status and voter registration at the county
level were taken from the 1960 Census county tabulations and a dataset compiled by
Matthews and Prothro for their studies of voting in the South.28 Data on segregation (black
exposure to whites and white exposure to blacks) were taken from two sources. For 1960 to

27 Cameron Parish (county) is excluded from the analysis. The district had substantial oil reserves on school
district property (Section 16 lands), which generated substantial revenue for the district during this period. The
finances of the schools were therefore quite different from those of other school districts, and the district is an
extreme outlier in funding and student-teacher ratios.
28 I am grateful to Jim Alt for providing an electronic version of the Matthews-Prothro data.

- 17 -

1966, black exposure to whites was estimated based on data collected by the Southern
Education Reporting Service and published in various editions of Statistical Summary of School
Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border States.29 For later years, I use the school-level
surveys of students and teachers by race conducted by the U.S. Department of Health
Education and Welfare (HEW) Office of Civil Rights (OCR).30
Appendix A provides more detail on all the data sources.
V. Results

As shown graphically in Figure 3, blacks in high black enrollment share districts saw
larger increases in resources and smaller increases in exposure to whites compared to blacks
in lower black enrollment share districts. I can also show this with and without controls for
preexisting district characteristics by estimating equations (1a) and (1b) with the change in
black exposure to whites (Table 1a) and black student-teacher ratios (Table 1b) on the lefthand-side. The first column of Table 1a shows the mean and standard deviation for the
control variables. The regression of the change in black exposure on 1960%black shows a
strong negative relationship between black enrollment share and black exposure to whites,
with an estimated coefficient of -1.05; controls for pre-existing characteristics have little
effect on the coefficient. Table 1b shows that a 10 percentage point increase in 1960%black is
associated with an additional reduction in black student-teacher ratio of 0.74 (first column);
the inclusion of controls reduces the estimates (in absolute value) by about a third.

SERS reports the share of black students in school with any whites. When only a small share of blacks were
in school with whites, exposure of blacks to whites is approximately equal to the share of blacks with any
whites (since those in school with whites were in schools that were virtually 100 percent white and the
remaining blacks were in schools that were virtually 100 percent black). The segregation data are described in
greater detail in Appendix A.
30 I am grateful to Ben Denckla for converting the school-level OCR data from its antiquated format.
29

- 18 -

Because of the method used to estimate school continuation rates (the share of each
cohort continuing to each grade), it is critical that mobility among counties in Louisiana
during the period of the study not be correlated with the county’s initial black enrollment
share. Recall that I estimate the 12th grade continuation rate for a district as the ratio of
students registering for 12th grade to the number of students registering for 8th grade four
years prior. If students leave (enter) the district, I will under (over) estimate the continuation
rate.31 However, if those movements are not correlated with initial black enrollment share,
migration will not bias estimates of the coefficient on 1960%black, but will simply introduce
classical measurement error to the dependent variables.
Fortunately, I can assess the plausibility of this assumption by examining the
relationship between black enrollment share and changes in continuation rates for younger
grades. If there is no true dropping out among younger children32, then continuation rates
for younger children can be used to assess whether mobility is correlated with black
enrollment share. Indeed, the analysis of continuation rates for younger grades provides no
evidence that black mobility was correlated with initial black enrollment share, suggesting
that changes in continuation rates for upper grades are likely to reflect differential changes in
the true rate of dropping out.33 White mobility, on the other hand, was significantly related
to black enrollment share, as white enrollment shifted dramatically from higher to lower
black enrollment share counties during the period of desegregation (Reber, 2006). This
precludes using a similar methodology to assess the effects of desegregation on white
educational attainment.
Note that the enrollment data employed in the analysis include private school enrollment, so movements
from public to private school or vice versa are not problematic for the construction of continuation rates by
district. Black private enrollment is quite small in any case.
32 It is possible that some younger children have low attendance rates, but it seems unlikely that many would
not register for school at all. The measure of enrollment I employ here is based on fall registration.
33 This requires the additional assumption that families with older and younger children do not migrate
differentially in a way that is correlated with districts’ initial black enrollment share.
31

- 19 -

A. Continuation Rates for Younger Grades
Table 2a shows the relationship between changes in continuation rates and initial
black enrollment share for 6th, 7th, and 8th grade (6th, 7th, and 8th grade registration divided by
4th grade registration 2, 3, and 4 years prior, respectively; these can be compared to results
for 10th, 11th, and 12th grade continuation rates, respectively). The first column in each set
shows the results for equation (1a) with no controls; the second and third columns with
controls (equation (1b)) are reported for consistency with the results reported in Table 4 for
higher grade continuation rates; the controls do not substantially affect the coefficients of
interest. The coefficients on initial black enrollment share are not significantly different from
0 for any of the grades or specifications, indicating that changes in the continuation rates for
younger grades were not related to initial black enrollment share. I show the results
estimating equation (2) for the 6th, 7th and 8th grade continuation rates together with the
results for the upper grades below. These also show no differential trend in continuation
rates for lower grades among districts with higher initial black enrollment shares.
To reduce noise in the lower grade registration rates, I take advantage of data for a
larger number of lower grades, estimating equations (1a) and (1b) for the average 2-, 3-, and
4-year “lagged” continuation rates for 5th-8th grade (again, for comparison to 10th, 11th, and
12th grade continuation rates). The average lagged continuation rate is avgratetl =

1 8 reg tg
,
∑
4 g =5 reg tg−−ll

where l indexes the number of years lagged and g indexes grade. The results with avgrate as
the dependent variable are presented in Table 2b. Again, the coefficients on 1960%black are
insignificant and close to zero. The standard errors are smaller than when a single grade’s
registration rate is analyzed alone, yielding relatively precisely estimated zeros.

- 20 -

Changes in continuation rates for lower grades show no significant correlation with
initial black enrollment share, providing support for the assumption that mobility is
unrelated to 1960%black. I therefore turn to the analysis of registration rates for higher
grades.
B. Main Results: Continuation Rates Older Grades
To estimate registration rates for 10th, 11th, and 12th grade and high school graduation
rates, registration in the relevant grade (or number of high school graduates) is divided by 8th
grade registration (the closest year unaffected by true dropping out) for the same cohort;
thus contrate t10 =

reg t10
reg t11
reg t12
grads tHS
11
12
HS
,
contrate
,
contrate
,
and
contrate
. I
=
=
=
t
t
t
reg t8− 2
reg t8−3
reg t8−4
reg t8−4

compare those with 6th, 7th, and 8th grade registration divided by 4th grade registration for the
same cohort, respectively, as well as the 2-, 3-, and 4-year lagged avgrate, respectively,
described above.
To test the hypothesis that the continuation rates rose differentially by 1960%black, I
estimate equation (1a) for the upper grades. Because the results for younger grades show no
evidence of differential migration, I also estimate equation (1a) for the upper grades,
controlling for the change in the 5th-8th grade lagged continuation rate. The results, with and
without controlling for the change in average 5th-8th grade lagged registration rates, are
presented in Table 3. The point estimates indicate that black educational attainment rose
more in districts with higher 1960%black. Controlling for changes in low-grade continuation
rates, the coefficients on 1960%black indicate that a 10 percentage point increase in
1960%black was associated with a 1.3, 1.9, and 1.8 percentage point larger increase in the
continuation rates for 11th grade, 12th grade, and high school graduation, respectively; the
estimated coefficients are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10 percent level

- 21 -

for 11th grade and at the 5 percent level for 12th grade and high school graduation. The
coefficient for the 10th grade continuation rate is relatively small and statistically insignificant.
(The 1960 black enrollment share ranges from about 10 to 70 percent, with a mean and
median both around 40 percent; the standard deviation of this variable is 0.16.)
The results show that high black enrollment share districts saw larger increases in
educational attainment during the period of desegregation.
C. Specification Checks
If black enrollment share is correlated with other characteristics of counties that were
related to changes in attainment, the estimated relationship between 1960%black and
attainment could be due to factors other than the desegregation-induced changes in funding
and peers. For example, if blacks in high black enrollment share districts were less educated
at the beginning of the period, they might naturally improve at a faster rate over time, and
the effects of increases in funding due to desegregation (due to higher initial black
enrollment share) would be overstated.
There are three important potential confounders for which I can include proxies in
the regression. First, the socioeconomic status of blacks living in a district may be correlated
with black enrollment share, and counties with different socioeconomic status may be on
different educational attainment trends. I use several proxies for SES of blacks and the
population of the county as a whole from the 1960 Census (nonwhite median income,
nonwhite median education, percent of households with complete plumbing, and the
percent of population living in urban areas).34

34 Note that the poverty line was not defined until after 1960, so county tabulations of poverty rates are not
available from the 1960 Census. (Poverty status is available on the 1960 IPUMS, but county identifiers are not.)
I therefore, use the prevalence of complete plumbing as a proxy for poverty.

- 22 -

Second, during the 1960s, black participation in politics increased following the
passage of the Voting Rights Act (VRA). Before VRA, black registration was particularly low
in predominately black counties; to the extent that VRA helped equalize registration across
counties, political participation would have increased more in blacker districts. In addition,
blacks are a larger share of the voting-age population in blacker districts, so increased black
participation may translate to improved circumstances for blacks more in those counties. I
control for the share of the black voting age population (VAP) registered to vote in 1960 and
the change from 1964 to 1968 in the share of black VAP registered, collected by Matthews
and Prothro (1963a, 1963b).
Finally, the economic climate, especially the availability of employment, is an
important input to the decision to enroll in school, as expanded employment opportunities
increase the opportunity cost of schooling. Frequent district-level data on employment are
not available for this period; but I am able to control for the log change in total employment
from 1963 to 1970-1975.35
Another potential contributor to changes in educational attainment is changes in
compulsory schooling laws. Some Southern states changed compulsory schooling laws
during the period of desegregation because the state did not want to force whites to go to
integrated schools. Fortunately for this study, there were no changes in compulsory
schooling laws in Louisiana during this period.36
Tables 4a and 4b show the results of estimating equation (1b), including controls for
pre-existing county characteristics. The first column (no controls) of Table 3 is repeated for
comparison. Except for 10th grade continuations rate (where the estimated coefficient on
Technically, employment could be affected by changes in schools; however, the share of the potentially
employed whose work decision may be affected by changes in schooling is most likely very small.
36 Personal communication with Ann Huff Stevens and Marianne Page; data collected for Oreopoulos, Page,
and Stevens (2003).
35

- 23 -

1960%black was already small and insignificant), the inclusion of controls increases the
coefficients by about a quarter. If anything, high black enrollment share districts had other
characteristics associated with declining educational attainment for blacks.
In addition to controlling for pre-existing county characteristics and changes in
employment, I can examine the timing of changes in attainment in more detail. The
differential increases in funding and exposure to whites were concentrated between 1965 and
1970; so if the differential improvements in attainment documented above were due to these
changes, we would expect them to be concentrated in these same years (or at least not a
gradual upward trend over the whole period). Two factors limit our ability to assess the
timing of changes in black educational attainment somewhat. First, the annual attainment
data are somewhat noisy, so year-to-year changes are not as precisely estimated as the
differences in averages over longer periods. Second it is not obvious ex ante when changes in
funding and peers should translate into changes in outcomes. We might expect lags between
changes in schools and changes in outcomes, but we would not expect changes in outcomes
to lead changes in schools due to desegregation. Despite these difficulties, the estimates of
equation (2) are instructive, suggesting the differential improvements in educational
attainment among high black enrollment share districts were concentrated between 1967 and
1971, consistent with a causal effect on attainment of increased funding around the same
time.
The first panel of Figure 6 shows the results of estimating equation (2) for the 10th
grade registration rate and plotting the interactions of 1960%black with the year dummies.
(Recall that this is equivalent to estimating year-by-year univariate regressions of 10th grade
registration rate on 1960%black.) For comparison, I also plot the results for the 6th grade
continuation rate (6th grade registration divided by 4th grade registration two years prior) and

- 24 -

the average 5th-8th grade 2-year lagged continuation rate. The remaining panels of Figure 6
show the results for the 11th and 12th grade continuation and high school graduation rates,
with the relevant low-grade comparison groups. First, Figure 6 shows that for none of the
younger grade continuation rates is a trend in the coefficients evident, confirming that
blacks’ mobility was not correlated with initial black enrollment share.
The coefficient for the 10th grade continuation regressions increased around 1972,
and for 11th grade continuation, it increased around 1969 or 1970. The coefficient for the
12th grade continuation and high school graduation rate regressions rose slightly earlier
around 1968. The results are consistent with a larger increase in black continuation rates for
high 1960%black districts around the time of desegregation, when those districts experienced
larger increases in per-pupil funding but smaller increases in exposure to whites.
Controlling for changes in younger grades, the results are similar to those shown in
Figure 6 and are presented in Figure 7. Estimates of the coefficient on black enrollment
share for the 10th and 11th grade registration rates began rising around 1969 and were higher
on average in the post-desegregation period (left panel). The estimates for 12th grade
registration and high school graduation rates increased substantially around 1968 and
continued to rise thereafter (right panel).
The main finding that black educational attainment increased more in higher black
enrollment share counties during the period of desegregation is not substantially influenced
by the inclusion of control variables. Further, the timing of the increases closely matches the
timing of differential increases in funding and reductions in student-teacher ratios for blacks
due to desegregation, suggesting that desegregation policy—and the changes in the system of
school finance it brought—helped improve black educational attainment in Louisiana.
VI. Conclusion and Discussion

- 25 -

The analysis presented above shows that, during the five years of the most intensive
desegregation activity in Louisiana, districts with higher black enrollment shares saw
substantially larger increases in per-pupil funding. Blacks in those districts saw large
reductions in student-teacher ratios as black-white school quality gaps closed but also smaller
increases in exposure to whites. The finding that blacks in higher black enrollment share
districts experienced significantly larger increases in educational attainment during this
period suggests that the increased funding that came with desegregation was more important
than the increased exposure to whites.
The results suggest that increased funding associated with desegregation improved
educational attainment for blacks, but the magnitudes of the coefficients presented in Tables
3 and 4 are not easily compared to the existing literature. I therefore provide two “back-ofthe-envelope” calculations of the effects of school funding on educational attainment
implied by the estimates. First, I estimate the elasticity of high school graduation rates with
respect to school spending. I am not aware of existing literature estimating the cost of
programs that increase high school graduation rates, however, so it is not clear to what this
estimate should be compared. I therefore also conduct a simple cost-benefit analysis: I
compare the net present value of additional wages induced by desegregation-related increases
in school spending to the net present value of additional school spending for the affected
cohorts. While the calculation necessarily requires a number of assumptions, desegregationinduced spending appears to have had positive net benefits for reasonable values of the
relevant parameters.
To estimate the increase in high school graduation rates per additional dollar spent, we
need to know the differential increase in spending for high black-enrollment-share districts.
Estimating equation (1) with per-pupil revenue as the dependent variable yields a coefficient

- 26 -

on 1960%black of 1.7 (thousands of 2003 dollars), indicating that a 10 percentage point
increase in 1960%black is associated with an additional increase in per-pupil revenue of $170
(not reported).37 Dividing the coefficient on the 1960%black from the high school graduation
rate regression (0.19) by that from the per-pupil revenue regression yields an estimate of
0.11; thus, a $1,000 differential increase in funding (in constant 2003 dollars) during the
period of desegregation was associated with an 11 percentage point increase in the black
high school graduation rate. Average per-pupil spending in the pre-desegregation period
(1960-1965) was $2,400. Based on the 1980 Census, the average high school graduation rate
for pre-desegregation cohorts was 68 percent. The estimates suggest, therefore, that a 42
percent desegregation-induced increase in per-pupil revenue resulted in a 17 percent increase
in high school graduation rates.
A fuller accounting of the effect of desegregation on educational attainment should
include increases in educational attainment at points in the educational distribution below
high school graduation (starting in 10th grade). Based on the coefficients from the 10th, 11th,
12th grade continuation rate and high school graduation rate regressions, I estimate that a 10
percentage point increase in 1960%black was associated with an additional increase in average
black educational attainment of 0.05 year for those cohorts represented in the “after” years.38
The average cohort in the in the “after” period was exposed to higher levels of funding for
3.5 years. Thus, $595 of additional spending39 (3.5 X $170 per pupil per year) corresponded
to 0.05 additional years of educational attainment. Estimates from the literature on returns to
schooling suggest that an additional year of education raises wages by 8-12 percent; I use an
This is similar to an instrumental variables approach, regressing the change in educational attainment on the
change in per-pupil revenue, using initial black enrollment share to instrument for per-pupil revenue. Because
there are other channels through which black enrollment share may have affected outcomes—most important,
changes in black exposure to whites depended on initial black enrollment share—I do not take an IV approach.
38 See Appendix B for the details of the cost benefit calculation this section.
39 Technically, the present discounted value of spending should be used. At reasonable discount rates,
discounting will have little effect over such short time periods.
37

- 27 -

intermediate value of 10 percent. According to the 1970 Census, black Louisianans between
the ages of 20 and 50 with 10-12 years of education (but no high school degree) had annual
average wages around $9,700 (in CPI-adjusted 2003 dollars).40 Based on these assumptions
and assuming a 5 percent discount rate, the net present value of additional wages surpasses
the $595 increase in spending after 17 years in the labor force.
This calculation is necessarily rough, requiring many assumptions. The benefits of
desegregation policy are potentially significantly underestimated, primarily because higher
wages due to increased educational attainment were not the only benefits of the policy, and
there may have been costs not captured here (for example, to whites). Still, the additional
spending appears to have been “worth it.” Evidence is mounting that education has
beneficial effects on outcomes other than wages, in particular, health and criminality.41 In
addition, the quality of education for blacks likely rose as well, so blacks who did not change
their attainment may also have seen benefits. On the other hand, this study has not been able
to account for the effects of desegregation on whites. In previous work (Reber 2006), I find
that funding and student-teacher ratios were “leveled up” to the level previously experienced
by whites; this is suggestive that whites were “held harmless” in resources allocated to their
schools, and we would not expect large effects on educational attainment and quality for
whites through that channel. Still, the overall effect of desegregation on whites could be
positive or negative.
Little is known about how desegregation affected school finances in other states, so
it is difficult to assess whether the mechanism that operated in Louisiana to bring up school
spending and black educational attainment after desegregation operated in other parts of the

40 This estimate includes blacks with 0 wages; the average wages among those who are working is nearly
$15,000.
41 See, for example Lochner and Moretti (2004), Currie and Moretti (2003), Lleras-Muney (2005).

- 28 -

country. Margo (1990) estimates that Louisiana had one of the largest state-wide black-white
school spending gaps among Southern states in 1950. This suggests that by the time of
desegregation, other states may not have had as large a black-white quality gap to close, so
there may have been less scope for improvement in blacks’ outcomes through the
mechanisms shown here.
The findings here are consistent with Guryan’s (2004) results that implementation of
a court-ordered desegregation plan reduced black dropout rates. Using a different
methodology and different source of variation than that employed in earlier studies, I find
evidence that desegregation improved educational attainment for blacks. The results
presented here contribute to the growing literature suggesting that the policies designed to
equalize educational opportunities of blacks and whites around the middle of the century—
including desegregation—contributed to improved outcomes for their intended
beneficiaries.

- 29 -

References

Armor, D.J. (2002), “Desegregation and Academic Achievement.” School Desegregation in
the 21st Century, Christine H. Rossell, David J. Armor, and Herbert J. Walberg, Eds.:
148-187.
Ashenfelter, O., W. Collins and A. Yoon (2006). “Evaluating the Role of Brown v. Board of
Education in School Equalization, Desegregation, and the Income of African
Americans.” American Law and Economics Review. 8(2): 213-248.
Bond, H.M. (1934). The Education of the Negro in the American Social Order. New York,
Prentice-Hall.
Boozer, M. A., A. B. Krueger, et al. (1992). “Race and School Quality since Brown v. Board
of Education.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics: 269-326.
Card, D. (2001). “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems.” Econometrica 69(5): 1127-1160.
Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992). “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A
Direct Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 151-200.
Card, D. and A.B. Krueger (1996a). “School Resources and Student Outcomes: An
Overview of the Literature and New Evidence from North and South Carolina.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(4): 31-50.
Card, D. and A.B. Krueger (1996b). “Labor Market Effects of School Quality: Theory and
Evidence,” in Gary Burtless, Ed., Does Money Matter? The Effects of School
Resources on Student Achievement and Adult Success. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution.
Cascio, E.U., N.E. Gordon, E. Lewis, and S.J. Reber (2006). “Local Responses to Education
Policy: Evidence from the Civil Rights Act and Title I,” Mimeo.
Coleman, J. S. (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity Summary Report. Washington,
D.C., U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education.
Cook, T. (1985). “What Have Black Children Gained Academically from School Integration?
Examination of Meta-Analytic Evidence,” National Institute of Education.
Crain, R. and J. Strauss (1985). “School Desegregation and Black Occupational Attainments:
Results from a Long-Term Experiment,” Center for Social Organization of Schools,
Johns Hopkins University.
Currie, J. and E. Moretti (2003). “Mother's Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence From College Openings,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 118(4): 1495-1532.

- 30 -

Guryan, J. (2004). “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates,” American Economic Review.
94(4): 919-943.
Hanushek, E. (1986). “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public
Schools,” Journal of Economic Literature. 24(3): 1141-77.
Lleras-Muney, A. (2005). “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States,” Review of Economic Studies. 72(1): 189-221.
Lochner, L. and E. Moretti (2004) “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” American Economic Review. 94(1): 155189.
Matthews, D. R. and J. W. Prothro (1963a). “Social and Economic Factors and Negro
Registration in the South,” American Political Science Review. 57(1): 24-44.
Matthews, D. R. and J. W. Prothro (1963b). “Political Factors and Negro Voter Registration
in the South,” American Political Science Review. 57(2): 355-367.
Margo, R. A. (1990). Race and schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An economic history.
Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press.
Oreopoulos, P., M.E. Page, and A.H. Stevens (2003). "Does Human Capital Transfer from
Parent to Child? The Intergenerational Effects of Compulsory Schooling," NBER
Working Papers 10164, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Reber, S.J. (2006). From Separate and Unequal to Integrated and Equal? School
Desegregation and School Finance in Louisiana. UCLA mimeo.
Rivkin, S.G. (2000). “School Desegregation, Academic Attainment, and Earnings.” The
Journal of Human Resources 35(2): 333-346.
St. John, N.H. (1975). School Desegregation Outcomes for Children. John Wiley and Sons.
New York.
Southern Education Reporting Service. Statistical Summary, State by State, of School
Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border Area from 1954 to the
Present. Nashville, Tennessee, SERS. Various issues, 1960-1967.

- 31 -

Appendix A: Data Sources and Imputation of Segregation Measures

A. Data Sources
Louisiana Administrative Data
The Annual Financial and Statistical Report is published annually by the Louisiana
Department of Education. The following variables were collected at the district level for
1960-1975 school years (all years refer to the fall of the school year): total black fall
registration in public and nonpublic schools, total white fall registration in public and
nonpublic registration, total revenue, total black classroom teachers in public schools, and
total white classroom teachers in public schools.
To create the continuation rate variables (the outcome of interest), I also collected
black registration in public and nonpublic schools for each grade for the 1956 to 1975
school years, as well as the number of high school graduates. (The analysis is restricted to
1960-1975, but in order to construct the 12th grade continuation and high school graduation
rate, data on the number of 8th graders 4 years prior is required, so I employ data on
registration by grade starting in 1956.) To account for the possibility of movement between
public and private schools in the same district, I use the sum of public and nonpublic
registration by grade to calculate the continuation rates (although few blacks were enrolled in
private schools).
Data on student-teacher ratios at the school level are not available before 1970.
However, according to the Southern Education Reporting Service, students and teachers
were completely segregated by race through 1965 (white teachers did not teach in black
schools and vice-versa). Thus, the average student-teacher ratio for the district is the total
number of black students in the district divided by the total number of black teachers in the
district. Student-teacher ratios by race for later years are calculated from Office of Civil

- 32 -

Rights (OCR) data. The OCR data (described below) contain information on the number of
teachers in every school, as well as the number of black students and the total number of
students. To calculate the black student-teacher ratio for 1970-1972, I calculated the studentteacher ratio (total students, any race, divided by total teachers, any race) in every school; I
then calculated the weighted average student-teacher ratio for schools in each district, with
black enrollment in the school as weights.
Per-pupil revenue is total revenue received by the district divided by total public
registration (black and white).
Preexisting County Characteristics and Voter Registration
The percent of households with complete plumbing and the percent of the
population living in urban areas at the county level, originally from the county tabulations of
the 1960 Census, were taken from the City and County Databook. Nonwhite median income
and the nonwhite median years of education were collected by Matthews and Prothro
(1963a, 1963b), also from county tabulations of the 1960 Census. The percent of the black
voting-aged population (VAP) registered to vote in 1960, 1964 and 1968 were collected by
Matthews and Prothro from reports of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.
Employment
Information on employment by county was taken from County Business Patterns for
1964 and 1970-1975. The variable Ln Change in Employment is the average of the natural log of
employment in 1970 through 1975 less the natural log of employment in 1964 (the only year
in the “before” period for which data are available).
Educational attainment by state of birth
To estimate the share of cohorts of students attending 10th through 12th grade in
1960 to 1975, I use the 1980 Census IPUMS. Individuals were assigned to the state in which

- 33 -

they were born. Cohorts are identified by the school year in which they are expected to have
been in the relevant grade. For example, an individual who is expected to have entered 12th
grade in the 1965-66 school year is assigned to the 1965 cohort for the 12th grade ratio, 1964
for the 11th grade ratio, and 1963 for the 10th grade ratio. Individuals are assigned to a cohort
based on their quarter and year of birth, assuming they entered 1st grade if they would have
been 6 at the end of the 3rd quarter (individuals born in the 4th quarter are assigned to the
following school year) and assuming they do not repeat grades.
B. Sources of Data on Segregation and Imputation Methods
I use data from the Southern Education Reporting Service’s (SERS) Statistical
Summary, State by State, of School Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border Area from 1954
to the Present and surveys conducted by the Office of Civil Rights (OCR) of the Office of
Education to estimate the measures of segregation for Louisiana school districts from 19601976. The exposure of blacks to whites is the percent white in schools, weighted by black
enrollment and vice-versa for exposure of whites to blacks; data on racial composition at the
school level are required to calculate these indexes. I obtained the original binary EBCDIC data
files for the OCR surveys for 1968-1974 and 1976 (the survey was not conducted in 1975)
and converted the files to ASCII for analysis. Similar school-level data on students and
teachers by race were published for 1967 by the Office of Education; these data were
entered for analysis. The exposure indexes where then calculated based on the school-level
enrollment by race.
The OCR surveys were not comprehensive in all years, but the large size of
Louisiana’s school districts and the heavy involvement of the courts in desegregating its
schools ensured that most Louisiana districts were included in the data in most years. Of the

- 34 -

66 districts in Louisiana, 45 were included in the 1967 survey, 61 in the 1969 survey, and all
of the districts were included in the remaining years.
Before the 1967 school year, no school-level data on enrollment by race are available,
but the Southern Education Reporting Service monitored desegregation efforts in Southern
and Border states including Louisiana and reported on their findings in the Statistical
Summaries. In some issues, the percent of blacks in school with any whites is listed at the
district level for districts with any desegregation activity. Desegregation in this period generally
took the form of a small number of black students enrolling in white schools. At low levels
of desegregation of this form, the percent of blacks in school with whites provides an upper
bound of exposure of blacks to whites. For example, consider a district that has one black
school and one white school, each with half the total enrollment in the district. If 1 percent
of blacks are moved to the white school, 1 percent of blacks are in a school that is 50/51 or
98 percent white, while 99 percent of blacks are in school with 0 percent white. Thus, the
exposure of blacks to whites is (0.98 × .01) + (0.99 × 0) = 0.0098 or 0.98 percent. My
method assumes that black exposure to whites is 1 percent; as the percent of blacks in
school with any white increases and the percent black in the district increases, this method
will overestimate exposure of blacks to whites more. The highest percent of blacks in school
with any whites reported in the data is 5.5 percent. The small increase in black exposure to
whites before 1966 represents an upper bound on the true increase in exposure.
The SERS publication only listed the percent of blacks in school with any whites for
districts where there was at least some desegregation activity. The publication covering the
1964-65 school year appears to have complete coverage for districts with any desegregation;
the Office of Education contracted with SERS to conduct a more complete accounting of
the status of desegregation in that year, following the passage of the Civil Rights Act (CRA).

- 35 -

I therefore assume that any district that is not listed as having any blacks in school with
whites in 1964 had no desegregation in earlier years and set exposure of blacks to whites to 0
for those years. In Louisiana, only 3 districts had any blacks in school with whites, with an
average of about 2 percent of blacks in school with any whites. For 1966, SERS reported the
number of blacks in school with whites; to estimate the percent in school with whites, I
divided this by the number of blacks reported in the district in the 1967 OCR data if
available. If a district is not listed as having any blacks in school with whites in 1966, black
exposure to whites is set to 0 for 1966 and all previous years.
White exposure to blacks is not estimated from the SERS data, but the small
numbers of blacks in school with whites indicates that this was also quite low before 1967.
The trends presented in Figure 1 look similar if the sample is limited to districts that had
data available in all years.

- 36 -

Appendix B: Cost-Benefit Analysis
Change in Revenue

The financial cost associated with desegregation is the additional revenue required to
“level up” spending in integrated schools to the level previously experienced in the white
schools. Because districts with high black enrollment shares traditionally had larger blackwhite spending gaps, spending had to increase more in high black enrollment share districts.
In order to quantify the differential increase in revenue for high black enrollment share
districts, I estimate equation (2) with per pupil revenue on the left-hand-side. The
coefficient on 1960%black is 1.7, indicating that a 10 percentage point increase in initial black
enrollment share was associated with an additional $170 increase in per-pupil revenue
between the before period (1960-1965) and the after period (1970-1975). The number of
years that individuals were exposed to additional funding varied by year in the after period:
observations in 1970 were exposed to increased funding for one year, observations in 1971
were exposed to two years, and so on. The average observation in the after period was
therefore exposed to (1+2+3+4+5+6)/6 = 3.5 years of increased funding. Thus, a ten
percentage point increase in 1960%black was associated with an increase in cumulative
average spending for cohorts in the “after” period of $170 X 3.5 = $595.
Change in Educational Attainment

In this analysis, I only consider the benefits of higher wages due to increased
educational attainment. The educational benefits to blacks, therefore, are likely to be
significantly underestimated. The estimates in Table 3 indicate the differential change in the
share of students who attain at least 9th grade, 10th grade, 11th grade and high school

- 37 -

graduation.42 I am interested in the change in average years of completed education, which is
calculated as follows.
Because the estimates of the effects of desegregation on attainment focus on changes
in 9th grade through high school graduation, for simplicity, I assume that everyone in the
population attains at least 8th grade and not more than 12th grade. (Attainment outside of
these ranges will difference out when I estimate changes in attainment due to desegregation
policy.) The average education of the population is
12

(A1)

educ = ∑ t × pt ,
t =8

where pt is the share of the population attaining exactly t years of education. Let q t be the
share of the population that attains at least t years of education, then q t = pt + q t +1 . If
everyone attains at least 8 and not more than 12 years (high school graduation), then q8 = 1
and q12 = p12 . Substituting into (A1):
(A2)

educ = 8 (1 − q 9 ) + 9 (q 9 − q 10 ) + 10 (q 10 − q 11 ) + 11 (q 11 − q 12 ) + 12 (q 12 )

educ = 8 + q 9 + q10 + q11 + q12

The change in educational attainment is therefore:
(A3)

Δ educ = Δq9 + Δq10 + Δq11 + Δq12

The coefficients on 1960%black give the differential change in the q’s. The differential
change in average educational attainment is therefore the sum of the differential changes in
attaining at least 9, 10, 11, and 12 years, the coefficients on 1960%black for 10th, 11th, and 12th

42 Note that the 10th grade registration rate is the share of 8th graders who registered for 10th grade in the fall; I
consider this to be a close proxy for the number of students who completed at least 9th grade; the 11th grade
registration rate is the share that completed at least 10th grade, the 12th grade registration rate is the share that
competed 11th grade; the High School Graduation rate is the share that completed at least 12th grade.

- 38 -

grade registration and high school graduation, respectively.43 Using the second set of
estimates from Table 3 (controlling for lower grade registration rates)44, average educational
attainment for blacks in a district that was 100 percent black would have risen by 0.040 +
0.132 + 0.191 + 0.184 = 0.547 years more than a district that was all white. Thus, a 10
percentage point increase in initial black enrollment share is associated with an additional
increase in educational attainment of about 0.05 years during the period of desegregation.
Return to Education

Estimates from the literature on returns to schooling suggest that an additional year
of education raises wages by 8-12 percent; I use an intermediate value of 10 percent.45
According to the 1970 Census, black Louisianans between the ages of 20 and 50 with 10-12
years of education (but no high school degree) had annual average wages around $9,700 (in
CPI-adjusted 2003 dollars).46 Based on these assumptions and assuming a 5 percent discount
rate, the net present value of additional wages surpasses the $595 increase in spending after
17 years in the labor force. See the main text for further discussion of the limits of this
analysis.

I consider a student who registered for 10th grade to have attained 9 years of education, those who registered
for 11th grade to have attained 10 years, and so on.
44 I use the point estimates even where they are not statistically significantly different from zero.
45 See Card (2001) for a review of the literature on returns to schooling.
46 This estimate includes blacks with 0 wages; the average wages among those who are working is nearly
$15,000.
43

- 39 -

Table 1a - Determinants of Changes in Black Exposure to Whites, 1960-65 to 1970-74
Mean
(std dev)
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960
Percent Black Voting Age Population Registered to Vote, 1960
Nonwhite Median Income, 1960
Nonwhite Median Years of Education, 1960
Percent of Households with Complete Plumbing
Percent of Population in Urban Areas
Change in Percent of VAP Blacks Registered to Vote, 1964-1968
Ln Change in Employment

0.405
(0.162)
0.359
(0.282)
8.952
(1.938)
3.365
(1.082)
0.519
(0.135)
0.341
(0.241)
0.299
(0.178)
0.353
(0.206)

Constant
N
R-squared

63

Change in Black Exposure to Whites
-1.051
(0.064)***

-1.104
(0.071)***
0.097
(0.048)*
-0.007
(0.008)
0.005
(0.014)
-0.136
(0.119)
-0.140
(0.063)**

0.878
(0.031)***
63
0.74

1.030
(0.094)***
63
0.82

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more information about variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

-1.024
(0.081)***
0.048
(0.051)
-0.009
(0.009)
0.005
(0.014)
-0.188
(0.112)*
-0.106
(0.061)*
-0.174
(0.079)**
0.067
(0.048)
1.079
(0.107)***
63
0.83

Table 1b - Determinants of Changes in Black Student-Teacher Ratio, 1960-65 to 1970-72
Change in Black Student-Teacher Ratio
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

-7.434
(2.622)***

-4.166
(2.405)*
1.547
(1.533)
-0.108
(0.284)
0.991
(0.381)**
8.967
(3.939)**
-1.736
(2.187)

-2.924
(1.155)**
63
0.13

-11.235
(2.821)***
63
0.29

Percent Black Voting Age Population Registered to Vote, 1960
Nonwhite Median Income, 1960
Nonwhite Median Years of Education, 1960
Percent of Households with Complete Plumbing
Percent of Population in Urban Areas
Change in Percent of VAP Blacks Registered to Vote, 1964-1968
Ln Change in Employment
Constant
N
R-squared

-4.919
(2.449)**
2.058
(1.679)
-0.080
(0.307)
1.004
(0.389)**
9.458
(3.775)**
-2.088
(2.157)
1.804
(2.541)
-0.310
(1.796)
-11.971
(3.384)***
63
0.30

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more information about
variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically significant at the 1
percent level.

Table 2a - Determinants of Changes in Low Grade Continuation Rates, 1960-65 to 1970-75
Grade 6
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

-0.025
(0.051)

-0.056
(0.072)
-0.043
(0.040)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.047
(0.134)
0.021
(0.059)

0.029
(0.024)
63
0.00

0.086
(0.074)
63
0.06

% Black VAP Registered to Vote, 1960
Nonwhite Median Income, 1960
Nonwhite Median Years of Education, 1960
% Households with Complete Plumbing
% of Population in Urban Areas
Change in % of VAP Blacks
Registered to Vote, 1964-1968
Ln Change in Employment
Constant
N
R-squared

Grade 7
-0.061
(0.090)
-0.025
(0.037)
0.006
(0.004)
-0.012
(0.009)
-0.043
(0.123)
0.009
(0.054)
0.056
(0.082)
0.082
(0.036)**
0.011
(0.068)
63
0.14

-0.009
(0.071)

0.014
(0.093)
-0.060
(0.059)
0.007
(0.004)**
-0.028
(0.012)**
0.179
(0.151)
-0.025
(0.068)

0.052
(0.031)
63
0.00

0.010
(0.080)
63
0.12

Grade 8
-0.007
(0.102)
-0.027
(0.062)
0.011
(0.005)**
-0.025
(0.013)*
0.192
(0.135)
-0.048
(0.067)
0.106
(0.115)
0.101
(0.056)*
-0.103
(0.095)
63
0.20

-0.065
(0.067)

-0.080
(0.084)
-0.105
(0.061)*
0.006
(0.006)
-0.037
(0.011)***
0.196
(0.127)
-0.040
(0.066)

0.079
(0.031)**
63
0.02

0.103
(0.069)
63
0.22

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more information about variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

-0.062
(0.096)
-0.096
(0.058)
0.009
(0.005)*
-0.034
(0.011)***
0.184
(0.120)
-0.047
(0.064)
0.020
(0.094)
0.137
(0.054)**
0.013
(0.075)
63
0.33

Table 2b - Determinants of Changes in Low Grade Continuation Rates. 1960-65 to 1970-75
2-Year Lag
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

-0.014
(0.032)

0.002
(0.045)
-0.035
(0.032)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.015
(0.007)**
0.118
(0.085)
0.002
(0.038)

0.034
(0.015)**
63
0.00

0.035
(0.044)
63
0.15

% Black VAP Registered to Vote, 1960
Nonwhite Median Income, 1960
Nonwhite Median Years of Education, 1960
% Households with Complete Plumbing
% of Population in Urban Areas
Change in % of VAP Blacks
Registered to Vote, 1964-1968
Ln Change in Employment
Constant
N
R-squared

3-Year Lag
-0.003
(0.056)
-0.022
(0.032)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.014
(0.007)*
0.121
(0.078)
-0.006
(0.036)
0.039
(0.060)
0.053
(0.030)*
-0.015
(0.048)
63
0.22

-0.016
(0.038)

0.007
(0.050)
-0.047
(0.040)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.020
(0.008)**
0.162
(0.089)*
-0.002
(0.042)

0.029
(0.018)
63
0.00

0.012
(0.044)
63
0.20

4-Year Lag
0.012
(0.063)
-0.039
(0.036)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.018
(0.008)**
0.159
(0.088)*
-0.008
(0.043)
0.023
(0.063)
0.068
(0.036)*
-0.040
(0.049)
63
0.27

-0.042
(0.049)

-0.014
(0.062)
-0.056
(0.047)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.020
(0.009)**
0.205
(0.101)**
-0.013
(0.049)

0.036
(0.022)
63
0.01

-0.004
(0.054)
63
0.20

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more information about variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

-0.006
(0.079)
-0.051
(0.041)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.019
(0.009)**
0.200
(0.103)*
-0.017
(0.051)
0.012
(0.069)
0.065
(0.044)
-0.047
(0.057)
63
0.24

Table 3 - Changes in Continuation Rates v. Initial Black Enrollment Share, 1960-65 to 1970-75
Grade 10
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

0.045
(0.066)

Lower Grade Average Continuation Rate
Constant
N
R-squared

0.037
(0.029)
63
0.01

0.040
(0.064)
-0.361
(0.238)
0.049
(0.029)
63
0.03

Grade 12
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

0.177
(0.076)**

Lower Grade Average Continuation Rate
Constant
N
R-squared

-0.027
(0.033)
63
0.09

0.191
(0.078)**
0.324
(0.152)**
-0.039
(0.034)
63
0.13

Grade 11
0.130
(0.075)*

-0.016
(0.034)
63
0.05

0.132
(0.077)*
0.135
(0.224)
-0.020
(0.035)
63
0.05

HS Graduation
0.179
(0.075)**

-0.020
(0.032)
63
0.10

0.184
(0.076)**
0.119
(0.141)
-0.024
(0.033)
63
0.11

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more
information about variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically
significant at the 1 percent level.

Table 4a - Determinants of Changes in 10th and 11th Grade Continuation Rates, 1960-65 to 1970-75
Grade 10
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

0.045
(0.066)

0.019
(0.083)
-0.472
(0.242)*
-0.041
(0.058)
0.001
(0.008)
-0.021
(0.013)
-0.126
(0.148)
0.110
(0.059)*

0.037
(0.029)
63
0.01

0.164
(0.085)*
63
0.10

Lower Grade Average Continuation Rate
% Black VAP Registered to Vote, 1960
Nonwhite Median Income, 1960
Nonwhite Median Years of Education, 1960
% Households with Complete Plumbing
% of Population in Urban Areas
Change in % of VAP Blacks
Registered to Vote, 1964-1968
Ln Change in Employment
Constant
N
R-squared

Grade 11
-0.002
(0.098)
-0.434
(0.285)
-0.031
(0.063)
0.001
(0.008)
-0.021
(0.014)
-0.117
(0.153)
0.104
(0.064)
0.033
(0.107)
-0.039
(0.077)
0.168
(0.114)
63
0.11

0.130
(0.075)*

0.160
(0.099)
-0.035
(0.236)
-0.026
(0.052)
-0.001
(0.010)
-0.023
(0.014)
-0.038
(0.153)
0.134
(0.067)*

-0.016
(0.034)
63
0.05

0.040
(0.096)
63
0.14

0.155
(0.115)
0.067
(0.258)
-0.031
(0.064)
-0.003
(0.010)
-0.022
(0.015)
-0.052
(0.152)
0.141
(0.072)*
-0.027
(0.113)
-0.077
(0.068)
0.097
(0.123)
63
0.17

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more information about variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

Table 4b - Determinants of Changes in 12th Grade Continuation and High School Graduation Rates, 1960-65 to 1970-75
Grade 12
Black Share of Enrollment, 1960

0.177
(0.076)**

0.230
(0.090)**
0.185
(0.177)
-0.017
(0.050)
-0.007
(0.010)
-0.019
(0.014)
0.085
(0.135)
0.087
(0.061)

-0.027
(0.033)
63
0.09

0.010
(0.095)
63
0.21

Lower Grade Average Continuation Rate
% Black VAP Registered to Vote, 1960
Nonwhite Median Income, 1960
Nonwhite Median Years of Education, 1960
% Households with Complete Plumbing
% of Population in Urban Areas
Change in % of VAP Blacks
Registered to Vote, 1964-1968
Ln Change in Employment
Constant
N
R-squared

HS Graduation
0.207
(0.101)**
0.214
(0.208)
-0.005
(0.061)
-0.007
(0.010)
-0.019
(0.014)
0.095
(0.137)
0.080
(0.065)
0.040
(0.104)
-0.040
(0.070)
0.013
(0.124)
63
0.22

0.179
(0.075)**

0.215
(0.099)**
0.020
(0.188)
-0.017
(0.050)
-0.003
(0.009)
-0.011
(0.014)
0.047
(0.160)
0.079
(0.070)

-0.020
(0.032)
63
0.10

-0.013
(0.103)
63
0.15

0.202
(0.118)*
0.019
(0.219)
-0.008
(0.062)
-0.003
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.014)
0.055
(0.156)
0.073
(0.071)
0.031
(0.113)
-0.003
(0.067)
-0.027
(0.122)
63
0.16

Notes: Huber-White heteroskedasticity-adjusted robust standard errors in parentheses. See Appendix A for more information about variables.
* statistically significant at the 10 percent level; ** statistically significant at the 5 percent level; *** statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

Figure 1
Trends in Segregation for Louisiana Counties

50

40

Percent

30
Black Exp to Whites
White Exp to Blacks
20

10

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

Notes: Authors calculations from Southern Education Reporting Service data (1960-1966) and Office of Civil Rights Surveys (1967-1974).
Black exposure to whites for years before 1967 is estimated from the percent of blacks in school with any whites. See Appendix A
for details.

15

Average, 1960-65

15

Black-White Student-Teacher Ratio Gap, After

Black-White Student-Teacher Ratio Gap, Before

Figure 2
The Relationship between Black-White Student-Teacher Ratio Gaps and Black Enrollment Share
Before and After Desegregation

10

5

0

-5

Average, 1970-72

10

5

0

-5
0

.2

.4
Black Enrollment Share, 1960

.6

.8

0

.2

.4
Black Enrollment Share, 1960

.6

Notes: Author’s calculations. Left panel shows the average gap between the student-teacher ratio for blacks and whites for 1960 to
1965 versus 1960 black enrollment share (based on Annual Financial and Statistical Report). Right panel shows the average gap between
the student-teacher ratios for blacks and whites for 1970 and 1972 (based on Office of Civil Rights Survey). Data on student-teacher
ratios by race is not available for other years between 1970 and 1975.

.8

Figure 3
Changes in Peers and Resources by 1960 Black Enrollment Share
Black Exposure to Whites and Student-Teacher Ratios
5

Change in Black Exposure to Whites

Change in Black Student-Teacher Ratio

.8

0

-5

-10

-15

.6

.4

.2

0
0

.2

.4
Black Enrollment Share, 1960

.6

.8

0

.2

.4
Black Enrollment Share, 1960

.6

Notes: Author’s calculations. Left panel shows the change in the student-teacher ratio from before (1960-1965) to after (1970-1972)
desegregation. Black exposure to white is the white share of enrollment in the average black’s school. Right panel shows the change
in black exposure to whites from before (1960-1965) to after (1970-1974) desegregation. Segregation measures were imputed in
some years, and black exposure to whites before desegregation was estimated from the percent of blacks in school with any whites
(see Appendix A for details).

.8

Figure 4
Trends in Black Educational Attainment in Louisiana
Administrative and Census Data
Percent Starting 11th Grade
.9

.95

.85

Percent

Percent

Percent Starting 10th Grade
1

.9

.85

.8

.75

Census Data

.8
1960

1965

Administrative Data
1970

Census Data

.7
1975

1960

1965

1970

1975

Percent HS Graduate

.8

.8

.75

.75

Percent

Percent

Percent Starting 12th Grade

Administrative Data

.7

.65

.7

.65

Census Data

.6
1960

1965

Administrative Data
1970

Census Data

.6
1975

1960

1965

Administrative Data
1970

1975

Notes: Author’s calculations. Census series is the share of Louisiana-born blacks who reported attaining the specified level of
education. Individuals are assigned to the year in which they would have attained the specified level. Series for administrative
data are rescaled to be equal to Census series in 1960. See text for information on how attainment was calculated from
administrative data.

Figure 5
Percent with High School Degree, by Race and Region
.85

Blacks

Percent

.8
.75
.7
.65
.6
1960

1965

1970

.95

1975

Whites

Percent

.9
.85
.8
.75
.7
1960

1965

Louisiana

Confederate

Border

Non-South
1970

1975

Notes: Author’s calculations from 1980 Census IPUMS based on state of birth. Individuals are assigned to the year
in which they would have graduated from high school.

.3

.3

Figure 6
Trends in Correlation between Initial Black Enrollment Share and Continuation Rates
By Grade

.3

-.2

Coefficient on % Black
-.1
0
.1
1960

1965

Grade 11
Grade 7
Avg. Grade 5-8, lagged 3

-.3

-.3

Grade 10
Grade 6
Avg. Grade 5-8, lagged 2
1970

1975

.3

-.2

Coefficient on % Black
-.1
0
.1

.2

11th Grade

.2

10th Grade

1960

1965

1970

1975

1970

1975

Coefficient on % Black
-.1
0
.1
-.2

-.2

Coefficient on % Black
-.1
0
.1

.2

HS Grads

.2

12th Grade

1960

1965

High School Graduation
Grade 8
Avg. Grade 5-8, lagged 4

-.3

-.3

Grade 12
Grade 8
Avg. Grade 5-8, lagged 4
1970

1975

1960

1965

Notes: Author’s calculations. Each point represents the coefficient on 1960%black from a regression of the continuation or
high school graduation rate on 1960%black. Trends in the coefficient for lower grade continuation rates are presented for
comparison.

.3
.2
Coefficient on % Black
-.1
0
.1
-.2

-.2

Coefficient on % Black
-.1
0
.1

.2

.3

Figure 7
Trends in Correlation between Initial Black Enrollment Share and Continuation Rates
Controlling for Lower-Grade Continuation Rates

1960

Grade 12
High School Graduation

-.3

-.3

Grade 10
Grade 11
1965

1970

1975

1960

1965

1970

1975

Notes: Author’s calculations. Each point represents the coefficient on 1960%black from a regression of the continuation or
high school graduation rate on 1960%black, controlling for average lower grade continuation rates (see text for further
description).

