                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SPIN-OFFS AND THE MARKET FOR IDEAS

                                          Satyajit Chatterjee
                                       Esteban Rossi-Hansberg

                                         Working Paper 13198
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13198


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




We thank Boyan Jovanovic, Chris Phelan, Victor Rios-Rull and seminar participants at the FRB Minneapolis,
NYU Stern, Yale, U Penn, UBC, and IIES Stockholm for useful comments. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve System
or the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Satyajit Chatterjee and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Spin-offs and the Market for Ideas
Satyajit Chatterjee and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
NBER Working Paper No. 13198
June 2007
JEL No. E10,E23,L22,L23,L25,L26

                                            ABSTRACT

We propose a theory of firm dynamics in which workers have ideas for new projects that can be sold
in a market to existing firms or implemented in new firms: spin-offs. Workers have private information
about the quality of their ideas. Because of an adverse selection problem, workers can sell their ideas
to existing firms only at a price that is not contingent on their information. We show that the option
to spin off in the future is valuable so only workers with very good ideas decide to spin off and set
up a new firm. Since entrepreneurs of existing firms pay a price for the ideas sold in the market that
implies zero expected profits for them, firms' project selection is independent of their size, which,
under some assumptions, leads to scale-independent growth. The entry and growth process of firms
in this economy leads to an invariant distribution that resembles the one in the US economy.

Satyajit Chatterjee
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
satyajit.chatterjee@phil.frb.org

Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
erossi@princeton.edu
                           Spin-oﬀs and the Market for Ideas∗

                         Satyajit Chatterjee                         Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
              Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia                     Princeton University

                                                  June 2007




                                                   Abstract

          We propose a theory of firm dynamics in which workers have ideas for new projects that
      can be sold in a market to existing firms or implemented in new firms: spin-oﬀs. Workers have
      private information about the quality of their ideas. Because of an adverse selection problem,
      workers can sell their ideas to existing firms only at a price that is not contingent on their
      information. We show that the option to spin oﬀ in the future is valuable so only workers
      with very good ideas decide to spin oﬀ and set up a new firm. Since entrepreneurs of existing
      firms pay a price for the ideas sold in the market that implies zero expected profits for them,
      firms’ project selection is independent of their size, which, under some assumptions, leads to
      scale-independent growth. The entry and growth process of firms in this economy leads to an
      invariant distribution that resembles the one in the US economy.




1    Introduction

The generation and implementation of ideas shape industry dynamics and the structure of firms.
Ideas can be generated in many diﬀerent contexts, but many important innovations have been
developed by workers of existing firms. In some cases, workers decide to sell their idea to their
   ∗
     We thank Boyan Jovanovic, Chris Phelan, Victor Rios-Rull and seminar participants at the FRB Minneapolis,
NYU Stern, Yale, U Penn, UBC, and IIES Stockholm for useful comments. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia.


                                                        1
current employer (or to some other firm), and in other cases, they use their innovation to start a
new firm: a spin-oﬀ. Whether an innovation by a worker is implemented within the firm, leads to
a spin-oﬀ, or is discarded depends on the initial ownership and knowledge of the idea, as well as
the profits that the diﬀerent entities can generate by implementing it. In this paper we propose
a theory of these decisions and, therefore, of firm dynamics and entry. The theory we propose
takes a clear stance on the determinants of the boundary of the firm by modeling which ideas
are implemented within the firm and which ones are not. Our take is that private information
on the expected returns of an idea leads to an adverse selection problem in which the best ideas
give workers incentives to set up new firms, while ideas that are not as good are sold to existing
firms at a price that is not contingent on private information but implies zero expected profits for
existing firms. Hence, we propose a theory that underscores the private information of innovators
as a fundamental determinant of industry dynamics and spin-oﬀs.

   In our theory, the selection process induced by private information determines whether an idea
is used within an existing firm or exploited by setting up a new firm. The innovator has information
on the mean return of an idea that he cannot credibly convey to firm management. Hence, the
firm is willing to pay only a non-contingent price for the project. The inventor can either decide to
create a new firm or sell the project in the market for ideas. If he does the latter, he can credibly
reveal his information about the project, since there is nothing at stake for him. The firm can
then decide to implement the idea or not. Implementing a project, either in a spin-oﬀ or within
the firm, requires one unit of labor. The reason is that to find out the realized return of an idea —
that comes from a distribution with mean given by the innovator’s private information — the idea
has to be tried out for one period. The actual realized profit from an idea can be low enough to
make further use of the project non-optimal for the entrepreneurs. In that case, the project will
be dropped next period. If the return on the idea is high enough, the idea is used and provides a
permanent and constant source of profits to entrepreneurs.

   If the worker decides to spin oﬀ with an idea, we show that he will exit and return to an
existing firm as a worker unless the idea pays a return that is strictly higher than an amount that
exceeds the unit labor cost. The reason is that by continuing to use the idea, the worker forgoes
the opportunity of spinning oﬀ with an even better idea in the future. Consequently, workers who
decide to spin oﬀ are more selective than existing firms when deciding whether to drop a project.
In turn, having this option, which has a positive value, leads workers to be more selective than
existing firms in deciding which ideas to try out. That is, existing firms implement ideas with lower
expected value than the ideas workers use to spin oﬀ. In other words, workers decide to forgo their


                                                 2
wage and the price at which they can sell their idea — if they do not spin oﬀ — only if the idea is
particularly good. Hence the best ideas will result in spin-oﬀs and the not-so-good ideas will be
sold to existing firms. In this sense, our theory determines entry through spin-oﬀs and firm growth.

   Most of the previous eﬀorts to study firm dynamics have taken a diﬀerent approach. The seminal
works of Jovanovic (1982), Hopenhayn (1992), and Ericson and Pakes (1995) study firm dynamics
that result from an exogenous stream of productivity levels. So do more recent papers like Luttmer
(2006), Klette and Kortum (2004), and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2006), although these papers
do endogenize the characteristics of entrants. Firms do not determine their productivity; they act
conditional on it or on what they know about it. In contrast, what we propose is a theory in
which the quality of the projects that firms implement, as well as the quality of the projects of new
entrants (spin-oﬀs), is determined endogenously by the selection of projects. This mechanism leads
to a theory of firm behavior in which firm dynamics are determined by the quality and quantity of
the implemented projects. Franco and Filson (2006) also provide a theory of spin-oﬀs but focus on
imitation of existing ideas by workers. Silveira and Wright (2007) study the market for ideas in the
context of a search model and analyze its eﬀects on wages and employment. None of these studies
focus on private information and adverse selection as a determinant of entry through spin-oﬀs and
the size distribution of firms, which is the main focus of this paper.

   We show that the set of ideas that entrepreneurs are willing to buy at the non-contingent equi-
librium price does not depend on the size of firms. Hence, the selection of projects is independent
of size, where size is measured as the number of projects (or workers) in a firm. The equilibrium
price of an idea is such that any entrepreneur in the economy obtains zero expected profits from
buying an idea in the market, given the set of ideas sold by workers (the ones that do not lead to
spin-oﬀs). Hence, entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent about whether to buy ideas at the market price.

   In order for the model to have predictions on firm growth, and since entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent
about how many ideas to buy in the market, we need to specify the rate at which entrepreneurs
buy ideas. We do this by assuming that they find out about ideas for sale in proportion to the size
of the firm. This may be because the workers in the firms have ideas themselves or because they
provide information to the entrepreneur about ideas for sale. Independent of what the reason is,
the key argument is that the market for ideas implies that entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent about the
number of projects to buy and so the selection of a project does not depend on the characteristics
of the firm. In this sense, it is the market for ideas that leads to scale-independent firm growth
and, together with entry, to a realistic size distribution of firms. We show that the upper tail of
the size distribution can be arbitrarily close to a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient 1.

                                                  3
   The theory also has predictions for the entry process of firms. Large firms generate more spin-
oﬀs than small firms, although as a fraction of the workforce, the number of spin-oﬀs is constant.
Only the best ideas lead to spin-oﬀs. The model also results in a fraction of unsuccessful spin-oﬀs.
Only these firms exit the economy. Large firms can have unsuccessful projects, too, but they just
drop the project. They do not exit, since they have at least one ongoing project that provides a
permanent source of profits.

   In the model presented we assume that workers can be hired at a fixed wage, independent of
the size of the industry. This may be an appealing assumption for small industries. Growth of
larger industries, however, is likely to have eﬀects on labor and capital markets, in particular, the
market for specialized skills and industry- or sector-specific capital. Adding a market for capital
and labor would tend to decrease and eventually stop the development of a particular industry.
This general equilibrium problem is interesting and important, but in this paper, we focus only on
the characteristics of industry dynamics.

   There are many famous examples of successful firms that began with one employee or a group
of employees quitting a firm and starting their own firm. This process of separating from a parent
firm and starting one’s own firm seems particularly prevalent in innovative industries. It is this
process our model is designed to explain. Our theory does not make a deep distinction between
spin-oﬀs and startups — that is, new entrants not necessarily associated with an incumbent firm.
Nevertheless, we prefer to think of new entrants as spin-oﬀs because all new entrepreneurs are
workers in some firm and, in our theory, only these agents have new ideas.

   Our results imply that the best ideas are the ones that lead to spin-oﬀs, while the ideas that are
not as good are implemented in existing firms. This implies that, on average, profits from the first
product of a firm should be higher than the profits from the subsequent products a firm decides
to produce. This is consistent with some of the available evidence, which suggests that the first
product of a firm is, on average, the most successful of its products. Prusa and Schmitz (1994)
argue that this is the case in the PC software industry. The first product of a firm sells, on average,
1.86 times the mean product in its cohort, while the second product sells only 0.91 times the mean
product in its cohort. That is, first products are, on average, about twice as successful as second
products. The first product is also about twice as successful as the third, fourth, and fifth products.
This evidence suggests that spin-oﬀs discriminate more than incumbent firms in choosing which
projects to implement. This is exactly in line with the selection mechanism our theory underscores.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model and proves some


                                                  4
basic results. Section 3 characterizes the selection of projects and the market for ideas. Section 4
derives the invariant distribution of firm sizes and compares the invariant distributions obtained in
the model to the US data. Section 5 concludes.



2        The Model

Agents order consumption according to the following utility function:
                                                            ∞
                                                            X
                                              U ({ct }) =         β t u (ct ) ,
                                                            t=0

where u (ct ) is strictly increasing, concave, twice continuously diﬀerentiable and bounded. In Section
3 below we will study two particular cases: the case with linear utility, u (c) = c, and the case with
constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility, u (c) = −ae−bc .

        Agents work in two occupations. They can be entrepreneurs or workers. A worker earns w > 0
each period working for an entrepreneur (plus the value they extract from their ideas). There is
a perfectly elastic supply of workers at this wage w. Agents do not have a technology to save so
they consume what they earn each period. Entrepreneurs earn and consume profits, and the wage
they receive from the project they work for directly. A worker can become an entrepreneur if, while
working for a firm, he has an idea and decides to spin oﬀ the firm.

        An idea is a non-replicable technology to produce consumption goods using labor, specifically,
an idea uses 1 unit of labor.1 Consider an entrepreneur who owns a firm with N ∈ {1, 2, ..} ideas.
Then his one-period profits are given by

                                               π(S, N ) = N (S − w)

               1   PN
where S =      N    i=1 Pi   denotes the average revenue and Pi the per period income generated from a
particular idea. We assume that Pi > 0 with probability one.

        We assume that in each period the probability of a worker getting an idea is λ. An entrepreneur
does not get ideas but buys ideas from workers. An entrepreneur can learn of an idea for sale
with probability 0 < γ(λ, N ) < 1. For now, we do not take a stand on the specification of γ(·)
but assume, as seems natural, that the probability of learning about an idea in any given period is
    1
    We assume that ideas are non-replicable technologies in order to determine the scale of each project. If technologies
are replicable, we would need a demand structure and goods diﬀerentiation to limit the size of each project. This
simple extension would complicate our framework with no new insights.


                                                            5
increasing in λ and N. We will have more to say about the specification of γ (·) at the beginning
of Section 4. In particular, in equilibrium, the number of ideas an entrepreneur learns about — the
demand for ideas — must be equal to the number of ideas generated by workers — the supply of ideas.
As we show below, equilibrium in the market for ideas will determine the average probability of an
entrepreneur learning about an idea but not the distribution of probabilities among them. Thus, if
we write γ(λ, N ) = θγ̃ (λ, N ) , θ will be an equilibrium object (the average probability of an entre-
preneur learning about an idea) and γ̃(·) (the distribution of probabilities among entrepreneurs) is
a primitive of our economy which we will specify as λN in Section 4.

   The mean payoﬀ per period from the idea is μ, which is private information to the originator
of the idea. The mean payoﬀ is drawn from a continuous distribution H(μ) with H 0 (μ) > 0 for all
μ ≥ 0. The actual payoﬀ is drawn from a distribution Fμ (P ) where
                                       Z
                                          f (P ) dFμ (P )

is increasing in μ for all increasing functions f , Fμ (0) = 0 all μ, and
                                           Z
                                              P dFμ (P ) = μ.

We also assume that Fμ is continuous with respect to μ and

                                            lim Fμ (w) = 0.
                                           μ→∞

The realization of P for a given idea can be discovered by implementing the idea for one period.

   As mentioned above, entrepreneurs do not get ideas as they are involved in the management
of their firm, but they can buy ideas from workers. An entrepreneur who has bought an idea can
pay w to try it out for one period and observe the realization of P. If he does, he will use the idea
to produce as long as his future expected utility from doing so is greater than from dropping it.
Entrepreneurs may decide to implement a project even if the stream of profits is negative (P < w),
since having an extra project implies that they may generate more ideas in the future (although
this will not happen in equilibrium, as we show below).

   A worker who has had an idea this period has two potential uses for it. He can sell his idea to
an entrepreneur, in which case he reveals the mean payoﬀ to the entrepreneur who buys it. In this
case he earns a wage w plus the price Z at which he sells the idea. The idea is then owned by the
entrepreneur and he decides to try it out or not.

   He can also leave with the idea and become an entrepreneur of a firm with only this idea: a
spin-oﬀ. Note that in the market of ideas, the price of an idea has to be non-contingent on the

                                                    6
quality of the idea. The reason is that any contingent contract would give the worker an incentive
to lie about the quality of the idea. So the only incentive-compatible price is independent of quality,
in which case the agent is indiﬀerent between revealing the true quality of the idea or not. Since this
information is useful for the entrepreneur, we assume that the worker does reveal the true quality.
The price of an idea Z is determined in equilibrium, where all entrepreneurs will be indiﬀerent
between buying ideas or not. Given this indiﬀerence we will further assume that transaction costs
(or search costs) are such that entrepreneurs end up buying ideas generated within the firms.

      The implementation of an idea and the return that it generates are specific to the entrepreneur
of the firm that implements it. That is, without the entrepreneur who implemented the idea, the
project has zero value. Hence, projects are entrepreneur-specific but, importantly, not worker-
specific.2 We are also implicitly assuming that there is no contract in which the distribution of the
gains from an idea is done ex-post. That is a contract contingent on realizations. To the extent
that such a verification process is costly, workers and entrepreneurs will prefer our current market
setup, particularly if we assume that the cost of writing these contracts is positive and therefore
larger than the zero cost of setting up a new firm through a spin-oﬀ. If setting up a new firm was
costly, we would need the cost of writing these contracts to be higher than the cost of setting up a
new firm. Even though we do not have any direct evidence that writing these contracts may be as
costly as setting up a new firm, conceptually there is little diﬀerence between a new firm and part
of a firm that is run independently and the realized profits are distributed to the generator of the
idea, who is not the entrepreneur. Hence, in what follows we just assume that the cost of contracts
contingent on realizations is positive and the fixed cost of setting up a new firm is zero.



2.1     An Entrepreneur’s Problem

Consider the problem of an entrepreneur with average revenue S, coming from N old ideas, who
owns one new idea with mean payoﬀ μ. If the entrepreneur tests the idea, his value function is
                            Z
            V (μ, S, N ) =    [u (π(S, N ) + w + P − Z − w)] dFμ (P )
                               Z       ∙ µ                  ¶            ¸
                                             NS + P
                            +β max W                 , N + 1 , W (S, N ) dFμ (P ).
                                              N +1

This period, his expected utility is the result of consuming the profits from the accumulated used
projects π(S, N ), his wage w, the price of the idea Z, and the random realization of profits from the
  2
   The idea is that the entrepreneur has some specific knowledge necessary to generate output from a particular
implementation of an idea.


                                                      7
new project P − w. Note that the distribution from which P is drawn has expected value μ. Denote
by W (S, N ) the continuation value of an entrepreneur with N projects with average revenue S. If
the entrepreneur uses the project, next period he will manage a firm with N +1 projects and average
revenue (N S + P ) / (N + 1). If he does not use it, next period his continuation value stays constant
at W (S, N ) . The continuation value (or the value without any new idea) of an entrepreneur with
N projects with average revenue S is given by
                            Z μH
     W (S, N ) = γ (λ, N )       max [V (μ, S, N ), u (π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )] dH(μ)
                         +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) [u (π(S, N ) + w) + βW (S, N )]

or
                                 Z   μH
         W (S, N ) = γ (λ, N )            max [V (μ, S, N ) − u (π(S, N ) − Z + w) − βW (S, N ), 0] dH(μ)
                       +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) [u(π(S, N ) + w) + βW (S, N )]
                       +γ (λ, N ) H(μH ) [u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )]

where μH denotes the mean revenue value at which workers leave the firm with their idea.3 The
probability of someone in this firm generating an idea next period is γ (λ, N). If an employee
has an idea, he can leave and set up his own firm. He will do so as long as the idea is good
enough, μ ≥ μH . If the entrepreneur has the idea, in order to implement it, he has to hire a worker
and communicate to him what he knows about the idea. If the idea is good enough, the worker
will leave the firm and set up his own firm, too. Hence, ideas get implemented within the firm
only if μ < μH , independent of who has them. Given that an idea of expected revenue μ was
generated, the value of implementing it is, as discussed above, given by V (μ, S, N ). The value
of not implementing the idea is given by u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N ), namely, the utility of
consuming profits and wage today and paying the price for the idea, plus the same continuation
value tomorrow. An idea will not be implemented if it provides a very low expected value. If no
one has an idea or if the idea is good enough to generate a spin-oﬀ, the value of the entrepreneur
is given by u(π(S, N ) + w) + βW (S, N ), since he does not pay for the idea. One of these scenarios
happens with probability 1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH ).

         The next lemma shows that the continuation value W (S, N ) exists and is increasing and con-
tinuous in average revenue S. We then show in Lemma 2 that the value of an entrepreneur with
     3
    Note that we are already assuming that workers spin oﬀ when they get an idea with μ > μH . Below we prove
that this is, in fact, the case. In the meantime, all our arguments remain unaﬀected if we were to define a set MH
that includes the μ’s for which agents spin oﬀ. Then the integrals above would integrate over all values of μ that are
not in MH .


                                                          8
an idea μ, V (μ, S, N ) is increasing and continuous in the expected value of the idea μ and in the
average return S.


Lemma 1 W (S, N ) exists and is strictly increasing in S.


   Proof. Let C be the space of bounded continuous functions defined on R × N. Define the
operator T (W ) : C → C as
                                Z   μH
  T (W ) (S, N ) = γ (λ, N )             max [V (μ, S, N ) − u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) − βW (S, N ), 0] dH(μ)
                      +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) [u(π(S, N ) + w) + βW (S, N )]
                      +γ (λ, N) H (μH ) [(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )]

where
                                Z
               V (μ, S, N ) =     [u (π(S, N ) + w + P − Z − w)] dFμ (P )
                                   Z       ∙ µ                  ¶           ¸
                                                 NS + P
                                +β max W                 , N + 1 , W (S, N ) dFμ (P ).
                                                  N +1
It is easy to show that T is a contraction using Blackwell’s conditions. It satisfies monotonicity
since W ≤ W 0 implies that T (W ) ≤ T (W 0 ) (all expressions above are increasing in the function
W ). It satisfies discounting, since for a > 0

                                          T (W + a) ≤ βa + T (W )

where β < 1. Hence, T is a contraction by the Contraction Mapping Theorem and a unique fixed
point to the operator T exists.

   Suppose W is strictly increasing in S. Since S appears only in π and W in the definition of T ,
T (W ) is also strictly increasing in S. Hence, by the Contraction Mapping Theorem the fixed point
of T is strictly increasing in S.

   To show that W is continuous in S, note that since the space of continuous functions is closed
in the sup norm, we can apply the same argument to show continuity given that π is continuous in
S, Fμ is continuous in μ, and H(μ) is continuous in μ.


Lemma 2 V (μ, S, N ) exists and is strictly increasing and continuous in μ and S.


   Proof. By Lemma 1 W (S, N ) exists and therefore V (μ, S, N ) exists. Since π(S, N ) + w − w +
                                                                                          R
P − Z is strictly increasing in P , the first term in V is strictly increasing in μ, since f (P ) dFμ (P )

                                                      9
is increasing in μ for all increasing functions f . Since W (S, N ) is strictly increasing in S by the
previous lemma,           Z       ∙ µ               ¶           ¸
                                      NS + P
                               max W         , N + 1 , W (S, N ) dFμ (P )
                                       N +1
is strictly increasing in μ, which proves the result.

   That V is strictly increasing in S follows from W being strictly increasing in S.

   To show that V is continuous in μ and S, note that by Lemma 1, W (S, N ) is continuous in S,
the maximum of continuous functions is continuous, and Fμ is continuous with respect to μ.

   An entrepreneur will implement an idea with expected revenue μ if

                              V (μ, S, N ) > u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N ).

Let μL (S, N ) be the value of μ that solves

                           V (μL , S, N ) = u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N ).                            (1)

Then an entrepreneur will implement an idea as long as μ > μL (S, N ). Thus we can rewrite
W (S, N ) as


                               Z   μH
    W (S, N ) = γ (λ, N )               max [V (μ, S, N ) − u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) − βW (S, N ), 0] dH(μ)
                    +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) [u(π(S, N ) + w) + βW (S, N )]
                    +γ (λ, N ) H (μH ) [u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )]


   Or, equivalently,


                                   Z   μH
      W (S, N ) = γ (λ, N )                    [V (μ, S, N ) − u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) − βW (S, N )] dH(μ)
                                   μL (S,N )
                       +γ (λ, N) H(μH ) [u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )]
                       +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) [u(π(S, N ) + w) + βW (S, N )]

The next lemma shows that there exists a unique function μL (S, N ) that satisfies equation (1).


Lemma 3 There exists a unique function μL (S, N ) that satisfies equation (1).


                                                         10
   Proof. First note that given our assumption that Fμ (0) = 0 all μ we know that μ ≥ 0. Then

          V (0, S, N ) = u (π(S, N ) − Z) + βW (S, N ) < u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )

since w > 0. In contrast,
                                        Z
            lim V (μ, S, N ) =   lim   u (π(S, N ) + w − Z − w + P ) dFμ (P )
            μ→∞                   μ→∞
                                    Z      ∙ µ                  ¶           ¸
                                                NS + P
                                +β max W                 , N + 1 , W (S, N ) dFμ (P )
                                                  N +1
                              > u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N ).

The inequality follows because the probability that P > w goes to 1 as μ → ∞ and
                                  ∙ µ                   ¶           ¸
                                       NS + P
                             max W               , N + 1 , W (S, N )
                                        N +1
is non-negative. Hence since V (μ, S, N ) is strictly increasing and continuous in μ, by the Mean
Value Theorem there exists a unique scalar μL that satisfies (1) for each pair (N, S). Let μL (S, N )
be the unique function that takes this value given a pair (S, N ) .



2.2   A Worker’s Problem

The expected utility of a worker with an idea μ that decides to spin oﬀ is given by
                            Z                   Z
                   V0 (μ) = u (P ) dFμ (P ) + β max [W (P, 1) , W0 ] dFμ (P ).

The continuation value of a worker currently working in a firm, W0 , is then given by
                    Z
            W0 = λ max [V0 (μ), u (w + Z) + βW0 ] dH(μ) + (1 − λ) [u (w) + βW0 ] .


   Using arguments similar to the ones used above for V , we can show that V0 (μ) is strictly
increasing in μ. A worker with an idea μ will leave the firm and become an entrepreneur if

                                       V0 (μ) > u(w + Z) + βW0

Let μH be the value of μ that solves

                                    V0 (μH ) = u(w + Z) + βW0 .                                  (2)

Thus, if μ > μH the worker will leave his employer and set up a new firm. The continuation value
of a worker can therefore be written as
                 Z
         W0 = λ      V0 (μ)dH(μ) + (1 − λ) [u (w) + βW0 ] + λH (μH ) (u (w + Z) + βW0 ) .
                   μH


                                                 11
   We show formally below that there exists a unique threshold μH . Note also that μH is a constant
and so it is independent of the characteristics of the firm (S, N ) in which the agent works.


Lemma 4 There exists a unique value μH that satisfies equation (2). Furthermore V0 (μ) is in-
creasing and continuous in μ.


   Proof. We first need to show that V0 is increasing and continuous in μ, but this follows directly
from Fμ being continuous and increasing in μ as assumed above. We also know that

                                 V0 (0) = u (0) + βW0 < u (w + Z) + βW0

since w + Z > 0 and max [W (0, 1) , W0 ] = W0 . The latter is the result of the fact that a new
entrepreneur with a project that pays 0 earns less than a worker and has fewer opportunities with
regard to exploiting his future ideas (he has exercised the option of spinning oﬀ). In contrast,
                                         Z                      Z
                    lim V0 (μ) = lim        u (P ) dFμ (P ) + β   W (P, 1) dFμ (P )
                   μ→∞                μ→∞                       w
                                   > u (w) + βW0 .

Hence since V0 (μ) is strictly increasing in μ and continuous by the Mean Value Theorem, there
exists a unique scalar μH that satisfies (2).

   We still need to define the realized return needed in order to continue with a project once its
return is realized. Define PL (N, S) as
                                µ                        ¶
                                  N S + PL (N, S)
                             W                    , N + 1 = W (S, N ),
                                       N +1
and PH by
                                            W (PH , 1) = W0 .

Then a firm keeps the project if the realized return is P ≥ PL (N, S) and a spin-oﬀ stays in
operation if the realized return on the idea that generated the spin-oﬀ is such that P ≥ PH . Note
that P < PH , the spin-oﬀ will exit and the would-be entrepreneur will return to the labor force
as a worker. In that case, given that the implementation of his project was specific to him, the
project has zero resale value.



2.3   Equilibrium

A long-run equilibrium of this economy is a distribution of firm sizes δ N , a list of four thresholds,
μL (·), μH , PH and PL (·), a price of ideas, Z, and the average probability with which an entrepreneur

                                                   12
buys an idea, θ, (where θ is given by γ(λ, N ) = θγ̃(λ, N )) such that entrepreneurs solve the problem
in Section 2.1, workers solve the problem in Section 2.2 and the price, Z, and the average probability
of buying an idea, θ, clears the market for ideas:
                                         ∞
                                         X                         ∞
                                                                   X
                                     λ       (N − 1)δ N = θ               γ̃(λ, N )δ N ,                          (3)
                                         N=1                       N =1

where the l.h.s. is the supply of ideas and the r.h.s. is the demand for ideas. As we show in the next
section, the price Z will be such that entrepreneurs will be indiﬀerent about how many ideas to
buy. Therefore, market clearing will just require that the number of ideas bought by entrepreneurs
be equal to the number of ideas generated by workers. That is, market clearing simply determines
the value of θ (but not γ̃(λ, N ) which is a primitive of the model). The price Z is the only price
at which entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent and so, for an arbitrary γ̃(λ, N), any other price will be
inconsistent with market clearing.



3     Characterization

In this section we characterize the thresholds on the expected revenue from an idea that determine
if an idea is thrown away, implemented by a particular firm, or results in a spin-oﬀ. For this, we
first assume that the utility function is of the form

                                                       ∞
                                                       X                   ∞
                                                                           X
                                                              t
                                         U ({ct }) =         β u (ct ) =         β t ct .
                                                       t=0                 t=0

We show in the Appendix that our main results hold under a CARA utility function as well. The
main reason to choose these two utility functions is that we can solve the value of an existing firm
in closed form given the additive separability or log additive separability of these utility functions.4

    Under the assumption that the utility function is linear we can fully solve this problem in closed
form. The first result shows that the threshold μL (S, N ) is independent of S and N . μL (S, N )
independent of S is implied by risk neutrality (or, in the CARA case below, by the fact that risk
does not depend on the level of wealth). μL (S, N ) constant in N is the result of the market for
ideas. Since workers will sell their ideas to whoever is willing to pay more for them, and there is a
relative scarcity of ideas, workers extract all the surplus of an idea and we can solve for the price
   4
     Note that none of these specifications of the utility functions satisfy the bounded assumption we made in Section
2. However, since in these two cases we can solve the functional equation for W (S, N ) analytically, it follows from
Theorem 9.12 in Stokey, Lucas, and Prescott (1989) that the solution is, in fact, optimal.


                                                              13
of an idea in equilibrium. The proposition also yields the result that in equilibrium PL = w, and
so entrepreneurs use all projects that give positive returns. In contrast, PH > w and so spin-oﬀs
use projects that give strictly positive returns. The reason is that new entrepreneurs that start a
firm with a project with a low realized return have the option of going back to work for a firm and
start a new firm in the future with a better project. The proposition also shows that the threshold
for implementing ideas through spin-oﬀs is greater than the one for implementing ideas within the
firm, μL < μH . This is essentially the result of the fixed capital cost of setting a new firm in the
case of linear utility. Inventors are more selective with the ideas they use when they spin oﬀ than
are firms. This also implies that some ideas within the firm do not result in spin-oﬀs and so some
firms grow. An industry’s growth is then the result of entry through spin-oﬀs and growth in the
intensive margin. With risk-averse CARA agents, this is the result of the larger risk faced by agents
that spin oﬀ.


Proposition 5 If u (ct ) = ct , then in equilibrium


   • μL (S, N ) is independent of S and N , and μL (S, N ) < w,

   • the thresholds for using a project are given by PL (S, N ) = w and PH = w + f0 > w for some
        positive constant f0.

   • μL < μH , so some ideas are implemented within existing firms and some through spin-oﬀs,

   • and the market price of ideas is given by
                             Z μH               Z
                        1                     β
               Z=                 [μ − w +        max [P − w, 0] dFμ (P )]dH(μ) > 0.             (4)
                    H (μH ) μL              1−β


   Proof. Guess
                           W (S, N ) = ω (π (S, N ) + w) = ω (N (S − w) + w)

Since
                                        ⎡         R                                     ⎤
                            Z                     [π(S, N ) + w + P − Z − w] dFμ (P )
                                μH       ⎢     R    h ³               ´           i     ⎥
                                         ⎢                NS+P                          ⎥
 W (S, N ) = γ (λ, N )               max ⎢   +β max W N+1 , N + 1 , W (S, N ) dFμ (P ), ⎥ dH(μ)
                                         ⎣                                              ⎦
                                                    π(S, N ) − Z + w + βW (S, N )
                   +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) [π(S, N ) + w + βW (S, N )]

then

                                                      14
     ω (N (S − w) + w) = (1 + βω) (N (S − w) + w) − γ (λ, N ) H (μH ) Z
                                    Z μH    ∙             Z                        ¸
                         +γ (λ, N )      max μ − w + βω max [P − w, 0)] dFμ (P ), 0 dH(μ)

Let
                                             ω = 1 − βω

or
                                                     1
                                              ω=
                                                    1−β
then
                           Z μH    ∙             Z                           ¸
                      1                       β
             Z =                max μ − w +        max [P − w, 0] dFμ (P ), 0 dH(μ)
                   H (μH )                  1−β
                           Z μH    ∙             Z                      ¸
                      1                       β
               =                max μ − w +          [P − w] dFμ (P ), 0 dH(μ)
                   H (μH ) μL               1 − β PL

Note that this is exactly the condition that makes
                                                    π(S, N ) + w
                                      W (S, N ) =                .
                                                       1−β
That is, it makes the value function of entrepreneurs equal to the present value of the current project
of the firm. So entrepreneurs are willing to pay up to Z for workers’ ideas, and workers will get this
price or will sell the idea to another entrepreneur. Competition for ideas among entrepreneurs then
guarantees that the market price of ideas Z is determined by the condition above in equilibrium.

      Then
                           V (μL , S, N ) = (π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )

implies that μL satisfies
                   Z                                Z
                                              β
                       (P − w) dFμL (P ) +               max [P − w, 0] dFμL (P ) = 0,             (5)
                                             1−β
and therefore is independent of S and N. Hence, μL < w, since entrepreneurs can drop the idea
next period (the maximum in the second term on the l.h.s.). PL satisfies

                                   max [P − w, 0] > 0 for P > PL ,

so PL = w. Then μL is given by
                            Z                      Z w
                         1
                               (P − w) dFμL (P ) =     [w − P ] dFμL (P ).
                      1−β w                         0


                                                    15
Namely, the present value of the gains from implementing a project has to be equal to the cost.

     Guess that
                                                           w + f0
                                                  W0 =
                                                           1−β
then

                                      Z                      Z
                                                       β
                           V0 (μ) =       P Fμ (P ) +            max [P, w + f0 ] dFμ (P ).
                                                      1−β
The continuation value of a worker currently working in a firm, W0 , is then given by
               Z       ∙Z                   Z                                             ¸
 w + f0                                  β                                         w + f0
          = λ max          P Fμ (P ) +        max [P, w + f0 ] dFμ (P ), w + Z + β          dH(μ)
  1−β                                  1−β                                         1−β
                       ∙               ¸
                              w + f0
              +(1 − λ) w + β
                               1−β
so
          Z         ∙Z                             Z                                   ¸
                                            β
 f0 = λ       max        (P − w) Fμ (P ) +             max [P − w − f0 , 0] dFμ (P ), 0 dH(μ) + (1 − λ)Z (6)
                                           1−β
                                                                                                 R
which determines f0 as a positive constant (given H assigns positive mass to μ’s such                (P − w) Fμ (P ) >
0) and verifies our guess.

     Then
                                      Z                                 ∙Z                                ¸
                  w   βf0                                      β
        V0 (μ) =    +     +                (P − w) dFμ (P ) +                max [P − w − f0 , 0] dFμ (P ) .
                 1−β 1−β                                      1−β
Since
                                             V0 (μH ) = w + Z + βW0

μH is given by
                    Z                                  Z
                                              β
                         (P − w) dFμH (P ) +               max [P − w − f0 , 0] dFμH (P ) = Z,
                                             1−β
Two results are immediate from this expression. First, since Z ≥ 0 and f0 > 0 the left-hand
side of the above equation evaluated at μH = μL is less than the right-hand side given that μL is
determined by Equation (5). Since the left-hand side is increasing in μ, it follows that μL < μH .
Second, since PH is such that P − w − f0 = 0, it follows that PH = w + f0 > w.

     The key insight in the previous proposition is that the selection of the ideas implemented in
existing firms, which is given by μL and μH , is independent of S and N . Because of this, the set of
ideas that will be implemented within each firm is independent of the firm’s size. It is the market

                                                           16
for ideas that leads to this result. In the absence of these markets, entrepreneurs of existing firms
will appropriate some of the surplus of a given idea. Then, as long as γ (λ, ·) is not linear in N , a
large firm with many projects will have more/less incentives to implement ideas than smaller firms.
The type of scale dependence will depend on the concavity or convexity of the function γ (λ, ·) in
N . If the probability of getting new ideas is concave in N , large firms will be more selective and
will therefore implement ideas with a higher expected return than entrepreneurs in small firms.
The reverse is true if γ (λ, ·) is convex. This is not the case when entrepreneurs pay the market
price Z of an idea in the market. In this case the expected benefits for all entrepreneurs is zero,
and so the selection of projects in equilibrium is independent of the shape of the function γ (λ, ·)
and therefore of the scale of the firm. This is the sense in which the market for ideas is key to
generating scale independence in the selection of ideas.

    In order for firm growth to be scale independent we need the thresholds μL and μH to be
independent of the size of the firm. We also need the number of innovations bought by a given firm
in the market of ideas to be proportional to its size. In our theory, as long as the unconditional
probability (λ) that a worker has an idea is independent of firm size, we obtain that the two
thresholds are independent of size. In order for firms to buy projects at a rate proportional to
their size, we will assume a linear probability of learning about ideas, γ (λ, N ) = θλN , where θ
is determined by equalizing the demand and supply of ideas. In eﬀect, we are assuming that an
entrepreneur learns about ideas for sale through all the agents working in his firm, including himself.
This may be the result of workers having ideas themselves and selling them to their manager, since
that may be easier than contacting an unknown manager or employees finding out about ideas for
sale in the market and informing their manager.5

    Figure 1 summarizes what we have learned about firm behavior and firm entry. It shows
expected revenue μ in the real line. For projects above μH , firms’ workers spin oﬀ. All other
firms implement ideas with μ’s between μL and μH . An incumbent risk-neutral entrepreneur would
implement projects as long as they pay expected return w, so the diﬀerence between μL and w is
the result of an entrepreneur’s ability to drop the project next period (this ordering can change
once we consider risk-averse agents). The threshold that determines μL is given by
                      Z                            Z
                                               β
                         (P − w) dFμL (P ) +          (P − w) dFμL (P ) = 0.                                    (7)
                                             1−β w
The diﬀerence between μL and μH is the result of the option value of exiting and setting up a new
    5
      In the particular case in which γ (λ, N) = λ̃(λ)N and utility is linear, even without the market for ideas, μL
is independent of size. The market for ideas is necessary to obtain scale independence in the selection of ideas if
the utility function is not linear and/or γ (λ, ·) is not linear in N. In the Appendix where we consider the case of
exponential utility this is evident.


                                                        17
    μL        w                                                         μH                 μ


                                                                               Spin-Offs

                        Firms with one or more workers




                               Figure 1: Figure 1: Selection of Ideas

firm in the future, f0 . The threshold μH is implicitly determined by
                    Z                            Z
                                              β
                        (P − w) dFμH (P ) +           (P − w − f0 ) dFμH (P ) = Z.               (8)
                                            1 − β PH

The diﬀerence between the two thresholds comes from the option value f0 given by equation (6) of
closing a new firm and starting another one later on with a better idea and the fact that workers
give up the price of an idea Z when they set up the firm. Note that if f0 = 0, the two threshold
equations and the equation for Z imply that Z = 0 and μL = μH . So, all projects would be
implemented via spin-oﬀs. However, as shown in the previous proposition, f0 is positive, since
workers can extract the value of very good projects by spinning oﬀ. New firms will require a higher
return from their first project than existing firms demand from new projects, given the larger option
value f0 that new firms have of returning to an old firm and spinning oﬀ in the future, namely,
PH > w = PL . Both of these equations imply that the number of entrants as a fraction of the
population is constant and so is the number of new projects implemented in existing firms each
period as a fraction of total population.

   Finding an equilibrium amounts to solving equations (4), (6), (7) and (8) for the values of Z,
f0 , μL and μH . In the next proposition we show that an equilibrium exists and is unique.


Proposition 6 A long-run equilibrium for this economy exists and is unique

                                                 18
    Proof. To establish this proposition, observe that when Z = 0, f0 given by Equation (6) is
positive. Then, Equations (7) and (8) imply that if μH = μL , the l.h.s. of (8) is negative and hence
smaller than Z = 0. Now note that the l.h.s. of (8) is strictly increasing and continuous in μH as
is the r.h.s. However, observe that the derivative of the l.h.s. of Equation (8) with respect to μH
is strictly larger than the derivative of Z with respect to μH and the diﬀerence of both derivatives
is bounded away from 0, as Z is the average value of the l.h.s. of (8) for the interval [μL , μH ].
Therefore, by the Intermediate Value Theorem there exists a unique μH that solves Equation (8).
Given μH we can immediately obtain a unique value of Z and f0 . Furthermore, μL is uniquely
determined by Equation (7) since the r.h.s. of Equation (7) is strictly increasing and continuous in
μL and at μL = 0 the r.h.s. is less than zero.

    We still need to show that there exists a unique invariant distribution δ N and an average
probability of entrepreneurs buying an idea θ. To show that there exists a unique θ given an
invariant distribution is immediate from Equation (3). Showing existence of a unique invariant
distribution is more involved and we dedicate the next section to it. In Corollary 8 we show that
in fact such a distribution exists and is unique.

    As we noted above, one potential issue is the existence of an equilibrium with contingent con-
tracts, namely, a contract in which an entrepreneur oﬀers the worker the contingent return on an
idea minus w. Workers with good ideas that would otherwise spin oﬀ would be willing to stay if
the entrepreneur pays the cost of writing the contract. However, since we assumed that the cost of
the contract is positive, this is never optimal for the entrepreneur.

    In the appendix, we show that all results, except μL < w, hold when u (ct ) = −ae−bct . In this
case all agents in the economy are risk averse. However, because their risk aversion does not depend
on the level of their wealth, in the presence of markets for ideas, we still obtain the result that μL
is constant, and therefore that the selection of projects is scale independent. In the CARA case
studied in the appendix, the price of ideas is given by
                           "      β R μH R     ¡             ¢
                                                     −b(P −w) dF (P )dH(μ)
                                                                           #
                     1       1 + 1−β   μL PL 1 − e               μ
                 Z = log            Rμ R ¡                ¢                  > 0.
                      b         1− μH        1 − e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )dH(μ)
                                       L




4    Invariant Distribution of Firm Sizes

In order to derive the implications of our model for firm growth and the size distribution of firms,
we need to take a stand on the number of projects that firms buy in the market. The reason is


                                                    19
that in our model entrepreneurs are indiﬀerent about how many ideas to buy. As argued above, we
can either specify the function γ (·) and assume that entrepreneurs buy ideas in proportion to the
number of agents in the firm. This amounts to assuming that they find out about ideas generated
by their own workers or, alternatively, they and their workers get information about ideas at a
constant rate per person.

       Suppose that a firm with N projects has a probability of finding out about an idea given by
γ (λ, N ) = θλN. We assume that the maximum size of a firm is given by N such that λN < 1.6
Everyone in the firm has a probability λ > 0 of generating an idea. Note that since the value
of λ depends on our definition of a period, we can always make λ small enough by appropriately
defining the length of a period in the model. Correspondingly, we can make N arbitrarily large. In
case a firm hits the size constraint N , its workers will sell ideas to other firms. For the moment we
abstract from this problem, but we return to it below.

       Given our specification for γ(·) we need to choose θ such that the supply of ideas and the
demand for ideas equalize in equilibrium at price Z. Let δ N denote the share of firms of size N in
equilibrium. We will discuss this distribution in much more detail below. Then, market clearing in
the market for ideas is given by
                                           ∞
                                           X                     ∞
                                                                 X
                                       λ       (N − 1)δ N = θλ         N δN                                    (9)
                                           N=1                   N=1

where the l.h.s. is the supply of ideas (N − 1 workers in a firm of size N have a probability λ of
generating an idea) and the r.h.s. is the demand for ideas (a firm of size N learns of and buys
γ (λ, N ) = θλN ideas). Denote by ν the average firm size, then
                                                        1
                                                   θ =1− .                                                    (10)
                                                        ν

       Note that our assumption that the maximum size of firms is given by N implies an additional
adjustment for θ. Since firms get zero expected benefits out of implementing ideas, entrepreneurs
are indiﬀerent about expanding or not. Hence, they do not care about this upper bound for the
size of their firm. The only role that this bound plays is to determine how other firms grow if there
is a positive mass of constrained firms. Thus, the only adjustment we need to make is to add the
upper bound N to Equation (9). Notice, however, that Equation (10) still holds.
   6
    Alternatively we could work with continuous time and assume that the process by which firms generate ideas is
Poisson with parameter λN. This would imply an identical random process for generating ideas in continuous time.
Note that we are assuming that the process of generating ideas and the process of assigning knowledge and ownership
are independent. If instead each worker had an unconditional probability of generating an idea λ independently of
other workers, there would be a positive probability of generating several ideas per period, which we rule out.


                                                        20
   In order to derive the size distribution of firms, first note that the size of the industry will
increase constantly in our setup, given that innovation does not stop (every worker in the industry
has probability λ of having an idea independently of where they work). On top of this the probability
of firms adding a project is positive for all firms, while the probability of dropping a project that
is already being used is zero. Hence, firms will also grow continuously. This is combined with a
positive mass of new entrants with one worker every period. We can show that there is an invariant
distribution of employment shares and firm sizes measured as a share of total employment. That
is, we normalize by the size of total employment.

   First consider the transition equation for a firm with N workers. Each worker has a probability
λ of having an idea. If they do, the firm implements it if μ ∈ [μH , μL (N )] and if it implements it,
the firm uses the idea with probability 1 − Fμ (PL (N )) where PL (N ) is such that
                                µ                       ¶
                                  N S + PL (N)
                             W                  , N + 1 = W (S, N ),
                                      N +1
which by the arguments above does not depend on S.

   In what follows we will ignore the upper bound on firm sizes N . We will return to it once we
define the invariant distribution of firm sizes for the case without this bound. Hence if p (N, N + 1)
denotes the probability of a firm transitioning from N to N + 1 workers
                                               Z μH
                          p (N, N + 1) = θλN        (1 − Fμ (PL )) dH (μ) .
                                                  μL


   Hence,
                       ⎧
                       ⎪
                       ⎪ 0                                              for N 0 > N + 1
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪     Rμ
              ¡    0
                     ¢ ⎨ θλN μLH (1 − Fμ (PL )) dH (μ)                  for N 0 = N + 1
             p N, N =       h     Rμ                      i                               .
                       ⎪
                       ⎪ 1 − θλN μ H (1 − Fμ (PL )) dH (μ)              for N 0 = N
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                                    L
                       ⎩
                         0                                              for N 0 < N

   Let S = {1, 2, ...} then for any A ⊆ S,
                                                  X         ¡       ¢
                                     p (N, A) =            p N, N 0
                                                  N 0 ∈A


   is positive if N ∈ A or N + 1 ∈ A.

   Let Lt be the total labor force and Et the total number of firms or enterprises in period t, and
let {δ N } be the invariant distribution of firm sizes. The probability that a firm with N employees

                                                  21
generates a spin-oﬀ is given by
                                                     Z
                               s (N ) = θλN                   (1 − Fμ (PH )) dH (μ)
                                                     μH

where PH satisfies
                                                  W (PH , 1) = W0 .

Hence, the expected number of spin-oﬀs in period t + 1 given the distribution of firm sizes in period
t is given by
                                       N=∞
                                       X
                                  Et            s (N ) δ N
                                       N=1
                                           Z                                 N=∞
                                                                             X
                             = Et θλ              (1 − Fμ (PH )) dH (μ)              Nδ N
                                             μH                               N =1
                                       Z
                             = θλ              (1 − Fμ (PH )) dH (μ) Lt
                                        μH
                             ≡ λH Lt ,

where λH denotes the number of new employees in new firms as a fraction of total employment.
Hence the expected number of spin-oﬀs is a constant fraction of the population, Lt .

     Similarly we can calculate the expected number of new workers in existing firms, which is given
by
                                       Lt
                                       X
                                  Et           p (N, N + 1) δ N
                                       N=1
                                       XLt           Z   μH
                             = Et              θλN             (1 − Fμ (PL )) dH (μ) δ N
                                       N=1               μL

                                         XLt
                             ≡ λL Et              N δ N = λL Lt ,
                                           N=1

where λL denotes the number of new employees in old firms as a fraction of total employment.

     Then, for Et large
                                                     Lt
                                                     X
                          Lt+1 = Lt + Et                      [p (N, N + 1) + s (N )] δ N
                                                     N=1
                                  = (1 + λH ) Lt + λL Lt .


     Given our definition of λL and λH , population evolves according to

                                           Lt+1 = (1 + λH + λL ) Lt

                                                              22
     Thus,
                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                                       Et+1 = Et + Et            s (N ) δ N
                                                          N =1
                                            = Et + λH Lt .

Hence the number of firms is expanding at a constant rate. In terms of number of firms, the
economy is growing at a constant rate. Note that we are assuming that Et is large enough so that
Lt and Et evolve deterministically. For small Lt and Et , however, both are random variables that
evolve according to a stochastic process.

     We now compute the invariant distribution of the share of workers in firms of diﬀerent sizes.
Let φN denote the probability that a worker is employed by a firm with N workers, given that the
probability that a worker has an idea that is used within the firm is given by λL independently of
the firm. Then, the invariant distribution satisfies

                           [φ1 (1 − λL ) + λH ] L = φ1 L0 = φ1 (1 + λL + λH ) L

or
                                 φ1 (1 − λL ) + λH = φ1 (1 + λL + λH )

which implies
                                                       λH
                                             φ1 =                                                (11)
                                                    λH + 2λL
for N = 1. Intuitively, the number of workers in firms of size 1 today, φ1 L, minus the number of
workers in firms of size 1 that become workers in firms of size 2, φ1 λL L, plus the number of new
workers in firms of size 1, λH L, is equal (in the invariant distribution) to the number of workers in
firms of size 1 tomorrow, φ1 L0 , which is equal to φ1 (1 + λL + λH ) L, given that the growth rate of
employment is λL + λH .

     Similarly, for firms of size N,

                                 φN (1 − λL N ) + φN−1 λL (N − 1) + φN−1 λL
                             = φN (1 − φL N ) + φN −1 λL N
                             = φN (1 + λL + λH )

and so
                                                         λL N
                                        φN = φN−1                                                (12)
                                                    λH + λL (N + 1)



                                                     23
which implies that
                                         φN  φ       λL (N − 1)
                                            = N−1                  .
                                         N   N − 1 λH + λL (N + 1)

   Note that by definition
                            ∞
                            X                 ∞
                                              X £                                           ¤
          (1 + λL + λH )           φN    =       φN (1 − λL N ) + φN−1 λL (N − 1) + φN−1 λL
                           N=1                N=2
                                              +φ1 (1 − λL ) + λH

which implies that
                                   ∞
                                                "   ∞
                                                                              #   ∞
                                   X                X                             X
                      (λL + λH )         φN =           φN−1 λL + λH = λL                φN + λH
                                   N=1           N=2                              N =1

Hence,
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                                            φN = 1,
                                                      N=1

and so the resulting φ’s form a probability distribution. This distribution is the invariant distri-
bution of population shares across firms of diﬀerent sizes. Simon and Bonini (1958) propose an
exogenous growth and entry process of firms that leads to the same type of distribution, namely, a
Yule distribution. This distribution approximates a Pareto in the upper tail.


Proposition 7 There exists a unique invariant distribution φ of employment shares across firm
sizes, where φN denotes the share of workers employed by firms of size N .


   To obtain the distribution of firm sizes we need to transform the distribution of worker shares
into a distribution of firm sizes. For this, note that if the share of the population employed by firms
of size N is given by φN , then the share of firms of size N, δ N , is given by
                                                             φN
                                                δN =        P∞       φN
                                                                          .                               (13)
                                                        N        N=1 N
                 P∞                      P∞      φN
Clearly, since    N=1 φN   = 1, 0 <          N=1 N    < 1 and so δ N is well defined, exists, and is unique.


Corollary 8 There exists a unique invariant distribution δ of firm sizes.


   Note from the previous equations that the distributions φ and δ depend only on the value of
the ratio λH /λL . Note also that in the theory N ≤ N . Hence, in order to get distributions of

                                                            24
employment shares and firm sizes that are consistent with the theory we need to re-normalize both
distributions. Hence, the distribution of employment shares is given by
                                                           φ
                                                   φ̃N = P N
                                                          N
                                                               N=1 φN

and the distribution of firm sizes by

                                                              φ̃N
                                                δ̃ N =       PN             .
                                                                      φ̃N
                                                         N        N=1 N


   Now consider the expected growth rate of employment, gN , of a firm of employment size N .
The firm grows by one employee with probability N λL , thus
                                           (N + 1) N λL + N (1 − N λL ) − N
                               gN    =
                                                   Z      N
                                                          μH
                                     = λL = θλ                 (1 − Fμ (PL )) dH (μ)
                                                         μL

Hence, the expected growth rate of firms is just given by the probability per worker of its employees
generating an idea that is used. This probability is constant, so the expected growth rate in terms
of employees of existing firms is constant, which is a statement of Gibrat’s Law. Therefore, the
model seems to be consistent with the evidence in Sutton (1997).


Proposition 9 The expected growth rate in employment size of existing firms is independent of
their size.


   Similarly, the expected growth rate in average revenue of a firm with average revenue S and N
employees is given by
                               R μH R ∞ ³ NS+P ´
                         θλN    μL   PL        N+1      dFμ (P ) dH (μ) + S (1 − N λL ) − S
              gS,N   =
                                                              NS      ³          ´
                         θλN
                               R μH R ∞                                   NS
                         N+1    μL   PL P dFμ (P ) dH (μ) +               N +1       N λL + S (1 − N λL ) − S
                     =
                                "                                   NS                  #
                                      Z   μH   Z   ∞
                           1  θλ
                     =                                 P dFμ (P ) dH (μ) − λL .
                         N +1 S           μL    PL

This implies that, as μL and PL , and therefore λL , are independent of N that

                                                     ES (gS,N ) = 0.


                                                             25
So average growth rates across firms of diﬀerent average revenues are zero. However, large firms
that have had good realizations and therefore have a high S will tend to grow slower, and vice
versa. In this sense there will be reversion to the mean, conditional on number of employees. Also
note that the variance of gS (S, N ) is decreasing in N , since the larger the firm, the smaller the
contribution of new projects. Since firms implement projects that yield only non-negative profits,
this implies that the growth rate of total revenue or total profits will decline with size.

   Note that since
                                                     λL N
                                    φN = φN−1
                                                λH + λL (N + 1)
it is immediate that as N → ∞ or λ → 0, when N → N, φN ≈ φN−1 , so the share of workers at
large firms is approximately constant. This implies that the density of firm sizes will be proportional
to 1/N as N becomes large. That is, the tail of the distribution will be arbitrarily close to the tails
of a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one. Similarly if λH is small, φN ≈ φN−1 (N/ (N + 1)) ,
and so for N large φN ≈ φN −1 and the distribution of firm sizes is approximately Pareto with
coeﬃcient one. This is interesting given that several authors have concluded that the upper tail
of the distribution of enterprise sizes is close to a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one (see, for
example, Axtell (2001)). We summarize these results in the following proposition.


Proposition 10 As λ → 0, or N → ∞, the density of firm sizes is arbitrarily close to the density of
a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one, for large enough firm sizes. Furthermore, the distribution
of firm sizes is closer to a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one, the smaller the mass of workers
in new firms, λH .


   The invariant distribution of firm sizes, as well as any other outcome of the model, is a function
of the exogenous parameters and distributions in the model, namely, β, w, and the distributions Fμ
and H. However, as we show above, the eﬀect of all those variables can be summarized through the
values of λL and λH . We can therefore assign particular values to these two variables and compute
the resulting distribution of employment shares and firm sizes. Figure 2 illustrates the invariant
distribution in this model and compares it with the distribution of firm sizes in 2000 in the US. In
order to compute the distribution given in equation (13), we need to truncate the distribution of
firm sizes at a certain size. We choose N = 500000, since the largest firms reported in the data have
this number of employees. We choose λH /λL = 1/9 and so 90% of the new employees are hired by
existing firms and 10% by new firms. As is evident from equations (11) and (12), the distribution
depends only on the ratio λH /λL and not on λH and λL separately.


                                                  26
                                    0



                                   −2



                                   −4
       ln ( Prob. > Employment)




                                   −6



                                   −8



                                  −10    Model: Employment Shares

                                         Model: Firm Size Distribution
                                  −12
                                         Data: Firm Size Distribution



                                  −14



                                  −16
                                     0   2             4              6          8   10   12
                                                                 ln (Employment)



                                                       Figure 2: Model vs. Data

   Figure 2 shows how our model can do a good job in matching the distribution of firm sizes.
Relative to a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one (a straight line with slope minus one), it
exhibits a relatively thinner tail of small firms. Furthermore, since in the model and in the data we
are truncating the distribution, both distributions exhibit thinner tails than the Pareto distribution
for very large sizes. This is only the result of truncation in the model. If we let N → ∞, then
the theory implies that the upper tail will be arbitrarily close to the Pareto distribution for large
enough sizes. Similarly, in the data the census does not reveal the sizes of the largest firms because
of confidentiality concerns. Furthermore, while in the model we do not have integer constraints
and so there are some firms at all sizes, in the data there cannot be any fractional firms, which
truncates the distribution as well. Hence, the reason to have a small mass of large firms on the


                                                                         27
upper tail is similar in the model and the data.


                                    0
                                                               Data: Firm Size Distribution

                                                               Model: Firm Size Distribution (Teams of Size 2.5)
                                   −2



                                   −4
       ln ( Prob. > Employment)




                                   −6



                                   −8



                                  −10



                                  −12



                                  −14



                                  −16
                                     0     2         4           6          8             10            12
                                                            ln (Employment)



                                         Figure 3: Model vs. Data with Variable Team Size

   One noticeable diﬀerence between the distribution generated by the model and the distribution
generated in the data is that the theoretical distribution lies below the empirical one in Figure 2.
The reason for this is that in our setup, ideas are generated by one employee and not by teams of
employees. Similarly individual agents spin oﬀ, not teams of agents. This is clearly not true in the
data. Firms enter small, but not necessarily with one employee. Were we to assume that teams of
between 2 and 3 employees have ideas and spin oﬀ, we could shift the theoretical curve in Figure 2
so that it lies on top of the empirical one. Thus, the emphasis is on the shape, not the level of the
curves. This exercise is illustrated in Figure 3.

   Figure 3 uses a value of λH /λL = 0.0736. This value is the empirical counterpart of λH /λL


                                                                   28
in the US economy from 1989 to 2003. Namely, we calculated the net number of workers added
through new firms and divided it by the net number of workers added through existing firms. The
data come from the US Small Business Administration.


                                   0
                                                Pareto with coefficient one
                                                                                              LambdaH/LambdaL = 1/2
                                                                                              LambdaH/LambdaL = 1/5
                                                                                              LambdaH/LambdaL = 1/10
                                                                                              LambdaH/LambdaL = 1/20
                                                                                              LambdaH/LambdaL = 1/50

                                  −5
       ln (Prob. > Employment)




                                 −10




                                 −15
                                    0   1   2            3            4          5        6   7      8       9         10
                                                                          ln (Employment)



                                                      Figure 4: Comparative Statics

   Figure 4 shows how we can modify the shape of the invariant distribution by changing the ratio
λH /λL . We illustrate this using N = 10000. The figure presents the cases for λH /λL = 1/2, 1/5,
1/10, and 1/20. It is clear from the figure that as we increase the number of entrants (by increasing
λH /λL ), we shift mass to the lower tail, and therefore, the slope of the curve in Figure 4 becomes
steeper. The distribution is farther way from a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one. However,
as we know from the previous proposition, if one increases N to large enough values, the shape
of the distribution approaches a Pareto distribution, as N increases, in all these cases. Figure 4
illustrates the invariant distribution for a large range of parameters. The empirical value of λH /λL
is as calculated above, equal to 0.0736. The variation in the distribution that results for low, and

                                                                                29
empirically relevant, values of λH /λL is, however, extremely small. Hence, the model can do a
good job of matching the empirical distribution for a wide range of realistic values of λH /λL . These
small diﬀerences in the distribution of firm sizes for a wide set of values of λH /λL in the empirically
relevant range may be the reason why the shape of the US distribution of firm sizes has changed
so little in the last 10 years.



5    Conclusion

We propose a theory of firm dynamics in which workers have ideas for new projects that can be
implemented inside existing firms or, at a cost, in new firms: spin-oﬀs. Workers have private
information about the quality of their ideas. Because of an adverse selection problem, workers
can sell their ideas to existing firms only at a price that is not contingent on their information.
Therefore, workers with very good ideas decide to spin oﬀ and set up a new firm. Since entrepreneurs
of existing firms pay a price for the ideas sold in the market that implies zero expected profits, firm
growth is scale independent. This, we believe, is the main insight that comes out of the theory. It
is the existence of a market for ideas that leads to scale-independent growth and distributions of
firm sizes that resemble a Pareto distribution with coeﬃcient one in the upper tail.

    Essentially, the theory produces a size distribution of firms that depends on all the parameters
and distributions of the model through the value of λH /λL only. The theory leads to a distribution
of firm sizes that depends only on λH /λL , which can be easily calculated from available data. In
Section 4 we calculated this parameter using US data and showed that one obtains a size distribution
that is hard to distinguish from the empirical distribution. Furthermore, in the empirically relevant
range the distribution in the model is not very sensitive to the value of λH /λL . This could explain
why the distribution of firm sizes has been so stable over time.

    In this paper we have abstracted from equilibrium eﬀects that can be important in the evolution
of an economy. Namely, we assumed throughout that the base wage of workers is fixed. Of course,
workers also earn the return on their ideas and so part of their income is endogenous in the model.
Nevertheless, we worked with a modeled economy in which new workers can always be hired at the
wage w. Embedding this theory of firm dynamics and entry into an equilibrium framework, such
as the neoclassical growth model, where one can study the interactions between industry evolution
and wages as well as the growth of an industry or the economy would be interesting, but it is left
for future research.


                                                  30
   Furthermore, if spin-oﬀs tend to be geographically close to their parent firm, then they are a
potentially important reason why we get clusters of firms working in the same line of business in the
same locality. Augmented by a location choice, our theory could then form the basis of a dynamic
theory of industrial agglomeration.




                                                 31
References

 [1] Axtell, R. L. (2001) “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes.” Science 293 (September 7): 1818-1820.

 [2] Ericson, R. and A. Pakes (1995) “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical
     Work.” Review of Economic Studies 62 (1): 53-82.

 [3] Franco, April and Darren Filson. (2006) “Spin-outs: Knowledge Diﬀusion through Employee Mobility.”
     Forthcoming in Rand Journal of Economics.

 [4] Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.” Econometrica
     60 (5): 1127-1150.

 [5] Jovanovic, B. (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica 50 (3): 649-670.

 [6] Klette T. K. and S. Kortum (2004) “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation.” Journal of Political
     Economy 112 (5): 986-1018.

 [7] Luttmer, E. G. J. (2006) “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms.” Forthcoming in the
     Quarterly Journal of Economics.

 [8] Prusa, T. and J. Schmitz (1994) “Can Companies Maintain Their Initial Innovative Thrust? A Study
     of the PC Software Industry.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(3): 523-540.

 [9] Rossi-Hansberg, E. and M. L. J. Wright (2006) “Establishment Size Dynamics in the Aggregate Econ-
     omy.” Working Paper 11261, NBER.

[10] Silveira, R. and R. Wright (2007) “The Market for Ideas,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

[11] Simon H. and C. Bonini (1958). “The Size Distribution of Business Firms.” American Economic Review
     48(4): 607-617.

[12] Stokey, N, R.E. Lucas, Jr., and E.C. Prescott (1989) Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard
     University Press, Cambridge, USA.

[13] Sutton, J. (1997) “Gibrat’s Legacy.” Journal of Economic Literature 35 (1): 40-59.




                                                   32
6     Appendix

In this Appendix, we prove the analog of Proposition 5 for the case of exponential utility. We are
interested in this case because as in the linear case the value functions can be solved analytically
which allows us to obtain an expression for the price of an idea. Furthermore, in contrast with the
linear case, with exponential utility agents are not risk neutral and, most importantly, without the
market for ideas the thresholds would depend on the size of firms. That is, absent a market for ideas
the selection of ideas would be firm-specific. Hence, this case further illustrates the importance of
the market for ideas in generating scale independent growth.


Proposition 11 If u (ct ) = −ae−bct ,


    • μL (S, N ) is independent of S and N ,

    • the thresholds for using a project are given by PL (S, N ) = w and a constant PH (S, N ) > w,

    • the market price of ideas is given by
                               "       β R μH R   ¡             ¢
                                                        −b(P −w) dF (P )dH(μ)
                                                                              #
                         1       1 + 1−β  μL PL 1 − e               μ
                    Z = log             Rμ R ¡               ¢                  > 0,
                          b         1− μH       1 − e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )dH(μ)
                                          L




    • and μL < μH , so some ideas are implemented within existing firms and some through spin-oﬀs.


    Proof. Guess that
                                  W (S, N ) = −ae−b[π(S,N )+w] f (N )
for some function f (N ) independent of S. Substitute the guess to get
                                                  ⎡                                      ⎤
                                         Z μH                          −b[π(S,N )+w] ebZ
                                                    V (μ, S, N ) +  ae
     −ae−b[π(S,N )+w] f (N ) = γ (λ, N )      max ⎣                                      ⎦ dH(μ)
                                                       +βae   −b[π(S,N )+w] f (N ), 0
                                                       h                                         i
                               +(1 − γ (λ, N ) H (μH )) ae−b[π(S,N )+w] + βae−b[π(S,N )+w] f (N )
                                                 h                                             i
                               −γ (λ, N ) H (μH ) ae−b[π(S,N )+w] ebZ + βae−b[π(S,N )+w] f (N )

and
                     Z
    V (μ, S, N ) =     −ae−b[π(S,N )+w] ebZ e−b(P −w) dFμ (P ) +
                      Z     h                                                           i
                     β max −ae−b[π(S,N )+w] e−b(P −w) f (N + 1), −ae−b[π(S,N )+w] f (N ) dFμ (P ).


                                                  33
Then,
                                     ⎡                       R                                 ⎤
                          Z                                 − ebZ e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )
              γ (λ, N )       μH  ⎢      R    £                       ¤                        ⎥
                                  ⎢                                                            ⎥
   f (N ) = −                max ⎢ +β max −e−b(P −w) f (N + 1), −f (N) dFμ (P )                ⎥ dH(μ)
               1−β                ⎣                                                            ⎦
                                                  +ebZ + βf (N ), 0
                  1    γ (λ, N ) H (μH ) ³ bZ   ´
               +     +                     e −1
                 1−β         1−β
which does not depend on S. This verifies our guess. Now guess that
                                                             1
                                                 f (N ) =       .
                                                            1−β
Substituting this guess, we obtain that
                                    Z μH Z ³             ´
                    bZ           bZ
                   e −1 = e                 1 − e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )dH(μ)
                                     μL
                                        Z μH Z ³               ´
                                    β
                                +                 1 − e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )dH(μ)
                                  1 − β μL PL

   Hence Z needs to satisfy this equation for our guess to be correct. Or,
                                  β R μH R      ¡               ¢
                                                       −b(P −w) dF (P )dH(μ)
                            1 + 1−β    μ    P     1 − e              μ
                     ebZ =          R μHL R ¡ L
                                                    −b(P −w)
                                                             ¢
                                1− μ         1−e               dFμ (P )dH(μ)
                                         L

which implies that
                             "      β R μH R   ¡             ¢
                                                     −b(P −w) dF (P )dH(μ)
                                                                           #
                        1      1 + 1−β  μL PL 1 − e              μ
                     Z = log          Rμ R ¡              ¢                  .
                        b         1− μH      1 − e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )dH(μ)
                                             L



   Note that this is exactly the condition that makes
                                         −ae−b[π(S,N )+w]   u(π(S, N ) + w)
                          W (S, N ) =                     =                 ,
                                             1−β                1−β
so entrepreneurs are willing to pay up to this amount for workers’ ideas, and workers will get this
price or will sell the idea to another entrepreneur. Competition for ideas among entrepreneurs then
guarantees that the condition is satisfied.

   The threshold μL (S, N ) is implicitly defined by

                       V (μL (S, N ) , S, N ) = u(π(S, N ) − Z + w) + βW (S, N )

which can be written as
           Z                                           Z       h                 i
                                                  β
             −e−b(P −w) dFμL (P ) + e−bZ                    max 1 − e−b(P −w) , 0 dFμL (P ) = −1
                                                 1−β

                                                       34
or             Z                                          Z
                                                     β             h             i
                   −e−b(P −w) dFμL (P ) + e−bZ                      1 − e−b(P −w) dFμL (P ) = −1
                                                    1−β       PL

which determines μL as a constant.

     PL is then determined by
                                     µ                   ¶
                                         N S + PL
                                 W                , N + 1 = W (S, N )
                                          N +1
or
                                              e−b[PL −w]    1
                                                         =
                                                1−β        1−β
and so PL = w.

     We still need to show that PH = w. As before guess that

                                             W0 = −ae−bw f0
                                                    −ae−bP
                                         W (P, 1) =
                                                     1−β
then
               Z                                 ∙   Z                           ¸
                      −bw −b(P −w)                   −bw −b(P −w) 1        −bw
     V0 (μ) =    −ae   e       dFμ (P ) + β max −ae      e            , −ae    f0 dFμ (P )
                                                                 1−β
                    ∙ Z                       Z    ∙                    ¸       ¸
                −bw      −b(P −w)                     −b(P −w) 1
            = ae     − e          dFμ (P ) + β max −e             , −f0 dFμ (P )
                                                              1−β
and from the expression for W0 ,
                      1
            f0 =         −
                     1−β
                                  ⎡ ⎡           R¡                     ¢               ⎤ ⎤
                           Z                         1 − e−b(P −w) dFμ (P )+
                      λ            ⎢ ⎣          R      £                  ¤         ⎦, ⎥
                                   ⎢       β                  −b(P −w)                 ⎥
                               max ⎢                max f0 − e         , 0 dFμ (P )    ⎥ dH(μ)
                     1−β           ⎣      1−β                                          ⎦
                                                           , −e−bZ


which determines f0 as a positive constant, where f0 < 1/ (1 − β) and verifies our guess.

     The threshold μH is determined by

                                      V0 (μH ) = u(w + Z) + βW

which implies that
      Z                                   Z      h                           i
                                  β
        −e−b(P −w) dFμH (P ) +                max −e−b(P −w) + (1 − β) f0 , 0 dFμH (P ) = −e−bZ .
                                 1−β

                                                         35
   The equation above implies that PH satisfies

                                      e−b(PL −w) = (1 − β) f0 < 1

since f0 < 1/ (1 − β). Hence, we conclude that PL > w.

   To show that μH > μL , we need to compare the equations that determine these thresholds,
namely,
          Z                                     Z h               i
                −b(P −w)                    β
                                            −bZ          −b(P −w)
            e         dFμL (P ) = 1 + e             1−e             dFμL (P )
                                          1 − β PL
          Z                                    Z h                        i
                                           β
            e−b(P −w) dFμH (P ) = e−bZ +           (1 − β) f0 − e−b(P −w) dFμH (P )
                                         1 − β PH

But note that
            Z      h                       i             Z    h             i
                                  −b(P −w)
                    (1 − β) f0 − e           dFμH (P ) <       1 − e−b(P −w) dFμL (P ) < 1
              PH                                         PL

since (1 − β) f0 < 1 and PH > PL . Hence,
                           Z                      Z
                              −b(P −w)
                             e         dFμH (P ) < e−b(P −w) dFμL (P )

which implies that μH > μL .




                                                   36
