                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE ECONOMICS, TECHNOLOGY AND NEUROSCIENCE OF HUMAN CAPABILITY
                            FORMATION

                                          James J. Heckman

                                        Working Paper 13195
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13195


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




A version of this paper was presented at the conference "Economic Causes and Consequences of Population
Aging," Robert Fogel's 80th birthday celebration, November 18, 2006. This research was supported
by NIH R01-HD043411, NSF SES-024158, the Committee for Economic Development with a grant
from The Pew Charitable Trusts and the Partnership for America's Economic Success, and the J.B.
Pritzker Consortium on Early Childhood Development at the Harris School of Public Policy, University
of Chicago. I thank Dora Costa, Flavio Cunha, Michael Grossman, Burton Singer and an anonymous
reviewer for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are mine and not necessarily those
of the funders listed here. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Economics, Technology and Neuroscience of Human Capability Formation
James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 13195
June 2007
JEL No. I1,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper begins the synthesis of two currently unrelated literatures: the human capital approach to
health economics and the economics of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. A lifecycle investment
framework is the foundation for understanding the origins of human inequality and for devising policies
to reduce it.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction

Two currently unrelated bodies of research in economics point to the importance of the early

years of childhood in shaping many adult outcomes. The “fetal programming” literature
surveyed by Gluckman and Hanson (2006, 2005) demonstrates that in utero environments
affect adult health. Fogel (1997, 2003) demonstrates an important empirical relationship

between early nutrition and adult health. Barker (1998) demonstrates the predictive power
of environmental insults in utero and in infancy for the onset of adult coronary disease,

stroke, diabetes and hypertension. Birthweight, fetal and maternal nutrition, growth by age
1, etc. are all predictive of later adult health.

    While the literature on the epidemiology of disease has taken a life cycle, developmental
perspective, this approach has not yet made its way into the mainstream of health economics.
For example, the influential analysis of Grossman (1972, 2000) focuses exclusive attention on

adult health investment decisions, treating the health endowment determined in childhood
and the preferences of adults as parameters determined outside of his model .

    Parallel to the epidemiological literature, there is an emerging developmental literature
in economics that demonstrates the importance of early environmental conditions on the

evolution of adolescent and adult cognitive and noncognitive skills (Cunha and Heckman,
2007b; Knudsen et al., 2006). These skills are important determinants of educational attain-
ment, crime, earnings, and participation in risky behaviors (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua,

2006). Like the fetal programming literature, this literature documents critical and sensitive
periods in the development of human capabilities. Unlike the fetal programming literature, it

also considers environmental influences on development over the entire life cycle of the child
and on into adulthood. Remediation of early disadvantage and resilience receive much more

attention in this literature than in the literature on health economics. Each literature has
much to learn from the other. Evidence on the importance of early environments on a spec-
trum of health, labor market, and behavioral outcomes suggests that common developmental

processes are at work.

                                                1
   Cognitive and noncognitive skills — self-regulation, motivation, time preference, far-sightedness,

adventurousness and the like — affect the evolution of health capital through choices made
by parents and children. Grossman (2000) and Smith (2007) show that education is an

important determinant of health disparities. The recent literature in economics shows the
importance of personality and cognition in affecting educational choices. Aspects of person-
ality and cognition play additional roles in affecting health and healthy behaviors beyond

their direct effect on education (Heckman et al., 2006; Ryff and Singer, 2005).
   Those with greater self-control and conscientiousness follow medical instructions and take

care of themselves in a variety of ways. Certain personality types are at greater risk for mental
health disorders (Borghans et al., 2007). Personality factors affect learning (Duncan et al.,

2007; Raver, Garner, and Smith-Donald, 2007). Adverse health conditions impair learning
(Currie, 2006). Ram and Schultz (1979) show that raising health promotes investment in
human capital. People with longer horizons and lower rates of time preference invest more in

themselves. Lower rates of time preference are associated with greater cognitive skills. Those
with higher IQs are more farsighted (have lower time preference) because they envision future

scenarios more clearly (Frederick, 2005). The recent literature on personality and preference
formation establishes causal impacts of parental inputs and other environmental factors on

cognitive and noncognitive skills (Borghans et al., 2007; Cunha and Heckman, 2007b; Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach, 2007). The parameters of the Grossman model are in fact the
outputs of a developmental model.

   The developmental focus adopted in this paper suggests new channels of policy influence
to remediate well documented health disparities. Early childhood interventions that affect

personality traits and cognitive skills that promote health can be effective policy tools in
preventing and curing disease.

   A simple investment framework unifies the literature on health and skill formation. It
also reveals currently unexplored avenues for future research. The framework can be used
to analyze synergies in producing health, cognitive skills, and noncognitive skills, which we


                                               2
group together as human capabilities. An econometric approach based on dynamic latent

variables operationalizes this framework. This approach recognizes the proxy nature of
variables like birthweight, height, nutrition, IQ scores, and measures of personality and

mental illness that play prominent roles in empirical work in epidemiology, education and
health economics.



2     Human Diversity and Human Development

Any analysis of human development must reckon with nine facts. The first fact is that ability

matters. A large number of empirical studies document that cognitive ability is a powerful
determinant of wages, schooling, participation in crime and success in many aspects of social
and economic life (Heckman, 1995; Heckman et al., 2006; Murnane, Willett, and Levy, 1995)

including health (Auld and Sidhu, 2005).
    Second, abilities are multiple in nature. Noncognitive abilities (perseverance, motiva-

tion, time preference, risk aversion, self-esteem, self-control, preference for leisure) have
direct effects on wages (controlling for schooling), schooling, teenage pregnancy, smoking,

crime, performance on achievement tests and many other aspects of social and economic life
(Borghans et al., 2007; Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001; Heckman et al., 2006). They
affect health choices (see the evidence on time preference and health in Grossman, 2000).

Social and emotional factors affect adult health (Ryff and Singer, 2005).
    Third, the nature versus nurture distinction, while traditional, is obsolete. The modern

literature on epigenetic expression and gene-environment interactions teaches us that the
sharp distinction between acquired skills and ability featured in the early human capital
literature is not tenable (Gluckman and Hanson, 2005; Pray, 2004; Rutter, 2006). Additive

“nature” and “nurture” models, while traditional and still used in many studies of heritability
and family influence, mischaracterize gene-environment interactions. Recent analyses in

economics that break the “causes” of birthweight into environmental and genetic components



                                              3
ignore the lessons of the recent literature. Genes and environment cannot be meaningfully

parsed by traditional linear models that assign unique variances to each component. Abilities
are produced, and gene expression is governed by environmental conditions (Rutter, 2006;

Rutter, Moffitt, and Caspi, 2006). Behaviors and abilities have both a genetic and an
acquired character. Measured abilities are the outcome of environmental influences, including
in utero experiences, and also have genetic components.

    The literature on fetal programming emphasizes the importance of the environment in
causing gene expression that gives rise to susceptibility to different diseases, abilities and

personality characteristics. See Gluckman and Hanson (2005) for evidence on gene expres-
sion for disease and Rutter (2006) and Rutter et al. (2006) for evidence on environmental

determinants of psychopathology and cognition. Some adverse early effects are more easily
compensated than other effects. The concepts of remediation and resilience play prominent
roles in economic analysis but are not featured in current discussions of health economics. 1

    Fourth, ability gaps between individuals and across socioeconomic groups open up at early
ages, for both cognitive and noncognitive skills. So do gaps in health status. Figure 1 displays

a prototypical pattern of a cognitive test score by age of child by socioeconomic status
of the family.2 Cunha et al. (2006) present many graphs showing the early divergence

of child cognitive and noncognitive skills by age across children of parents with different
socioeconomic status. Levels of child cognitive and noncognitive skills are highly correlated
with family background factors like parental education and maternal ability, which, when

statistically controlled for, largely eliminate these gaps (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Cunha
et al., 2006). Currie (2006) presents parallel evidence on child health. Case, Lubotsky, and

Paxson (2002) show that family income gradients in child health status emerge early and
widen with age (see Figure 2). Notice that a high y value is associated with lower health
   1
     See, however, Curtis and Cicchetti (2003) and Charney (2004) for analyses of biological and psychobio-
logical mechanisms for resilience.
   2
     Permanent income is the measure of socioeconomic status in this figure. See Cunha et al. (2006) for the
source of this figure and the precise definition of permanent income. The website of Cunha and Heckman
(2007b) presents many additional graphs showing the emergence of early and persistent gaps in abilities.



                                                     4
status on their graph. Experimental interventions with long term follow-up confirm that

changing the resources available to disadvantaged children improves adult outcomes on a
number of dimensions. See the studies surveyed in Cunha et al. (2006) and Blau and Currie

(2006).
   Fifth, for both animal and human species, there is compelling evidence of critical and
sensitive periods in development. Some skills or traits are more readily acquired at certain

stages of childhood than other traits (Knudsen et al., 2006). For example, on average, if a
second language is learned before age 12, the child speaks it without an accent (Newport,

1990). If syntax and grammar are not acquired early on, they appear to be very difficult to
learn later on in life (Pinker, 1994). A child born with a cataract on the eye will be blind if

the cataract is not removed within the first year of life.
   Different types of abilities appear to be manipulable at different ages. IQ scores be-
come stable by age 10 or so, suggesting a sensitive period for their formation below age

10 (Schuerger and Witt, 1989). There is evidence that adolescent interventions can affect
noncognitive skills (Cunha et al., 2006). This evidence is supported in the neuroscience that

establishes the malleability of the prefrontal cortex into the early 20s (Dahl, 2004). This is
the region of the brain that governs emotion and self-regulation. Rutter (2006) and Rutter

et al. (2006) present comprehensive summaries of age-dependent epigenetic and other gene-
environment interactions for psychopathology — including aggression. Nagin and Tremblay
(1999) show that early aggression predicts adult levels of criminality and violence. Barker

and his coauthors show the powerful influence of the mother’s health, as determined by her
lifetime experiences on child outcomes.

   On average, the later remediation is given to a disadvantaged child, the less effective it is.
A study by O’Connor et al. (2000) of adopted Romanian infants reared in severely deprived

orphanage environments before their adoption supports this claim . The later an orphan was
rescued from the social and emotional isolation of the orphanage, the lower was his or her
later cognitive performance. Secondary school classroom remediation programs designed to


                                               5
combat early cognitive deficits have a poor track record.

      At historically funded levels, public job training programs and adult literacy and educa-
tional programs, like the GED, that attempt to remediate years of educational and emotional

neglect among disadvantaged individuals, have a low economic return and produce meager
effects for most persons. Much evidence suggests that returns to adolescent education for
the most disadvantaged and less able are lower than the returns for the more advantaged

(Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Carneiro, Heckman, and Vytlacil, 2006; Meghir and Palme,
2001).

      The available evidence suggests that for many skills and human capabilities, later in-
tervention for disadvantage may be possible, but that it is much more costly than early

remediation to achieve a given level of adult performance (Cunha and Heckman, 2006).
Barker and coauthors document that if intervention is administered in the first year of birth
after birth, compensation for undernutrition can produce greater risk for later diabetes and

heart disease (Eriksson, Forsen, Tuomilehto, Osmond, and Barker, 2001)3 . To date, the
health economics literature has not systematically studied the effectiveness of remediation

for adverse early environments, although it evaluates the efficacy of treatments of diseases
that may be influenced by adverse early environments.

      Sixth, despite the low returns to interventions targeted toward disadvantaged adolescents,
the empirical literature shows high economic returns for remedial investments in young dis-
advantaged children. See Barnett (2004), the evidence in Cunha et al. (2006) and the papers

they cite. This finding is a consequence of dynamic complementarity and self-productivity
captured by the technology described in the next section. The evidence for interventions

in low birth weight children suggests that early intervention can be effective (Brooks-Gunn,
Cunha, Duncan, Heckman, and Sojourner, 2006). Olds (2002) documents that perinatal

interventions that reduce fetal exposure to alcohol and nicotine have substantial long-term
effects on cognition, socioemotional skills and on health and have high economic returns.
  3
      Barker and coauthors only investigate compensation in the first year after birth.



                                                       6
   Seventh, if early investment in disadvantaged children is not followed up by later invest-

ment, its effect at later ages is lessened. Investments at different stages of the life cycle are
complementary and require follow up to be effective (Cunha and Heckman, 2006, 2007b).

   Eighth, the effects of credit constraints on a child’s adult outcomes depend on the age at
which they bind for the child’s family. Recent research summarized in Cunha et al. (2006)
and Carneiro and Heckman (2002, 2003) demonstrates the quantitative insignificance of

family credit constraints in a child’s college-going years in explaining a child’s enrollment in
college. Controlling for cognitive ability, under policies currently in place in American society,

family income during a child’s college-going years plays only a minor role in determining
socioeconomic differences in college participation, although much public policy is predicated

on precisely the opposite point of view. Controlling for ability, minorities are more likely to
attend college than others despite their lower family incomes (see Cameron and Heckman,
2001, and the references they cite). Augmenting family income or reducing college tuition

at the stage of the life cycle when a child goes to college does not go far in compensating for
low levels of early investment. It is the shortfall in adolescent abilities and motivations that

account for minority college enrollment gaps. The gaps in health status by income evident in
Figure 2 likely diminish once early environmental factors are controlled for, but this remains

to be rigorously established.
   Credit constraints operating in the early years have lasting effects on adult ability and
schooling outcomes (Dahl and Lochner, 2005; Duncan, Kalil, and Ziol-Guest, 2007; Duncan

and Brooks-Gunn, 1997; Morris, Duncan, and Clark-Kauffman, 2005). Evidence on the
persistent effects of early malnutrition in utero and in the early years on adult health is

consistent with this evidence (Fogel, 1997, 2003; Gluckman and Hanson, 2005).
   Ninth, socioemotional (noncognitive) skills foster cognitive skills and are an important

product of successful families and successful interventions in disadvantaged families. They
also promote healthy behaviors. Emotionally nurturing environments produce more capable
learners. The Perry Preschool Program, which was evaluated by random assignment, did


                                                7
not boost participant adult IQ but enhanced the performance of participants on a number

of dimensions, including scores on achievement tests, employment and reduced participation
in a variety of social pathologies. See Schweinhart et al. (2005) and the figures and tables

on the Perry program posted at the website for Cunha and Heckman (2007b).
        Perseverance and motivation are also important factors in explaining compliance with
medical protocols. A large body of evidence suggests that a person’s mood and attitudes

as well as his social environment account, in part, for the ability of persons to ward off and
overcome various diseases and to age gracefully (Ryff and Singer, 2005). The evidence that

personality traits affect educational attainment (Heckman et al., 2006) helps to explain how
education, as a proxy, helps reduce disease gradients by socioeconomic class, as reported by

Smith (2007). Figure 3 shows how greater cognitive and noncognitive skills reduce partici-
pation in smoking, a major health hazard (Heckman et al., 2006).



3         A Model of Investment in Human Capabilities

A model of capability formation unifies this evidence. Agents are assumed to possess a

vector of capabilities at each age including pure cognitive abilities (e.g. IQ), noncognitive
abilities (patience, self control, temperament, risk aversion, time preference), and health
stocks. Health stocks include propensities for mortality and morbidity, including infant

mortality. All capabilities are produced by investment, environment and genes. These
capabilities are used with different weights in different tasks in the labor market and in

social life more generally.4
        The capability formation process is governed by a multistage technology. Each stage
corresponds to a period in the life cycle of a child. While the recent child development

literature in economics recognizes stages of development (Cunha and Heckman, 2007b; Cunha
et al., 2006), the early literature on the economics of child development and the current
    4
    Cunha et al. (2006) propose a model of comparative advantage in occupational choice to supplement
their model of skill formation.


                                                 8
literature on the economics of health do not (Becker and Tomes, 1986; Grossman, 2000).

In the developmental approach, inputs or investments at each stage produce outputs at the
next stage. Qualitatively different inputs can be used at different stages and the technologies

can be different at different stages of child development.
   The investment model used by Grossman focuses on adult investments where time and its
opportunity cost play important roles (Grossman, 1972, 2000). For investments in childhood

health, parents make decisions and child opportunity costs are less relevant (Cunha and
Heckman, 2007b). The outputs at each stage in our technology are the changes in capability

at that stage. Some stages of the technology may be more productive in producing some
capabilities than other stages, and some inputs may be more productive at some stages than

at other stages. The stages that are more effective in producing certain capabilities are called
“sensitive periods” for the acquisition of those capabilities. If one stage alone is effective in
producing a capability, it is called a “critical period” for that capability. See Cunha and

Heckman (2007b).
   The capabilities produced at one stage augment the capabilities attained at later stages.

This effect is termed self-productivity. It embodies the ideas that capabilities are self-
reinforcing and cross-fertilizing and that the effects of investment persist. For example,

emotional security fosters child exploration and more vigorous learning of cognitive skills.
This has been found in animal species (Cameron, 2004; Meaney, 2001; Suomi, 1999) and in
humans (see Duncan et al., 2007; Raver et al., 2007, interpreting the ability of a child to pay

attention as a socioemotional skill). A higher stock of cognitive skill in one period raises the
stock of next period cognitive skills. Higher levels of self-regulation and conscientiousness

reduce health risks and avoid accidents. Higher levels of health promote learning. A second
key feature of capability formation is dynamic complementarity. Capabilities produced at

one stage of the life cycle raise the productivity of investment at subsequent stages. In a
multistage technology, complementarity implies that levels of investments in capabilities at
different ages bolster each other. They are synergistic. Complementarity also implies that


                                               9
early investment should be followed up by later investment in order for the early invest-

ment to be productive. Together, dynamic complementarity and self-productivity produce
multiplier effects which are the mechanisms through which capabilities beget capabilities.

This dynamic process can account for the emergence of socioeconomic differentials in health
documented by Smith (2007) and Case et al. (2002).
      Dynamic complementarity and self-productivity imply an equity-efficiency trade-off for

late child investments but not for early investments (Cunha and Heckman, 2007b). These
features of the technology of capability formation have consequences for the design and

evaluation of public policies toward families. In particular, they show why the returns
to late childhood investment and remediation for young adolescents from disadvantaged

backgrounds are so low for many investments, while the returns to early investment in
children from disadvantaged environments are so high.
      Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and Carneiro, Cunha, and Heckman (2003) formalize these

concepts in an overlapping generations model. There is evidence on intergenerational link-
ages in health, personality and skill formation Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne Groves (2005);

Carneiro et al. (2003); Currie (2006). Consider a household which consists of an adult parent
and his/her child. Take parental stocks of skills as given. In a proper overlapping genera-

tions model, as developed in Carneiro et al. (2003) and the website for Cunha and Heckman
(2007b), investment in parents is modeled, explaining the intergenerational transmission of
health, personality and cognition.

      Altruistic parents invest in their children. Let It denote parental investments in child
capabilities when the child is t years-old, where t = 1, 2, . . . , T . The first stage can be in

utero investment. The output of the investment process is a skill vector. The parent is
assumed to fully control the investments in the skills of the child, whereas in reality, as a

child matures, he gains much more control over the investment process.5 Thus, children with
greater emotional skills and conscientiousness are less likely to be involved in risky teenage
  5
      A sketch of such a model is discussed in Carneiro et al. (2003).



                                                       10
activities (see Figure 3 and the evidence in Heckman et al., 2006). These capabilities create

a platform of adult capabilities and preferences which affect adult choices. Government
inputs (e.g., publicly provided schooling) can be modeled as a component of It . It would

be desirable to merge the model of parental investment with the model of adult investment,
but that is beyond the scope of this paper.
       At conception, the child receives genetic and environmental initial conditions θ 1 . As

documented by Gluckman and Hanson (2005) and Rutter (2006), gene expression is triggered
by environmental conditions. Let h denote parental capabilities (e.g., IQ, genes, education,

income). These are products of their own parents’ investments and genes. At each stage t,
let θt denote the vector of capabilities. The technology of capability production when the

child is t years old is
                                             θt+1 = ft (h, θt , It ) ,                                        (1)

for t = 1, 2, . . . , T .6 More investment produces more capabilities (∂ft /∂It > 0).

       Substituting in (1) for θt , θt−1 ,. . . , repeatedly, one can rewrite the stock of capabilities
at stage t + 1, θt+1 , as a function of all past investments:


                               θt+1 = mt (h, θ1 , I1 , . . . , It ) , t = 1, . . . , T.                       (2)


Dynamic complementarity arises when ∂ 2 ft (h, θt , It ) /∂θt ∂It0 > 0, i.e., when stocks of capa-
bilities acquired by period t − 1 (θt ) make investment in period t (It ) more productive. Such

complementarity explains why returns to educational investments are higher at later stages
of the child’s life cycle for more able, more healthy and more motivated children (those with

higher θt ). Students with greater early capabilities (cognitive, noncognitive and health) are
more efficient in later learning of both cognitive and noncognitive skills and in acquiring
stocks of health capital. The evidence from the early intervention literature suggests that

the enriched early preschool environments provided by the Abecedarian, Perry and Chicago
   6
     For analytical convenience, ft is assumed to be strictly increasing in It . I further assume strict concavity
in It and twice continuous differentiability in all of its arguments.


                                                         11
Child-Parent Centers (CPC) interventions promote greater efficiency in learning in school

and reduce problem behaviors (Blau and Currie, 2006; Cunha et al., 2006). Enriched early
environments produce healthier babies (Bhargava, 2008; Gluckman and Hanson, 2005).

       Self-productivity arises when ∂ft (h, θt , It ) /∂θt > 0, i.e., when higher levels of capabilities
in one period create higher levels of capabilities in the next period. For capability vectors,
this includes own and cross effects. The joint effects of self-productivity and dynamic com-

plementarity help to explain the high productivity of investment in disadvantaged young
children but the lower return to investment in disadvantaged adolescent children for whom

the stock of capabilities is low and hence the complementarity effect is lower.
       This technology explains the evidence that the ability of a child to pay attention affects

subsequent academic achievement. Healthier children are better learners (Currie, 2006). This
technology also captures the critical and sensitive periods in humans and animals documented
for a number of aspects of development (Knudsen et al., 2006).

       Suppose for analytical simplicity that there are two stages of childhood, (T = 2). In
reality, there are many stages in childhood, including preconception and in utero stages.

Assume for expositional simplicity that θ1 , I1 , I2 are scalars.7 The adult stock of capability,
h0 (= θ3 ), is a function of parental characteristics, initial conditions and investments during

childhood I1 and I2 :
                                           h0 = m2 (h, θ1 , I1 , I2 ) .                               (3)

       The conventional literature in economics (Becker and Tomes, 1986) assumes only one

period of childhood when it addresses childhood at all. It does not distinguish between early
investment and late investment. A general technology that captures a variety of interesting

special cases of (3) is a CES production function

                                       µ         h                            i φ1 ¶
                                0                        φ                φ
                              h = m2 h, θ1 , γ (I1 ) + (1 − γ) (I2 )                                  (4)

   7
    Cunha et al. (2006) analyze the vector case. See also the supporting material on the website for Cunha
and Heckman (2007b).



                                                       12
for φ ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1, where φ is a measure of how well late inputs substitute for early

inputs. 1/(1 − φ) is called an elasticity of substitution. When φ = 1, I1 and I2 are perfect
substitutes. When φ = −∞, I1 and I2 are perfect complements. The parameter φ governs

how easy it is to compensate for low levels of stage 1 investment in producing later adult
capability. See the analysis of this model in Cunha and Heckman (2007b); Cunha et al.
(2006).

   When φ is small, low levels of early investment I1 are not easily remediated by later
investment I2 . The other face of CES complementarity is that when φ is small, high early

investment should be followed with high late investment if the early investment is to be
harvested. In the extreme case when φ → −∞, (4) converges to a model of perfect comple-

ments. This technology explains why returns to education are low in the adolescent years for
disadvantaged (low h, low I1 , low θ2 ) adolescents but are high in the early years. Without
the proper foundation for learning (high levels of θ2 ) in technology (1), adolescent interven-

tions have low returns. Bad initial conditions that create physical and mental impairments
produce persistently less healthy adults (Barker, 1998; Eriksson et al., 2001; Gluckman and

Hanson, 2005).
   The CES share parameter γ is a capability multiplier. It captures the productivity of early

investment not only in directly boosting h0 (through self-productivity) but also in raising
the productivity of I2 by increasing θ2 through first-period investments. Thus I1 directly
increases θ2 which in turn affects the productivity of I2 in forming h0 . γ captures the net

effect of I1 on h0 through both self-productivity and direct complementarity. In a multiperiod
model, the multiplier could vary across stages. The capability multiplier helps to explain

why capabilities foster capabilities.




                                              13
4     The Optimal Lifecycle Profile of Capability Invest-

      ments

Using technology (4), Cunha and Heckman (2007b) determine how the ratio of early to
late investments varies as a function of φ and γ as a consequence of parental choices under

different market arrangements concerning lending and borrowing. It is fruitful to review
their analysis of the case without binding credit constraints.
    When φ = 1, so early and late investment are perfect CES substitutes, it is always

possible to remediate early disadvantage. However, it is not always economically feasible to
do so. The price of early investment is $1. The price of late investment is $1/(1 + r), where r

is the interest rate and 1/(1+r) is a discount factor. The amount of human capital (including
health capital) produced from one unit of I1 is γ, while $ (1 + r) of I2 produces (1 + r) (1 − γ)
units of human capital. Two forces act in opposite directions. High productivity of initial

investment (as captured by the skill multiplier γ) drives the parent toward making early
investments. The interest rate drives the parent to invest late. It is optimal to invest early

if γ > (1 − γ) (1 + r). Epidemiologists are prone to neglect the costs of remediation when
they demonstrate its possibilities.

    As φ → −∞, the optimal investment strategy sets I1 = I2 . In this case, investment
in the young is essential. However, later investment is needed to harvest early investment.
On efficiency grounds, early disadvantages should be perpetuated, and compensatory invest-

ments at later ages are economically inefficient. In the general case where −∞ < φ < 1, the
optimal ratio of early to late investment is

                                       ·                    1
                                                         ¸ 1−φ
                                  I1           γ
                                     =                         .                             (5)
                                  I2     (1 − γ) (1 + r)

Figure 4 plots the ratio of early to late investment as a function of the skill multiplier γ
under different values of the complementarity parameter φ, assuming r = 0.



                                               14
    When CES complementarity is high, the skill multiplier γ plays a limited role in shaping

the optimal ratio of early to late investment. High early investment should be followed
by high late investment. As the degree of CES complementarity decreases, the role of the

capability multiplier increases, and the higher the multiplier, the more investment should be
concentrated in the early ages. Cunha and Heckman (2007b) analyze the effects of alternative
credit market arrangements on optimal investment.



5     Cognitive, Noncognitive and Health Formation

This framework readily accommodates capability vectors. Child development is not just
about cognitive skill formation although a lot of public policy analysis focuses solely on
cognitive test scores to the exclusion of physical health and personality factors. Let θ t denote

the vector of capabilities, i.e., cognitive skills, noncognitive skills and health capabilities:
      ¡             ¢
θt = θtC , θtN , θtH . Let It denote the vector of investment in cognitive, noncognitive and
                            ¡            ¢           ¡          ¢
health capabilities: It = ItC , ItN , ItH . Use h = hC , hN , hH to denote parental cognitive,
noncognitive and health capabilities. At each stage t, one can define a recursive technology

for cognitive skills (k = C), noncognitive skills, (k = N ), and health (k = H):


                     k
                         = ftk θtC , θtN , θtH , Itk , hC , hN , hH , k ∈ {C, N, H}.
                              ¡                                    ¢
                    θt+1                                                                     (6)


Technology (6) allows for cross-productivity effects: cognitive skills may affect the accumu-

lation of noncognitive skills and vice versa. Health capabilities facilitate the accumulation
of cognitive and noncognitive skills. These technologies also allow for critical and sensitive
periods to differ across different capability investments. Cognitive and noncognitive skills

and health capabilities determine costs of effort, time preference and risk aversion parame-
ters. By investment choices, parents shape preferences that govern the choices of children in

a variety of dimensions.
    Accounting for preference formation explains the success of many early childhood pro-

                                                  15
grams targeted to disadvantaged children which do not permanently raise IQ, but which

permanently boost social performance.8 Conscientiousness, farsightedness, and persistence,
as well as other personality features, affect participation in risky activities, including smoking

(Borghans et al., 2007; Heckman et al., 2006).



6         Estimating the Technology: Accounting for the Proxy

          Nature of Inputs and Outputs

Cunha and Heckman (2007a) and Cunha et al. (2007) estimate versions of technology (6)

and show that many of the proxies for investment and outcomes that are used in the child
development and health literatures are only crude proxies for the true variables they proxy.
Systematically accounting for measurement error greatly affects estimates of technologies

of skill formation and other behavioral relationships. Smoking is an error-laden proxy for
noncognitive skill (Heckman et al., 2006). Many papers in health economics rely on smoking

(and other behaviors) as proxies for time preference (see the survey in Grossman, 2000).
The empirical literature on child development suggests that accounting for the proxy nature

of smoking and adjusting for measurement error will improve the explanatory power and
interpretability of the estimates of time preference on health choices.



7         Summary

This paper begins the process of synthesizing the modern literature on the economics of child
development and the economics of health. A large literature documents the importance of the

early years in determining adult capabilities of cognition, motivation and health. A common
developmental process appears to be in operation where cognitive and noncognitive skills and

health capabilities at one stage of childhood cross-fertilize the productivity of investment at
    8
        The Abecedarian early intervention program permanently boosted adult IQ (Cunha et al., 2006).



                                                      16
later stages. Using the technology of capability formation developed by Cunha and Heckman

(2007b), one can organize and interpret a large body of evidence from diverse literatures.
Accounting for the early emergence of abilities, personality parameters and health stocks

redirects the attention of health economists to the early years and to models of parental
investment instead of toward models of adult investment as in Grossman (2000).
   Simple economic models show the importance of accounting for early and late investments

and for examining the technological possibilities and economic costs of late remediation
for early environmental influence. Frameworks that account for the proxy nature of the

measurements of inputs and outputs hold much promise, both in health economics and in
the economics of child development.




                                           17
References

Auld, M. C. and N. Sidhu (2005, October). Schooling, cognitive ability and health. Health

  Economics 14 (10), 1019–1034.

Barker, D. J. P. (1998). Mothers, Babies and Health in Later Life (2nd ed.). Edinburgh:
  Churchill Livingstone.

Barnett, W. S. (2004, November). Benefit-cost analysis of preschool education. PowerPoint
  presentation, http://nieer.org/resources/files/BarnettBenefits.ppt.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1986, July). Human capital and the rise and fall of families.
  Journal of Labor Economics 4 (3, Part 2), S1–S39.

Bhargava, A. (2008). Food, Economics and Health. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Forth-

  coming.

Blau, D. and J. Currie (2006). Preschool, daycare, and afterschool care: Who’s minding the

  kids? In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education,
  Volume 2 of Handbooks in Economics, Chapter 20, pp. 1163–1278. Amsterdam: North-

  Holland.

Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2007). The economics and
  psychology of personality. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of

  Economics. Forthcoming, Journal of Human Resources.

Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (2001, December). The determinants of earnings: A

  behavioral approach. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4), 1137–1176.

Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne Groves (Eds.) (2005). Unequal Chances: Family
  Background and Economic Success. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                            18
Brooks-Gunn, J., F. Cunha, G. Duncan, J. J. Heckman, and A. Sojourner (2006). A re-

  analysis of the IHDP program. Unpublished manuscript, Infant Health and Development
  Program, Northwestern University.

Cameron, J. (2004). Evidence for an early sensitive period for the development of brain
  systems underlying social affiliative behavior. Unpublished manuscript, Oregon National
  Primate Research Center.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (2001, June). The dynamics of educational attainment
  for black, hispanic, and white males. Journal of Political Economy 109 (3), 455–99.

Carneiro, P., F. Cunha, and J. J. Heckman (2003, October 17). Interpreting the evidence
  of family influence on child development. In The Economics of Early Childhood Develop-
  ment: Lessons for Economic Policy, Minneapolis, Minnesota. The Federal Reserve Bank.

  Presented at ”The Economics of Early Childhood Development: Lessons for Economic
  Policy Conference,” Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, Minneapolis, MN. October 17,

  2003.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2002, October). The evidence on credit constraints in

  post-secondary schooling. Economic Journal 112 (482), 705–734.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2003). Human capital policy. In J. J. Heckman, A. B.
  Krueger, and B. M. Friedman (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital

  Policies? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2006). Estimating marginal and average

  returns to education. Under review, American Economic Review.

Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson (2002, December). Economic status and health in
  childhood: The origins of the gradient. American Economic Review 92 (5), 1308–1334.




                                            19
Charney, D. S. (2004, February). Psychobiological mechanisms of resilience and vulner-

  ability: Implications for successful adaptation to extreme stress. American Journal of
  Psychiatry 161 (2), 195–216.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2006). Investing in our young people. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007a). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technol-

  ogy of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Unpublished manuscript, University of
  Chicago, Department of Economics. Forthcoming, Journal of Human Resources.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007b, May). The technology of skill formation. American
  Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the

  evidence on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook
  of the Economics of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2007). Estimating the technology of cog-
  nitive and noncognitive skill formation. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago,

  Department of Economics. Presented at the Yale Conference on Macro and Labor Eco-
  nomics, May 5–7, 2006. Under revision, Econometrica.

Currie, J. (2006). Healthy, wealthy, and wise? The link between SES, children’s health,

  and human capital development. Presented at the IZA Seminar, April 7, 2006. Bonn,
  Germany. Forthcoming Journal of Economic Literature.

Curtis, W. J. and D. Cicchetti (2003, August). Moving research on resilience into the
  21st century: Theoretical and methodological considerations in examining the biological
  contributors to resilience. Development and Psychopathology 15 (3), 773–810.




                                           20
Dahl, G. B. and L. J. Lochner (2005, April). The impact of family income on child achieve-

  ment. Working Paper 11279, NBER. American Economic Review, in press.

Dahl, R. E. (2004). Adolescent brain development: A period of vulnerabilities and opportu-

  nities. In R. E. Dahl and L. P. Spear (Eds.), Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
  pp. 1–22. New York: New York Academy of Sciences.

Duncan, G., A. Kalil, and K. Ziol-Guest (2007). Economic costs of early childhood poverty.

  Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.

Duncan, G. J. and J. Brooks-Gunn (1997). Income effects across the life span: Integration

  and interpretation. In G. Duncan and J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Consequences of Growing
  Up Poor, pp. 596–610. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Duncan, G. J., C. J. Dowsett, A. Claessens, K. Magnuson, A. C. Huston, P. Klebanov,

  L. Pagani, L. Feinstein, M. Engel, J. Brooks-Gunn, H. Sexton, K. Duckworth, and C. Japeli
  (2007). School readiness and later achievement. Developmental Psychology. In press.

Eriksson, J. G., T. Forsen, J. Tuomilehto, C. Osmond, and D. J. P. Barker (2001, April).
  Early growth and coronary heart disease in later life: Longitudinal study. British Medical

  Journal 322 (7292), 949–953.

Fogel, R. W. (1997). New findings on secular trends in nutrition and mortality: Some
  implications for population theory. In M. R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark (Eds.), Handbook

  of Population and Family Economics, Volume 1A, pp. 433–481. Amsterdam: Elsevier
  Science.

Fogel, R. W. (2003). The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100: Europe,
  America and the Third World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Frederick, S. (2005, Fall). Cognitive reflection and decision making. Journal of Economic

  Perspectives 19 (4), 25–42.


                                            21
Gluckman, P. and M. Hanson (2006). Mismatch: Why Our World No Longer Fits Our

  Bodies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Gluckman, P. D. and M. Hanson (2005). The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development, and
  Disease. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Grossman, M. (1972, March-April). On the concept of health capital and the demand for
  health. Journal of Political Economy 80 (2), 223–255.

Grossman, M. (2000). The human capital model. In A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse (Eds.),

  Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1, pp. 347–408. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Heckman, J. J. (1995, October). Lessons from The Bell Curve. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 103 (5), 1091–1120.

Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006, July). The effects of cognitive and noncog-

  nitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 24 (3), 411–482.

Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Economic,

  neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.

Meaney, M. J. (2001). Maternal care, gene expression, and the transmission of individual

  differences in stress reactivity across generations. Annual Review of Neuroscience 24 (1),
  1161–1192.

Meghir, C. and M. Palme (2001). The effect of a social experiment in education. Technical
  Report W01/11, Institute for Fiscal Studies.

Morris, P., G. J. Duncan, and E. Clark-Kauffman (2005). Child well-being in an era of welfare

  reform: The sensitivity of transitions in development to policy change. Developmental
  Psychology 41 (6), 919–932.

                                             22
Murnane, R. J., J. B. Willett, and F. Levy (1995, May). The growing importance of cognitive

  skills in wage determination. Review of Economics and Statistics 77 (2), 251–266.

Nagin, D. S. and R. E. Tremblay (1999, September/October). Trajectories of boys’ physical

  aggression, opposition, and hyperactivity on the path to physically violent and nonviolent
  juvenile delinquency. Child Development 70 (5), 1181–1196.

Newport, E. L. (1990, January-March). Maturational constraints on language learning.

  Cognitive Science 14 (1, Special Issue), 11–28.

O’Connor, T. G., M. Rutter, C. Beckett, L. Keaveney, J. M. Kreppner, and the English

  and Romanian Adoptees Study Team (2000, March-April). The effects of global severe
  privation on cognitive competence: Extension and longitudinal follow-up. Child Develop-
  ment 71 (2), 376–390.

Olds, D. L. (2002, September). Prenatal and infancy home visiting by nurses: From ran-
  domized trials to community replication. Prevention Science 3 (2), 153–172.

Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York: W.
  Morrow and Co.

Pray, L. A. (2004, July). Epigenetics: Genome, meet your environment. The Scientist 18 (13),

  14–20.

Ram, R. and T. W. Schultz (1979, April). Life span, health, savings, and productivity.

  Economic Development and Cultural Change 27 (3), 399–421.

Raver, C. C., P. W. Garner, and R. Smith-Donald (2007). The roles of emotion regula-

  tion and emotion knowledge for children’s academic readiness: Are the links causal? In
  R. C. Pianta, M. J. Cox, and K. L. Snow (Eds.), School Readiness and the Transition to
  Kindergarten in the Era of Accountability. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.




                                             23
Rutter, M. (2006). Genes and Behavior: Nature–Nurture Interplay Explained. Oxford, UK:

  Blackwell Publishers.

Rutter, M., T. E. Moffitt, and A. Caspi (2006, March/April). Gene-environment interplay

  and psychopathology: Multiple varieties but real effects. Journal of Child Psychology and
  Psychiatry 47 (3/4), 226–261.

Ryff, C. D. and B. H. Singer (2005). Social environments and the genetics of aging: Advanc-

  ing knowledge of protective health mechanisms. Journals of Gerontology B-Psychological
  Sciences and Social Sciences 60B (Special Issue I), 12–23.

Schuerger, J. M. and A. C. Witt (1989, March). The temporal stability of individually tested
  intelligence. Journal of Clinical Psychology 45 (2), 294–302.

Schweinhart, L. J., J. Montie, Z. Xiang, W. S. Barnett, C. R. Belfield, and M. Nores (2005).

  Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40. Ypsilanti, MI:
  High/Scope Press.

Smith, J. P. (2007). Diabetes and the rise of the SES health gradient. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences. In press.

Suomi, S. J. (1999). Developmental trajectories, early experiences, and community conse-

  quences: Lessons from studies with rhesus monkeys. In D. P. Keating and C. Hertzman
  (Eds.), Developmental Health and the Wealth of Nations: Social, Biological, and Educa-

  tional Dynamics, pp. 185–200. The Guilford Press.




                                             24
Figure 1: Children of the NLSY average standardized score for PIAT-Math by family per-
manent income quartile. Source: Full sample of the Children of the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth.
   0.8000



   0.6000



   0.4000



   0.2000



   0.0000



-0.2000



-0.4000



-0.6000



-0.8000
                                                  5              6                 7                8             9           10           11             12        13    14
                                                                                                                       Age

                                                          Bottom Quartile                      Second Quartile               Third Quartile             Top Quartile




Figure 2: Health and income for children and adults U.S. national health interview survey
1986-1995. Reprinted from Case et al. (2002) with permission from the authors.
  health status (1 = excellent to 5 = poor)




                                              2 .2 5                                             ag e s 9 - 1 2


                                                                                                                                   a g e s 1 3 -1 7
                                                      2


                                                                     a ge s 4- 8
                                              1 .7 5
                                                                                    a g es 0 - 3

                                                  1 .5

                                                                 8                                          9                         10                                 11
                                                                                                            l n ( f a m i ly i n c o m e )


Figure 3: Probability of daily smoking by age 18, males by decile of cognitive and noncog-
nitive factor. The highest decile of cognitive and noncognitive ability is “10.” “1” is the
                                                      c
lowest decile. Reprinted from Heckman et al. (2006). °2006,   University of Chicago Press.

                                1


                   0.8


                   0.6
        y
Probabilit




                   0.4


                   0.2


                                0
                                1                                                                                                                               2
                                              2       3                                                                                                  4
                                                             4        5        6                                                           6
                                                                                       7        8                              8
                                                                                                        9    10       10
                                                                          Decileof Cognitive                                          Decileof Non-Cognitive




                                                                                                                                                                         25
Figure 4: Ratio of early to late investment in human capital as a function of the skill
multiplier for different values of complementarity. Reprinted from Cunha et al. (2006) with
permission from Elsevier.
   4
         Leontief
           = - 0.5
         CobbDouglas
 3.5       = 0.5


   3



 2.5



   2



 1.5



   1



 0.5



   0
   0.1     0.2         0.3   0.4          0.5         0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9
                                   Skill Multiplier ( )




                                                                              26
