                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MANAGERIAL OWNERSHIP DYNAMICS AND FIRM VALUE

                                        Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
                                          René M. Stulz

                                        Working Paper 13202
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13202


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2007




Fahlenbrach is Assistant Professor at the Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University. Stulz
is the Everett D. Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary Economics, Fisher College of Business, Ohio
State University, and affiliated with NBER and ECGI. Fahlenbrach acknowledges financial support
from the Dice Center for Financial Research. We thank seminar participants at Boston College and
the Ohio State University as well as Cliff Holderness, Andrew Karolyi, John Persons, and Henri Servaes
for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Carrie Pan for excellent research assistance. Address
correspondence to René M. Stulz, Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, 806 Fisher
Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, stulz@cob.osu.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Rüdiger Fahlenbrach and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Managerial Ownership Dynamics and Firm Value
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 13202
June 2007
JEL No. G20,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

From 1988 to 2003, the average change in managerial ownership is significantly negative every year
for American firms. The probability of large decreases in ownership is strongly increasing in contemporaneous
and past stock returns but the probability of large increases in ownership through managerial purchases
of shares is not. The relation between changes in Tobin's q and past and contemporaneous changes
in ownership depends critically on controlling for past stock returns. When controlling for past stock
returns, past large decreases in managerial ownership are unrelated to current changes in Tobin's q
but there is some evidence that past large increases in managerial ownership are positively related
to current changes in Tobin's q. Because managers sell shares when a firm's stock is performing well,
large contemporaneous decreases in managerial ownership are associated with increases in Tobin's
q. We argue that our evidence is mostly inconsistent with existing theories and propose a managerial
discretion theory of ownership consistent with our evidence.

Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
Department of Finance
812 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
rudi@cob.osu.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
    We examine the dynamics of managerial ownership for American firms from 1988 through

2003. We find that the average and median annual change in managerial ownership during that

period is negative. In others words, a firm’s managerial ownership is expected to decline. Further,

we show that a firm that experiences an economically significant change in ownership is

substantially more likely to experience a decline in ownership than an increase. High past and

concurrent stock returns make it significantly more likely that a firm will experience an

economically significant decrease in managerial ownership. In contrast, there is little evidence

that low past and concurrent stock returns increase the probability of large increases in

managerial ownership.

    We investigate how changes in managerial ownership are related to changes in Tobin’s q,

taking into account the relation between managerial ownership and stock returns. We find no

evidence that decreases in managerial ownership are associated with decreases in Tobin’s q. In

sharp contrast to the literature that examines the relation between managerial ownership and firm

value in the cross section, we show that decreases in managerial ownership are associated with

contemporaneous increases in Tobin’s q. Further, there is some evidence that past and

contemporaneous increases in managerial ownership are correlated with increases in Tobin’s q,

so that the contemporaneous relation between changes in Tobin’s q and managerial ownership is

u-shaped. Our findings are difficult to reconcile with existing theories of managerial ownership

and with existing interpretations of the evidence on the firm value/managerial ownership relation.

We argue that a new theory of managerial ownership which emphasizes managerial discretion

and the firm’s lifecycle is required to explain our findings.

    There is a considerable literature devoted to understanding the impact of managerial

ownership on firm value. Much of that research draws its inspiration from the agency literature

(e.g., Jensen and Meckling (1976), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988), and Stulz (1988)). In that

literature, greater managerial ownership benefits shareholders because it increases managers’

incentives to increase firm value, but when managerial ownership becomes too large, it enables


                                                  2
managers to entrench themselves, so that firm value falls as managerial ownership increases.

Because of these countervailing forces, the relation between firm value and managerial ownership

is not monotonic. We call this view the agency approach to managerial ownership.

    Following Demsetz (1983) and Demsetz and Lehn (1985), many authors argue that

managerial ownership is endogenously determined. This view has led to an alternative approach,

which we call the contracting theory approach to managerial ownership. The contracting

approach posits that firms have an optimal level of managerial ownership that solves a principal-

agent problem. Shareholders set the terms of a compensation contract for management which

includes management’s ownership in the firm. If actual managerial ownership is the solution to a

contracting problem between management and shareholders and there are no adjustment costs,

firm value would always be maximized given the constraints faced by shareholders. Hence,

everything else constant, firm value could not be increased by changing managerial ownership.

    There is considerable controversy as to which view is more appropriate. Recent papers

attempting to differentiate between the two views use fixed-effect models and instrumental

variables to address the problems created by the endogeneity of managerial ownership. Both

approaches have been shown to have serious limitations. Zhou (2001) shows that the fixed effects

approach has limited power because most changes in managerial ownership are small. Coles,

Lemmon, and Meschke (2006) provide examples of instrumental variable estimations in a fully

specified structural model in which the instrumental variable approach finds a relation between q

and managerial ownership when the structural model does not have such a relation. Though one

influential paper (Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999)) suggests that focusing on ownership

changes would be useful to understand the relation between Tobin’s q and ownership, the

dynamics of managerial ownership and their relation to changes in Tobin’s q have been neglected




                                               3
in the recent literature.1 Yet, considering separately the relation between changes in Tobin’s q and

past and contemporaneous economically significant changes in managerial ownership in a firm-

fixed effects regression approach helps address the criticisms leveled at earlier approaches. Coles,

Lemmon, and Meschke (2006) demonstrate that the firm-fixed effects approach has the potential

to address endogeneity caused by unobservable firm characteristics, but caution that the lack of

time variation in the level of ownership is an impediment to this approach. Because we focus on

economically significant changes in managerial ownership, we eliminate the issues raised by

Zhou (2001) in his criticism of the firm-fixed effects regression approach. Further, since we

consider the relation between changes in Tobin’s q and past changes in ownership within a firm,

there is less ground to be concerned about the endogeneity issue that has befuddled much of the

empirical work. A further advantage of looking at the relation between firm value and managerial

ownership dynamically is that it is possible to decompose changes in managerial ownership into

changes caused by purchases and sales of shares by managers and changes caused by increases or

decreases in shares outstanding.

    If economically significant decreases in ownership cause decreases in Tobin’s q, we should

see a positive relation between changes in Tobin’s q and past or contemporaneous changes in

ownership. We find no such relation for decreases in managerial ownership when we control for

past stock performance, but we find such a relation for increases in managerial ownership. We

show that it is important to control for past stock performance because it is an important

determinant of ownership decreases.

    Our findings can be explained by an alternative managerial ownership theory, which we call

the managerial discretion theory of inside ownership. This theory emphasizes that managers own

shares to maximize their welfare subject to constraints and that firms start their life with highly

concentrated ownership (see Helwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007) for evidence). The highly

1
  An important exception is McConnell, Servaes, and Lins (2006). They investigate the contemporaneous
stock-price reaction to the announcement of insider purchases. We discuss their results in more detail in
Section 6.


                                                     4
concentrated ownership of young firms is partly explained by the fact that early in the life of the

firm managerial ownership is a cheap form of financing. Later in the life of the firm, managers

would rather diversify their wealth and reduce their ownership, but they have to take into account

the impact of their sales on the value of their stake and on their ability to control the firm. First,

the market for the firm’s stock may not be sufficiently liquid for managers to be able to sell their

shares without affecting adversely the share price, so that they may be better off to wait. Second,

the market can infer from managerial sales that management has adverse information and that its

interests might become less well-aligned with those of shareholders, so that sales may affect

adversely the value of the shares held by management. Third, as management holds fewer shares,

its ability to control the firm falls. Hence, we expect managers to sell shares when the market for

the firm’s shares is liquid enough and receptive enough to an increased supply of shares so that

the managerial sales do not have a substantial adverse impact on the share price. In addition, we

expect managerial sales when managers are not concerned that they will face competition in

controlling the firm. These considerations imply that management will sell when the firm has

performed well. The reasons that lead management to buy shares are more complex. It is costly

for management to increase its stake in the firm and there is no reason to expect that it pays for

management to do so whenever a firm performs poorly – unless one believes that the stock

market typically overreacts. However, management may increase its stake to help finance the

firm directly or indirectly by signaling its belief in the firm. Further, if management’s control is

threatened, it may choose to buy shares to strengthen its control of the firm. Our evidence is

consistent with these predictions.

    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we review the literature and elaborate on our

theory of managerial ownership. The construction of our database is described in Section 2. In

Section 3, we document the decrease in managerial ownership and describe more generally how

managerial ownership evolves over our sample period 1988–2003. We then investigate in Section

4 why managerial ownership falls on average, focusing on economically significant changes in


                                                  5
ownership. The contemporaneous and lagged relation between firm value and managerial

ownership is analyzed in Section 5. In Section 6, we examine the contemporaneous relation

between changes in ownership and changes in Tobin’s q. We conclude in Section 7.



Section 1. Managerial ownership and firm value

    In this section, we review theories of the determinants of managerial ownership and their

implications for the relation between firm value and managerial ownership. We consider three

theories: the agency theory, the contracting theory, and the managerial discretion theory.



A. The agency theory approach

    The agency theory takes managerial ownership as given. It then derives implications for firm

value from the level of managerial ownership. Following Jensen and Meckling (1976), greater

managerial ownership aligns the interests of management better with the interests of shareholders.

However, with this view, managers’ interests can be aligned with the interests of shareholders

without managers actually owning shares – all that is required is that managers’ wealth increases

when the share price increases. When managers hold shares, they also control votes. As managers

control more votes, they become more entrenched and can use their position to further their

interests even when doing so does not benefit shareholders (see Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny

(1988) and Stulz (1988)). Consequently, too much ownership can adversely affect firm value,

perhaps because it makes it difficult or even impossible for outsiders to take the firm over. For

low levels of ownership, the interest alignment benefit of managerial ownership dominates the

costs associated with entrenchment because at low levels of ownership managers’ ownership does

not entrench them. However, there is a level of ownership beyond which the entrenchment effect

dominates, so that increases in managerial ownership beyond that level do not increase firm

value. At some even higher level of ownership, management is completely entrenched so that




                                                 6
further increases in ownership may increase firm value because they only have an incentive

effect.

    To summarize, the agency theory does not offer predictions about the determinants of

ownership structure: it is assumed to be exogenous. However, the agency theory implies that

there is a relation between changes in ownership and changes in Tobin’s q. If the relation between

firm value and ownership is concave, a decrease in managerial ownership brings about an

increase in Tobin’s q if managerial ownership is greater than the optimal amount. If the relation

between firm value and ownership is curvilinear with two segments with positive slope, increases

in managerial ownership increase firm value for both low and high levels of ownership but

decrease firm value for intermediate levels of ownership.

          McConnell and Servaes (1990) examine a large sample of firms with ownership data

from the Value Line Investment Survey and find a curvilinear relation between managerial

ownership and Tobin‘s q. In their cross-sectional regressions for both 1976 and 1986, Tobin’s q

increases with ownership up to 50% (1976) and 40% (1986), respectively, and decreases for

larger ownership levels. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) estimate a piecewise linear

regression of Tobin’s q on insider ownership, which they define as ownership by the company’s

directors. In their sample of 460 large firms in 1980 provided by the Corporate Data Exchange,

they find that Tobin’s q significantly increases for director ownership levels between zero and

five percent, decreases between 5 and 25 percent, and again increases for levels of ownership

above 25 percent. Hermalin and Weisbach (1991) also estimate a piecewise linear regression of

Tobin’s Q on managerial ownership, which is measured by the ownership of the current CEO and

of directors who are former CEOs. They find a positive relation between Q and ownership for

ownership levels between 0 and 1 percent and between 5 and 20 percent, and a negative relation

for ownership levels between 1 and 5 percent and above 20 percent.

          Holderness, Kroszner, and Sheehan (1999) use data on large firms for 1935 and 1995 to

re-estimate the Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) regression. They find support for the saw-


                                                7
toothed relationship in the 1935 sample, but not in the 1995 sample. More recently, McConnell,

Servaes, and Lins (2006) find a curvilinear relationship between announcement returns of insider

purchases and the level of insider ownership.



B. The contracting theory approach

    The evidence of a positive relation between firm value and managerial ownership is

interpreted by proponents of the agency theory as evidence that higher managerial ownership

increases shareholder wealth because it aligns the interests of management better with the

interests of shareholders as long as managerial ownership is not so high that it becomes a vehicle

for managerial entrenchment. Managers choose their ownership in the firm and they ought to be

encouraged to choose an even higher ownership. The problem with the agency theory approach is

that it is not clear why managers hold shares in the first place and why they would choose to hold

more shares. If there is a cost to managers of holding shares, they would hold more shares only if

they are compensated for doing so. Since shareholders would have to compensate managers for

holding shares, on net, shareholders might be worse off even if an increase in managerial

ownership increases the incentives of managers to maximize shareholder wealth. The contracting

approach, which builds on principal-agent models such as Holmstrom (1979), attempts to take

these costs explicitly into account.

    Consider a firm owned by atomistic shareholders. The shareholders have somehow managed

to resolve their collective action problem, so that they can act as a group. They have to hire

managers and set incentives for these managers so that firm value will be maximized. In this

situation, the shareholders have to solve an optimization problem where the terms of the

managers’ contract have to be such that the managers’ participation constraint is met. The

shareholders’ problem is made more difficult by the fact that, typically, they cannot observe all of

the managers’ actions. This hidden action problem makes it possible for managers to pursue their

own objectives at the expense of shareholders. For instance, managers could choose to shirk


                                                 8
because shareholders might not be able to find it out. Once managers are in place, shareholders

face the additional problem that managers have information they do not have.

    Because managers have better information than shareholders and because shareholders

cannot always establish whether actions undertaken by managers maximize firm value, the

contracting approach generally reaches the conclusion that the optimal contract for managers

involves compensation that is sensitive to changes in firm value. This sensitivity of compensation

to changes in firm value can be achieved without management owning any shares – management

could simply receive the change in value on phantom shares, for instance, if the optimal contract

is linear in the share price. However, it is common to interpret the optimal solution as involving

ownership of shares. As a result, firm value is maximized when managers have an optimal stake

in the firm’s cash flows, or an optimal level of managerial ownership. Contracting models differ a

great deal in their complexity and in the issues they emphasize.

    With the contracting view, shareholders face a tradeoff. As the managers’ stake in the firm

increases, their incentives become better aligned with those of shareholders in that, if they

increase firm value by one dollar, their wealth increases by a greater fraction of that dollar.

However, when managers have a large stake in the firm, they are exposed to the risk of the firm.

Everything else equal, managers would rather hold a diversified portfolio. Consequently, for

managers to be willing to hold a large stake in the firm, their compensation has to be higher. It

follows that shareholders benefit from an increase in managerial ownership because of better

alignment of incentives but incur additional costs because they have to pay managers more.

    If all managers have the same risk aversion and the same wealth, their ownership in the firm

they manage will depend on the extent of agency problems in the firm and on the risk to

managers of investing in the firm. As agency problems worsen, managerial ownership increases.

We would expect agency problems to be more important for firms with more information

asymmetries. Consequently, everything else equal, managerial ownership should be higher for

younger firms, firms with more intangible assets, with more R&D investment, and with more


                                                9
capital expenditures. The prediction of the model with respect to stock return volatility is

ambiguous. On the one hand, greater stock return volatility imposes costs on managers by forcing

them to bear more risk for a given level of ownership; on the other hand, greater stock return

volatility may be associated with greater moral hazard since it indicates greater information

asymmetries and hence greater opportunities for management to take actions that do not benefit

shareholders. Finally, it is not clear how stock returns affect managerial ownership in the

contracting model. Keeping everything else unchanged, an increase in the stock price means that

managers are less diversified since the value of their holdings in the firm increases. This effect

would predict a decrease in managerial ownership. However, if the firm’s stock price increases

because the firm has more growth opportunities (but larger information asymmetries), one would

expect optimal managerial ownership to increase.

    With the contracting view, assuming that the optimal contract with management has been

selected and that circumstances have not changed, it would be impossible to increase firm value

by changing managerial ownership. Requiring managers to hold more shares would decrease

shareholder wealth because the increase in expected compensation needed to satisfy the

managers’ participation constraint would cost more than the gain from greater incentive

alignment. Alternatively, requiring managers to hold fewer shares would have a cost through its

adverse impact on incentive alignment that is greater than the benefit of reduced expected

managerial compensation.

    Demsetz (1983), Demsetz and Lehn (1985), and Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) find

support for the predictions of the contracting model of managerial ownership. Variables proxying

for asymmetric information are positively and significantly related to the level of inside

ownership. Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) further point out that unobservable firm

characteristics, as captured by firm fixed effects, explain a considerable amount of variation in

managerial ownership. A concave or curvilinear relation between Tobin’s q and managerial

ownership is not inconsistent with the contracting model of managerial ownership. Himmelberg,


                                               10
Hubbard, and Palia (1999) show that the contracting model predicts a positive relation between

Tobin’s q and managerial ownership if firms with more intangible assets have a higher Tobin’s q

and optimally also have higher managerial ownership. However, it is not the case that the higher

managerial ownership causes the higher Tobin’s q. Rather, firm characteristics that lead to the

higher Tobin’s q also lead to higher managerial ownership, so that both the high Tobin’s q and

the high managerial ownership are the consequences of firm fundamentals. Coles, Lemmon, and

Meschke (2006) present a model which has these implications. They show through simulations

that their model can replicate a concave cross-sectional relation between managerial ownership

and Tobin’s q. Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) find support for their view by using firm

fixed-effects in a regression of Tobin’s q on managerial ownership. In that regression, they find

no relation between Tobin’s q and managerial ownership. Zhou (2001) shows, however, that the

power of their approach is questionable because most changes in ownership are small and large

changes are infrequent in the relatively homogeneous set of firms Himmelberg, Hubbard, and

Palia (1999) study.



C. The managerial discretion approach

    With the managerial discretion approach, managers make their decisions subject to

constraints imposed by shareholders. If shareholders solve their collective action problem in such

a way that they behave as a group and choose the optimal compensation contract for managers,

there is no difference between the managerial discretion approach and the contracting approach.

For the two approaches to be meaningfully different, we follow the existing managerial discretion

models (for early models, see Stulz (1990), and Zwiebel (1996)) and assume that shareholders

cannot solve the collective action problem to devise an optimal contract for managers. Instead,

shareholders can vote with their feet and the stock price reflects the actions the market anticipates

managers to take. Further, the company can be the subject of a tender offer, so that managers may




                                                 11
lose their position. Finally, managers may also lose their position if the firm performs poorly and

defaults on debt or requires help from banks to avoid default.

    With the managerial discretion approach, managers choose their ownership stake to

maximize their welfare. This makes ownership endogenous. The crucial difference between the

contracting approach and the managerial discretion approach is that the contracting approach

typically takes a narrow view of private benefits from control, focusing on the effort decision of

managers, and ignoring financing constraints. In contrast, we assume that managers are able to

extract a fraction of the firm’s cash flows for their own benefit, but at a cost. Their welfare

increases as cash flows increase – i.e., as the firm performs well – because a given fraction of

cash flows is worth more to them. Acquiring a stake in the firm that they manage is therefore

valuable for managers if the acquisition of that stake increases the resources available to the firm,

lowers its cost of funding, allows it to grow, and allows them to preserve their control over the

firm. When the firm is financially constrained or its investors face serious information

asymmetries, managers may be the cheapest providers of funds to the firm. If shares are issued in

exchange of cash or services from managers, the acquisition of the managers’ stake or the

increase of that stake infuses additional resources into the firm. To the extent that the acquisition

of a stake leads outsiders to infer that the firm is valuable in the eyes of managers, it increases the

value of the firm and hence makes it easier for managers to raise funds. Finally, the acquisition of

a stake increases managers’ power in the firm through their ownership of votes.

    The cost to managers of acquiring a stake in the firm they manage is that it forces them to

bear more of the firm’s risk and limits their ability to make other investments. Managerial

ownership will therefore not be high when the firm can finance itself at low cost in the capital

markets, when managers do not expect to be threatened in their position, and when the market

value of the firm reflects or exceeds managers’ assessment of firm value. Consequently, as a firm

becomes better established, management will gradually decrease its stake because sales of shares

by management have little impact on the firm’s stock price. The firm’s equity is traded in a liquid


                                                  12
market and external monitoring reduces information asymmetries and limits discretion of

management.

    With the managerial discretion approach, we would expect managerial ownership to be high

for firms which are constrained from accessing external finance, which have significant

information asymmetries, and which have a market for their equity that lacks liquidity. In

contrast, we expect managerial ownership to be low for well-established firms. We would expect

increases in managerial ownership for firms that become financially constrained or are subject to

potential or actual threats from the market for corporate control. Everything else equal, we would

expect managerial ownership to fall as a firm becomes older and better established.

    The managerial discretion approach also leads to a positive relation between Tobin’s q and

managerial ownership over some range of ownership levels, but it is somewhat more tentative.

With this view, young firms have high q’s because they are rich in investment opportunities. As

young firms tend to have limited access to equity markets, their managerial ownership is high. As

firms exploit their investment opportunities, their q falls. If they are successful, their managerial

ownership also falls because the market for their shares becomes more liquid and because

information asymmetries fall. With the managerial discretion approach, we would not expect a

causal relation from decreases in managerial ownership to decreases in q. Rather, ownership

changes would be largely driven by changes in a firm’s circumstances as long as the managers

stay the same. As managers change, ownership would change because the new managers might

value private benefits differently or might have a different level of wealth. Changes in a firm’s

circumstances will also lead insiders to buy shares when doing so is beneficial to them. They may

do so when a contest for control becomes more likely, when they want to decrease the firm’s cost

of capital, and when they are the cheapest source of financing for the firm. It is possible for all

these motives for managerial ownership increases to lead to increases in the share price and to an

increase in Tobin’s q. The managerial discretion approach also implies that managerial ownership

is at least partly path-dependent. If management has a high ownership at some time, its ability to


                                                 13
reduce that ownership if it wants to depends on the liquidity of the stock. The same firm might

have a different level of ownership if its management had lower ownership in the past.

    Finally, it is important to note that the managerial discretion theory of ownership recognizes

two aspects of managerial ownership which are completely ignored by the contracting approach

and partly ignored by the agency approach. First, it takes into account that managerial ownership

affects the ability of management to consume private benefits. Second, it explicitly allows for the

financing role of managerial ownership.

    With the managerial discretion theory of ownership, managerial ownership is endogenous.

However, whereas the contracting theory of managerial ownership is really a theory of the

pay/performance sensitivity, the managerial discretion theory of ownership recognizes that

managers play a complex role in firms that includes, at times, a financing role, and that they may

use their ownership to preserve private benefits rather than to maximize shareholder wealth. The

two theories have different implications for the determinants of managerial ownership. With the

contracting theory, we would expect that a change in a firm characteristic which makes it more

likely that management will sell shares makes it equally less likely that management will buy

shares. Such a symmetrical relation is unlikely to hold with the managerial discretion theory

because management is looking to reduce its stake in the firm when that stake is large because

management helped finance the firm through share acquisition. With the contracting theory,

management’s sales of shares always maximize firm value so that management does not have to

be concerned about a possible negative impact of its sales on firm value. In contrast, with the

managerial discretion theory, management sells shares when doing so has little adverse impact on

the share price. Management therefore sells when the market for the firm’s shares is receptive to

sales of shares by management.




                                                14
Section 2. Data

    We obtain data on insider ownership from Compact Disclosure, which is a CD-Rom

produced each month. Compact Disclosure attempts to provide information on all firms that file

with the SEC and have assets in excess of $5 million. Our main variable of interest is the

aggregate percentage ownership of equity securities by all directors and officers of a company.2

Our ownership variable is therefore the same as the one used in Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia

(1999), Helwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007), or Holderness, Kroszner, and Sheehan (1999).3

    Compact Disclosure contains text versions of SEC filings and has the ability to create

summary reports of many variables. We download the total number of shares held by officers and

directors from all monthly Compact Disclosure CDs that we have access to, and update this

number whenever the proxy date in Compact Disclosure changes from one year to the next. We

use CDs from January 1988 to August 2005. Three dates are important in the calculation of the

fraction of shares held by insiders, the fiscal year end date, the record date, and the proxy date. A

typical company in our database has a fiscal year end of December 31st, a record date of February

28th, and a proxy date of April 30th. The annual report, which is sent to investors about a month

prior to the proxy date, typically lists the number of shares held by officers and directors as of the

record date. Compact Disclosure reports the number of shares outstanding, but the latter is often

the fiscal-year end data. If, e.g., a stock split or an equity issue occurs between the fiscal year end

date and record date, we would calculate the wrong percentage ownership. We therefore use the

number of shares outstanding from CRSP for the month prior to the proxy date.



2
  The laws regulating a company’s proxy disclosure requirements of beneficial ownership of officers and
directors to shareholders are detailed in Regulation 14A (“Solicitation of Proxies”) and Schedule 14A of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (§240.14a). Pursuant to Schedule 14A(6-d) with reference to Item 403
of Regulation S-K (§229.403) entitled “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and
Management,” a company is required to disclose any ownership of equity securities by all directors and
officers of the company.
3
  Note that the early literature on the interaction of Tobin’s q and ownership sometimes uses slightly
different definitions. For example, Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) study the ownership by the
company’s directors, and Demsetz and Lehn (1985) study the ownership by the five (or twenty) largest
shareholders of a corporation.


                                                  15
         Researchers have compared inside ownership data from Compact Disclosure to

ownership data from other data sources as well as from proxies. They have found that Compact

Disclosure is a high quality data source for single class firms, but that there are considerable

errors in voting ownership for dual class firms (e.g., Anderson and Lee (1997)). Further,

differences between cash flow rights and voting rights complicate the analysis substantially. We

therefore exclude dual class firms from our sample.

         Denis and Sarin (1999) find that large ownership changes are correlated with concurrent

turnover of key executives. We identify changes in the position of CEO and chairman of the

board for each firm-year observation. The data on officers and directors is derived from the

director and officer text lists also provided by Compact Disclosure.4

         We match the Compact Disclosure data to CRSP and Compustat using 6-digit cusips. We

require that a firm is present in at least two adjacent years to calculate the change in insider

ownership. This leaves us with approximately 44,000 single-class firm-year observations. We

remove approximately 10,000 firm-years because firms are regulated utilities (SIC codes 4900-

4949) or belong to the financial sector (SIC codes 6000-6999). We lose about 6,000 observations

for which we cannot calculate Tobin’s q due to missing data in Compustat and CRSP. In the

specifications where we condition on a concurrent change in CEO or chairman, we lose an

additional 6,000 firm-years, because Compact Disclosure does not report data for all firm-year

observations. Our final sample contains 22,000 firm-year observations for 4,925 different firms.




4
 The director and officer lists contain spelling mistakes and inconsistencies across sample observations.
We use a sequence of automated programs to standardize names and match directors and officers across
years in the Compact Disclosure database so that we can identify changes in the CEO and chairman
position.


                                                    16
Section 3. Managerial ownership in U.S. firms: Time-series evidence

    Table 1 shows time-series summary statistics of our ownership data. The data is grouped by

fiscal year. Our dataset has more than 1,500 firms every year except for the first three years. The

number of firms peaks in 1999 and falls afterwards.

    The next two columns in Table 1 show the mean and median managerial ownership for our

sample years. Both the average and the median fluctuate over time, but there is no clear evidence

of a time trend. It is well-known that smaller and younger firms have higher managerial

ownership, so that we would expect the average and median managerial ownership to be affected

by entrants and exits.

    In their well-known study of corporate ownership, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer

(1999) consider firms to be widely held when the controlling shareholder holds less than 20% of a

firm’s votes according to one metric and less than 10% according to the other metric. Here, we

have data on ownership of cash flow rights by directors and officers. We see that, on average,

more than 40% of the firms in our sample would not be widely held according to a 20%

threshold.5 The fraction of firms with more than 20% managerial ownership stays relatively

constant over time. We also see that in a typical year managers have majority control in more

than 10% of the firms.

    The managerial discretion model predicts that managerial ownership falls as a firm ages,

everything else equal. The evidence of Table 1 is supportive of this prediction. For existing firms

inside ownership decreases each year by 0.9% on average. The average decrease in ownership is

statistically significant at the 10% level in all 16 sample years and statistically significant at better

than the 1% level in 13 out of 16 years. The median change is negative, but smaller in absolute

value. Though the median is positive in some years, the overall median is significantly negative at

the 1% level. The difference between the average and the median is not surprising. A large


5
 Because we use ownership by directors and officers, we may overstate the number of widely held firms.
For instance, institutional investors could own large blocks without having board representation.


                                                   17
number of changes in managerial ownership are extremely small and are not economically

meaningful. This fact is emphasized by Zhou (2001) who points out that managerial ownership is

typically slow-moving. The median is dominated by such small changes, while the mean is not.

    Another perspective on ownership changes can be obtained by considering separately positive

changes versus negative changes. It is immediately apparent that every year the mean of negative

changes is about 50% higher in absolute value than the mean of positive changes. Consequently,

decreases in ownership tend to be on average substantially larger than increases.

    To focus on economically meaningful changes, we investigate changes of ownership larger

than 2.5% in absolute value. On average, about a third of firms experience such large changes in a

year. A firm is much more likely to experience a large drop than a large increase. The probability

of a large decrease (21.2%) is almost twice the probability of a large increase (12.4%). This result

is striking because, in our sample, all firms can experience a large increase but some firms cannot

experience a large decrease because their managerial ownership is already below 2.5%.

    Changes in ownership in excess of 2.5% in absolute value explain most of the variation in

changes in managerial ownership. In Table 2, we establish that the change in ownership is

primarily caused by large changes in ownership. We estimate the following regression for each

year of our sample period:

        Change in ownershipt     = c + β × Change in ownershipt Change < −2.5%
                                 +γ × Change in ownershipt Change > 2.5% + ε t

    The R-squared of the regressions in Table 2 exceeds 98% each year. Therefore, the change in

managerial ownership is mostly determined by large changes, and we focus the analysis of the

determinants of managerial ownership on the large changes in ownership. We acknowledge that

the 2.5% cut-off is arbitrary. We have repeated our analysis by defining a large change as a 1%,

4%, and 5% change, with quantitatively and qualitatively similar results.




                                                18
Section 4. The determinants of large changes in ownership

    The contracting and managerial discretion approaches discussed in Section 2 make

predictions about the determinants of changes in managerial ownership. In this Section, we

investigate the determinants of changes in ownership in excess of 2.5%. We estimate probit

regressions for large increases and large decreases in ownership. Table 3 describes the data we

use for this investigation. The sample includes 6,015 large decreases, 3,488 large increases, and

18,609 observations with no large changes. Interestingly, both firms experiencing large increases

and large decreases have significantly higher ownership than firms experiencing no large

changes. Firms experiencing large decreases have significantly higher ownership before the

decrease than firms with large increases, but after the change they have significantly lower

ownership than the firms that experienced a large increase.

    Firm characteristics differ significantly among the three groups of firms. However, because

of the large number of observations, relatively small differences in firm characteristics are

significant. As we discuss in Section 2, firms with greater information asymmetries should have

higher ownership according to the contracting theory. Strikingly, firms that experience large

decreases in ownership appear to be firms with greater information asymmetries if one believes

that firms with greater information asymmetries are firms with more R&D expenditures, with

more capital expenditures, with a lower ratio of PPE/Assets, and with no dividends. The

univariate statistics are therefore largely inconsistent with the contracting theory. Firms which

experience large drops in ownership have the highest average Tobin’s q. Such a result is puzzling

given the predictions of both the agency and contracting theories.

    The result that firms which experience a large drop in ownership have a high Tobin’s q is

consistent with existing literature. For instance, Jenter (2005) provides evidence that managers

sell when firms have done well and ascribes a timing motive to managers. Even though the timing

motive does not provide a theory of the level of managerial ownership, it does offer predictions




                                                19
for the dynamics of ownership. With the timing motive, we would expect firms to perform poorly

following managerial sales. Jenter (2005) does not find evidence supportive of this prediction.

    We also investigate whether firms experience changes in CEO or in the chairman of the board

that could be associated with large changes in ownership (e.g, Denis and Sarin (1999)). For

instance, a retiring CEO who has a large ownership stake could sell shares upon retirement. There

is evidence that firms experiencing a large drop are more likely to have a concurrent change in

CEO or in the chairman of the board. Such a result is not consistent with simple contracting

theories in which managerial ownership is determined by firm fundamentals only.

    In the last panel, we summarize the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) variables

we use. There are extremely large differences in stock performance between the three groups of

firms. Firms experiencing large drops in ownership are extremely good performers in the year of

the drop and the year before. In contrast, firms experiencing large increases are poor performers.

We also see that NASDAQ firms experiencing large decreases in ownership have high turnover

compared to the other firms, but this is not the case for NYSE firms. Differences in idiosyncratic

volatility between the three groups of firms do not seem to be economically meaningful. Firms

that experience large changes are younger and the firms that experience large decreases are the

youngest.

    To better understand which type of firms experience large changes, we estimate multiple

probit regressions in Table 4. Strikingly, high managerial ownership is a good predictor of a large

drop in managerial ownership. This is consistent with the prediction of the managerial discretion

theory that firms start with high managerial ownership and that managers want to reduce their

ownership. With that theory, a high level of managerial ownership is typically not a steady-state

level of managerial ownership.

    Older, larger dividend-paying firms are less likely to experience a large drop in ownership.

Concurrent changes in the CEO or in the chairman of the board make it more likely that a firm

will experience a large drop in managerial ownership. Such a result is hard to explain with


                                                20
contracting models in which managerial ownership depends only on firm characteristics. It is

consistent with the managerial discretion model because in that model ownership depends on the

preferences and wealth of the management.

    Firms are more likely to experience large drops in ownership if they have more R&D, a

smaller ratio of PPE to assets, and smaller idiosyncratic volatility. Though the idiosyncratic

volatility result could be reconciled with the contracting approach, the other two results are

inconsistent with the predictions of that approach. Finally, firms are more likely to experience a

large drop if they have high share turnover and high contemporaneous and lagged stock return

performance. These results are again consistent with the managerial discretion approach.

    When we turn to the firms that experience a large increase, we see that firms with high levels

of managerial ownership are less likely to experience a large increase. We find again that more

established firms are less likely to experience a large change, but the number of years since listing

is not significant. Firms with better performance and higher turnover are less likely to experience

a large increase.

    The contracting and managerial discretion approaches suggest that changes in ownership

should result from changes in firm characteristics. To explore the predictions from the theories,

we use as explanatory variables the changes in firm characteristics from the year before to the

year of the large change in ownership. Since returns are changes in the value of the common

stock, we do not difference returns. The results are shown in Table 5.

    Table 5 shows that a firm’s contemporaneous and lagged stock returns are significant

predictors of large decreases in ownership. In contrast, the contemporaneous stock return is not

significant in the regression for large increases and the lagged stock return is only significant at

the 10% level with a coefficient in absolute value roughly half the coefficient of the large

decrease regression. The regressions demonstrate a lack in symmetry in the relation between

stock returns and large ownership changes when we separate large decreases and large increases.

This asymmetry can not be explained by contracting models which predict a monotonic, but not


                                                 21
causal, relation between optimal managerial ownership and firm value. However, such an

asymmetry makes sense in the context of the managerial discretion theory. With that theory, we

expect ownership to fall as the firm does well enough that managers can reduce their ownership

without any adverse effect. In contrast, managers increase their stake when doing so helps them

maintain or increase the value of their stake in the firm and the value of their private benefits.

There is no reason for poor stock returns alone to indicate to management that a greater stake will

be beneficial.

    Large decreases and increases in managerial ownership are more likely if the level of

managerial ownership is high. The probability of a large decrease in managerial ownership as

well as the probability of a large increase is negatively related to the change in managerial

ownership of the previous year. It would not be surprising if managers reduced their ownership

over time in such a way as to limit the market impact of their trades. In this case, past decreases

would predict future decreases, which is what we observe. However, it is puzzling that large

increases are more likely following decreases in ownership.6 Firms with an increase in R&D are

more likely to experience a decrease in ownership and less likely to experience an increase in

ownership, which seems inconsistent with the contracting theory. Firms that stop paying

dividends are more likely to experience an increase in managerial ownership, but there is no

association of dividend termination or initiation with a large decrease in ownership. Firms that

increase in size are more likely to experience a large decrease in ownership and less likely to

experience a large increase. Changes in turnover are never significant for NYSE firms. For

NASDAQ firms, an increase in turnover makes it less likely that a firm will experience a large

increase in ownership and more likely that a firm will experience a large decrease in ownership.

Finally, firms with a COB or CEO change are more likely to experience a decrease in ownership



6
  One concern we had with this result is that it could be driven by reversals due to data errors. We therefore
investigated cases of large decreases followed by large increases. We concluded that the cases we
examined were not explained by data errors, but rather by managerial changes.


                                                     22
but not more likely to experience an increase in ownership. The probability of a large change in

ownership is not related to a change in the chairman of the board.

    A concern one might have with our regression estimates is that we estimate the same equation

for firms with very different levels of ownership. To investigate whether our results depend on

the level of ownership, we re-estimate the regressions for large decreases and increases in

ownership for quintiles of ownership with breakpoints determined annually but do not report the

results in a table. The sample for each regression is one fifth of the sample for the regressions of

Table 5. It is not surprising, therefore, that the level of significance drops. Most variables are not

consistently significant across the five quintiles. However, the contemporaneous return is positive

and significant across the five quintiles for large decreases in ownership. The coefficients on

R&D, firm size, and the past return are positive and significant for four quintiles in the probit

regressions for large decreases. The ownership level is significant in three regressions, but it is

negative and significant for the two quintiles with the lowest ownership and positive and

significant for the quintile with the highest ownership in the large decrease regressions. The other

firm characteristics are significant in at most two regressions. These regressions suggest therefore

that the coefficients on firm characteristics other than R&D, firm size, and returns are fragile once

we split the sample into ownership quintiles and re-estimate the large decrease regressions. As for

the regressions by ownership quintile of large increases, very few variables are significant. The

contemporaneous return is never significant at the five percent level. The lagged change in

ownership is negative and significant in the three highest quintiles. Decreases in the book value of

assets in the prior period make it more likely that ownership increases in three out of five

quintiles.

    Managerial ownership is defined as the ratio of the number of shares held by managers

divided by the total number of shares outstanding. This definition is conventional, but it provides

an incomplete assessment of the incentive effects of managerial ownership changes because

managerial ownership defined this way could fall even though managers increase the number of


                                                 23
shares they hold. Such an outcome is possible if a firm increases its number of shares by a

sufficiently large amount. We know from the literature that firms issue shares following good

performance and when q is high. Hence, it could be that the negative relation between the

probability of a large decrease in managerial ownership and q is simply due to an increase in the

number of shares. One would generally expect a decrease in managerial ownership brought about

by an increase in the number of outstanding shares to affect managerial incentives differently

from a decrease in managerial ownership resulting from a sale of shares by management. To

allow for such a differential effect, we decompose the change in the ownership share of insiders.

To perform this decomposition, we follow Helwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007) and define Δαt to

be the change in the ownership share of insiders from t to t+1, St to be the number of shares held

by insiders at date t, St+1 = St + ΔS the number of shares held by insiders at date t+1, and Nt the

firm’s number of outstanding shares at date t. The ownership share of insiders at t, αt, is equal to

St/Nt. With this notation, we have:


                        ⎛S ⎞ ⎛S ⎞ S                 S − ΔS ΔS St +1 St +1
                 Δα t = ⎜ t +1 ⎟ − ⎜ t ⎟ = t +1 − t +1          =    +      −
                        ⎝ N t +1 ⎠ ⎝ N t ⎠ N t +1     Nt          N t N t +1 N t
                   ΔS St +1 N t St +1 N t +1 ΔS St +1ΔN
                 =     +           −         =      −                                      (1)
                   N t N t +1 N t N t N t +1     N t N t +1 N t
                     ΔS          ΔN
                 =      − α t +1
                     Nt          Nt


The first term in the last line of equation (1) is the change in α explained by changes in the

number of shares held by insiders (the numerator of the fractional ownership formula). The

second term is the change in insider ownership brought about by a change in the number of shares

outstanding (the denominator of the fractional ownership formula).

    Table 6 shows the marginal effects of probit regressions of the decomposed large decrease in

ownership (columns 1 and 2) and of the decomposed large increase in ownership (columns 3 and

4) on economic determinants. We set the indicator variable for a large decrease or increase in



                                                24
shares held equal to one if the first term of equation (1) exceeds 2.5% in absolute value, and we

set the indicator variable for a large increase or decrease in shares outstanding equal to one if the

second term is greater than 2.5% in absolute value. It is quite clear that managers are more likely

to sell shares when the firm’s stock market performance is good contemporaneously and was

good the previous year. There is no evidence that they make large purchases of shares when the

firm’s stock market performance is poor or was poor. Such evidence is hard to reconcile with

timing theories of changes in managerial ownership. Firms whose assets grow are more likely to

experience managerial sales and equity issues, and are less likely to experience managerial

purchases and share repurchases. An increase in leverage, a termination of dividends, and a drop

in turnover (for NASDAQ firms only) make it more likely that insiders will buy shares. As

idiosyncratic volatility increases, managers are less likely to increase the firm’s total number of

shares. Changes in idiosyncratic volatility are not related to the probability of large sales or large

purchases of shares by managers. A change in the chairman of the board or in the chief executive

officer makes it more likely that shares held by managers will experience a large drop.

    The evidence in Table 6 suggests that managers sell shares when the firm’s stock is

performing well and its assets are growing. In contrast, contemporaneous and lagged firm returns

are not significant in the regression for large purchases of shares. The variables that are

significantly related to large purchases are variables that proxy for financial constraints. In

particular, managers are more likely to buy shares if the firm stops paying dividends and if the

firm’s leverage increases. Asset growth makes it less likely that managers will buy shares. There

is no evidence that managerial ownership changes are negatively related to idiosyncratic volatility

changes.

    There is a striking asymmetry between the determinants of large decreases in managerial

ownership and of large increases in managerial ownership. Firm characteristics besides returns

seem more important in explaining large increases in the number of shares than large decreases in

shares held by managers. In contrast, firm characteristics besides returns seem more important in


                                                 25
explaining large increases in shares held by managers than they are in explaining large decreases

in shares outstanding. There is nothing in the contracting theory which suggests such an

asymmetry. In fact, with that theory, firm characteristics besides returns should play a key role in

explaining changes in managerial ownership and they should explain changes in managers’ share

holdings.



Section 5. Dynamics of managerial ownership and Tobin’s q

    In this section, we examine how changes in managerial ownership are related to changes in

Tobin’s q. We start with an investigation of the relation between changes in Tobin’s q and past

changes in managerial ownership. These regressions answer the question of whether a decrease in

managerial ownership is followed by a decrease in q. Since the changes in q follow the change in

managerial ownership and we estimate a firm-fixed effects regression to control for unobservable

firm characteristics, it is reasonable to treat the change in managerial ownership as exogenous

relative to the change in q.

    Table 7 reports the results of the regressions of changes in q on lagged changes in ownership.

We control for firm and year fixed effects and allow for clustering at the firm level. Strikingly,

the first regression is extremely supportive of the literature that concludes that there is a positive

impact of ownership on firm value. The coefficient on the lagged change in ownership is positive

and significant. The result might seem surprising in light of the inability of Himmelberg,

Hubbard, and Palia (1999) to find a significant relation in regressions using fixed effects.

However, their regressions use levels of variables instead of changes, and they focus on the

contemporaneous relation between Tobin’s q and ownership. Further, our panel is larger, both

with respect to the cross-section and the time series, and has more heterogeneous managerial

ownership. In the next regression, we distinguish between lagged increases in ownership and

lagged decreases. The regression coefficients are significant for the lagged increases as well as




                                                 26
the lagged decreases. Note that a positive coefficient on lagged decreases means that a decrease in

ownership precedes a decrease in Tobin’s q. The regressions reproduced in columns 1 and 2 use

explanatory variables that are common in the literature. In columns 3 and 4, we re-estimate these

regressions but include the stock performance variables we found to be particularly important in

predicting changes in ownership. Adding the stock performance variables reduces sharply the size

of the coefficient on lagged changes in ownership. The coefficient is still significant, but now it is

only significant at the 10% level. In column 4, we re-estimate the regression where we allow for

different slopes for lagged increases in ownership and lagged decreases. Now, the coefficient on

lagged decreases in ownership is no longer significant but the coefficient on lagged increases in

ownership is similar to what it was in column 2. The final two columns use indicator variables for

large changes. Column 5 shows that large increases and large decreases have again significant

coefficients indicating that large increases precede an increase in q and large decreases precede a

decrease in q. However, when the stock market performance variables are added, there is no

relation between large decreases in ownership and subsequent changes in q. The relation between

large increases in ownership and increases in q is preserved.

    Table 7 shows that it is critical in such regressions to control for stock market performance

because large decreases in ownership are much more likely to occur after good performance. If

there is a relation between stock market performance and future changes in q, the coefficient on

the change in managerial ownership is biased when stock market performance is omitted. In

Tables 5 and 6, we saw that stock market performance plays a much bigger role in explaining

large decreases in ownership than it does in explaining large increases in ownership. It is

therefore not surprising that controlling for concurrent and past stock returns has a much greater

impact on the coefficient for ownership decreases than for ownership increases.

    To understand better the relation between managerial ownership changes and changes in

Tobin’s q, we now decompose the managerial ownership change into the change caused by

managerial purchases or sales and the change caused by changes in the number of shares


                                                 27
outstanding. We report the results in Table 8. The results strengthen the asymmetry highlighted in

Table 7. We see that there is no relation between past large decreases in shares owned by

management and future changes in Tobin’s q. Though there is a negative relation between large

increases in shares outstanding and future changes in Tobin’s q when we do not control for past

stock returns, this relation is weaker when we use the indicator variable and disappears for the

level variable. In contrast, the relation between past large increases in shares held by management

and future changes in Tobin’s q is positive and significant at the 10% level in each specification.

The relation between decreases in shares outstanding and Tobin’s q is insignificant in three

specifications out of four.

    Tables 7 and 8 provide no evidence that large decreases in managerial ownership lead to

decreases in Tobin’s q. However, there is evidence that large increases in managerial ownership

lead to increases in Tobin’s q. A concern with our evidence is that theories do not necessarily

predict a monotone relation between ownership and firm value. For instance, Morck, Shleifer,

and Vishny (1988) and Stulz (1988) predict that firm value increases with share ownership up to a

point and falls after that point over some range. It could be, therefore, that we do not find a

negative relation between a decrease in ownership and change in firm value because we include

both firms for which ownership decreases increase firm value and firms for which they decrease

firm value. Following Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988) and McConnell and Servaes (1990),

the cross-sectional literature takes into account the non-monotonicity of the relation between firm

value and ownership by allowing this relation to be non-linear. With our approach, allowing for

non-linearities does not really address the issue we are concerned about. A large decrease in

ownership could have a positive impact if ownership is high and a negative impact if ownership is

low.

    We could re-estimate our regressions allowing the relation between ownership changes and

changes in q to be conditional on the level of ownership. Alternatively, we can estimate our

regressions separately for firms that have different levels of ownership. Table 9 shows estimates


                                                28
of the regression of column 2 of Table 8 for different ownership quintiles. We form quintiles

yearly, but the breakpoints remain stable over time. The results in Table 9 show that the

coefficients on large increases and decreases in shares held by management are never significant.

The coefficient on the large increase in shares outstanding indicator variable is negative and

significant in three quintile regressions, which suggests that decreases in Tobin’s q are driven by

past increases in shares outstanding rather than active selling by managers.

    One may argue that the quintile regressions of Table 9 are more likely to suffer from the

critique by Zhou (2001) that a firm-fixed effects regression would not be able to identify effects

when there is little time variation. We therefore repeat the regressions of Table 9 with industry-

fixed effects (not reported). At the five percent level, there is no quintile in which large decreases

in shares held by management are associated with changes in Tobin’s q and one quintile (quintile

3) in which large increases in shares held by management are positively associated with changes

in Tobin’s q.

    Together, Tables 7 through 9 show that estimates of the relation between past changes in

managerial ownership and changes in Tobin’s q are sensitive to controlling for past stock returns.

Without controlling for past stock returns, there is a linear relation between changes in Tobin’s q

and past changes in managerial ownership. However, after controlling for past stock returns, there

is only evidence of a relation between large increases in managerial ownership and changes in

Tobin’s q. When we decompose the change in managerial ownership into changes in the

numerator (shares held by managers) and changes in the denominator (shares outstanding), we

find that increases in shares held by managers are associated with future increases in Tobin’s q,

but the effect is not strong enough to hold up when we split the sample into size quintiles. All this

evidence is inconsistent with the predictions of the agency theory and of the contracting theory

since neither of these theories predict that there is a relation between Tobin’s q and past changes

in managerial ownership only for past increases in managerial ownership. The evidence is

consistent with the managerial discretion theory, because it predicts that managers will not sell


                                                 29
shares when doing so will have an adverse impact on the firm, but may buy shares to increase

firm value, perhaps for signaling reasons or to provide financing to a financially constrained firm.



Section 6. Dynamics of managerial ownership and Tobin’s q: The contemporaneous

relation

    We now turn to the contemporaneous relation between changes in Tobin’s q and changes in

ownership. Admittedly, the contemporaneous relation is harder to evaluate because the change in

Tobin‘s q could be causing the change in ownership. However, the focus of the existing literature

has been on how endogeneity could explain a positive relation between Tobin’s q and managerial

ownership. If we were to find a different relation or no relation at all, our finding would have

important implications for that literature. In column 1 of Table 10, we use indicator variables for

large changes. Surprisingly, both large increases and large decreases in managerial ownership are

associated with positive increases in Tobin’s q. One might be tempted to argue that this shows

that firms always move towards the optimum, but things are more complicated as revealed when

we decompose the large increases and the large decreases as we did before. In column 2, we use

indicator variables. We find that there is no contemporaneous relation between large decreases in

shares held by managers and changes in Tobin’s q, but there is a positive relation between

changes in q and large increases in shares held. We find that large increases in shares outstanding

are associated with an increase in q and large decreases with a decrease in q. In the last column,

we use actual changes in the ownership variables conditional on large changes. We show that the

variables associated with large increases in shares held by management are insignificant. In

contrast, the variables associated with large decreases are significant. Large decreases in shares

held by management are associated with firm value increases and large increases in shares

outstanding are associated with firm value increases as well. Though we do not reproduce the

results in a table, we also estimate regression (1) of Table 10 for quintiles of ownership. We find




                                                30
that the coefficient on large increases in ownership is never significant but the coefficient on large

drops is positive and significant for quintiles 2, 3, and 4.

    McConnell, Servaes, and Lins (2006) examine the announcement return associated with

insider purchases. They find that the announcement return first increases in pre-purchase insider

ownership and then falls. In contrast, we find mixed evidence on the relation between changes in

firm value and large increases in firm ownership. We show that there is a positive relation

between the change in q and the indicator variable for large increases in insider ownership, but

we find no relation between the change in q and the level of the large increase in insider

ownership. When we investigate whether the relation between the change in q and the change in

insider ownership depends on the level of insider ownership, we find no evidence that q increases

for large increases in ownership by managers with low insider holdings.

    The sample of McConnell, Servaes, and Lins (2006) differs substantially from ours. In

particular, they use insider purchases from 1994 through 1999, while we investigate changes in

managerial ownership from 1988 through 2003. Much of our analysis focuses on managerial

ownership changes of at least 2.5%. In contrast, their median insider purchase is for 0.15% of a

firm’s outstanding number of shares (even though they only include purchases of at least 10,000

shares). They focus only on open market insider purchases whereas we focus on the change in

managerial ownership irrespective of how that change came about. These sample differences

could explain the difference in the results. They argue that an advantage of their approach is that

it is less likely that other events will affect the change in firm value over the short period of time

over which they measure the change in firm value. This advantage might also contribute to the

difference between our results and theirs, but our approach is powerful enough to find

coefficients that are inconsistent with the agency approach when we investigate managerial

ownership decreases (which they do not consider).




                                                  31
Section 7. Conclusion

    In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of managerial ownership and their implications for

firm value. We find that managerial ownership is more likely to fall when the firm’s stock

performs or has performed well. However, managerial ownership is not more likely to increase

when the stock is performing poorly and there is only a weak relation between past poor

performance and managerial ownership increases. Such an asymmetry in the relation between

managerial ownership and stock returns cannot be explained in a straightforward way by

contracting models. We also find that the relation between the probability of large changes in

ownership and changes in firm characteristic is, for some variables such as R&D, inconsistent

with the predictions of contracting models.

    We then turn to the relation between changes in ownership and changes in Tobin’s q. We find

the same asymmetry we document when studying the dynamics of managerial ownership. We

find no evidence that past decreases in managerial ownership lead to decreases in Tobin’s q, but

we find some evidence that past increases in managerial ownership lead to increases in Tobin’s q.

When we estimate the contemporaneous relation between changes in Tobin’s q and changes in

managerial ownership, we find that both large decreases and large increases in managerial

ownership are associated with an increase in Tobin’s q. Consequently, the relation between

changes in firm value and changes in ownership is u-shaped. The correlation between ownership

decreases and Tobin’s q increases is driven by the fact that insiders sell when the stock is

performing well and firms issue equity when the stock is performing well. While none of our

evidence is consistent with a negative relation between ownership changes and changes in

Tobin‘s q for some range of ownership levels, some of our evidence supports the view that an

increase in managerial ownership is associated with an increase in Tobin’s q. The lack of a

negative relation between changes in Tobin’s q and contemporaneous or lagged decreases in

managerial ownership for any level of managerial ownership is hard to reconcile with the agency

theory.


                                               32
    To make sense of our evidence, we argue that a new theory of managerial ownership is

required. With this theory, managerial ownership is driven by insiders’ objective to maximize

their welfare. Insiders own shares to provide financing, to signal that the firm has high value, to

convince outsiders that they have the right incentives, and to protect their control of the firm.

Insiders reduce their ownership when they can do so without taking the risk of losing control of

the firm, of decreasing the value of their stake, and of decreasing the value of their private

benefits of control. As a result, insiders sell when the firm is doing well and has done well

because the market for the shares is liquid and because their control of the firm is secure. Insiders

buy shares when doing so is beneficial to them. They may do so when a contest for control

becomes more likely, when they want to decrease the firm’s cost of capital, and when they are the

cheapest source of financing for the firm. It is possible for all these motives for managerial

ownership increases to lead to increases in the share price. It is perfectly possible for the firm’s

performance to be poor and yet for insiders to choose not to increase their ownership stake. We

call this the managerial discretion theory of inside ownership. Future work should develop and

test this theory further, but we are optimistic that it provides a good foundation for understanding

both the dynamics of managerial ownership and the relation between changes in managerial

ownership and firm value.




                                                 33
References

Anderson, Ronald C., and D. Scott Lee, 1997, Ownership studies: The data source does matter,
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 311-329.

Coles, Jeffrey L., Michael L. Lemmon, and J. Felix Meschke, 2006, Structural models and
        endogeneity in corporate finance: The link between managerial ownership and corporate
        performance, University of Utah Working Paper.

Demsetz, Harold, 1983, The structure of ownership and the theory of the firm, Journal of Law
      and Economics 26, 375-390.

Demsetz, Harold, and Kenneth Lehn, 1985, The structure of corporate ownership: Causes and
      consequences, Journal of Political Economy 93, 1155-1177.

Denis, David J., and Atulya Sarin, 1999, Ownership and board structures in publicly traded
        corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 187-223.

Helwege, Jean, Christo Pirinsky, and Rene M. Stulz, 2007, Why do firms become widely held?
      An analysis of the dynamics of corporate ownership, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, 1991, The effects of board composition and
       direct incentives on firm performance, Financial Management 20, 101-112.

Himmelberg, Charles P., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia, 1999, Understanding the
      determinants of managerial ownership and performance, Journal of Financial Economics
      53, 333-384.

Holderness, Clifford G., Randall S. Kroszner, and Dennis P. Sheehan, 1999, Were the good old
       days that good? Changes in managerial stock ownership since the great depression,
       Journal of Finance 54, 435-469.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1979, Moral hazard and observability, Bell Journal of Economics 10, 74-91.

Jensen, Michael C., and William Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
        agency costs, and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Jenter, Dirk C., 2005, Market timing and management portfolio decisions, Journal of Finance 60,
         1903-1949.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership
        around the world, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
McConnell, John J., Henri Servaes, and Karl Lins, 2006, Changes in market values and analysts’
        EPS forecasts around insider ownership changes, Purdue University Working Paper.

McConnell, John J., and Henri Servaes, 1990, Additional evidence on equity ownership and
      corporate value, Journal of Financial Economics 27, 595-612.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1988, Management ownership and
       market valuation: An empirical analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.



                                               34
Stulz, René M., 1988, Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the market for
        corporate control, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25-54.

Stulz, René M., 1990, Managerial discretion and optimal financing policies, Journal of Financial
        Economics 26, 3-26.

Zhou, Xianming, 2001, Understanding the determinants of managerial ownership and the link
       between ownership and performance: comment, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 559-
       571.

Zwiebel, Jeffrey, 1996, Dynamic capital structure under managerial entrenchment, American
       Economic Review 86, 1197-1215.




                                               35
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Average Ownership Levels and Changes by Calendar Year

The table shows sample summary statistics of the director and officer ownership data. The sample period is fiscal year end 1988 to
2003. The data is listed by fiscal year. Number of firms is the number of firms for each fiscal year for which we have complete data on
the change in ownership and other key variables as explained in section 2. D & O ownership is the average level of officer and
director ownership as of the record date. Change in ownership is the average change in D & O ownership from one fiscal year to the
next. Positive change is the change in D & O ownership conditional on a positive change, and negative change is the change in D & O
ownership conditional on a negative change. A large drop (large increase) in the level of D & O ownership is defined as a change in
ownership of at least minus (plus) 2.5 percent. The last four columns show the percentage of firms that have an ownership level of at
least 20, 30, 40, or 50 percent, respectively.

                                                                                            % of firms with
Fiscal    Number     D&O ownership   Change ownership   Positive change   Negative change   Large     Large        % of firms with ownership level
Year      of Firms   Mean  Median    Mean     Median    Mean Median       Mean Median       drop     increase   > 20 %     > 30%     >40% > 50%
1988         845     23.1%  17.4%                                                                                45.2%      31.8% 21.9%        13.4%
1989        1396     24.4%  19.6%      -0.6%    -0.1%   1.6%       0.0%   -2.1%     -0.1%   19.5%      14.0%     49.3%      33.9% 22.5%        13.8%
1990        1404     24.8%  19.9%      -0.5%     0.0%   1.6%       0.0%   -2.1%      0.0%   19.2%      13.7%     49.8%      35.8% 23.4%        14.9%
1991        1532     24.4%  19.1%      -1.2%    -0.2%   1.4%       0.0%   -2.7%     -0.2%   23.3%      12.8%     48.6%      34.9% 23.2%        13.7%
1992        1588     23.3%  17.6%      -1.0%    -0.2%   1.4%       0.0%   -2.3%     -0.2%   21.9%      11.1%     45.8%      32.6% 21.2%        13.2%
1993        1668     21.2%  15.2%      -1.5%    -0.3%   1.1%       0.0%   -2.7%     -0.3%   23.5%       8.5%     41.3%      28.6% 17.3%        10.0%
1994        1812     21.1%  14.9%      -1.1%    -0.1%   1.0%       0.0%   -2.1%     -0.1%   19.9%       9.1%     41.9%      27.6% 17.3%        10.2%
1995        1761     21.8%  15.9%      -1.3%    -0.2%   1.2%       0.0%   -2.5%     -0.2%   23.2%      10.2%     42.6%      28.5% 17.8%        10.7%
1996        1575     21.7%  14.6%      -1.4%    -0.2%   1.3%       0.0%   -2.6%     -0.2%   24.4%      10.5%     41.1%      28.6% 18.6%        11.5%
1997        1746     21.4%  14.8%      -1.7%    -0.2%   1.2%       0.0%   -2.8%     -0.2%   24.6%      10.4%     40.3%      28.1% 17.4%        11.2%
1998        2134     22.4%  15.8%      -0.3%     0.0%   1.6%       0.0%   -2.0%      0.0%   19.0%      14.7%     42.4%      29.7% 19.4%        11.9%
1999        2313     22.9%  16.4%      -0.5%     0.1%   1.7%       0.1%   -2.1%      0.0%   20.6%      16.3%     44.1%      30.2% 19.7%        12.5%
2000        2270     23.0%  15.6%      -0.7%     0.0%   1.5%       0.0%   -2.2%      0.0%   21.1%      16.3%     43.5%      30.1% 21.4%        13.8%
2001        2070     22.4%  15.1%      -0.7%     0.0%   1.6%       0.0%   -2.3%      0.0%   20.8%      13.4%     41.7%      29.0% 19.7%        12.9%
2002        1743     21.5%  14.5%      -0.6%     0.1%   1.3%       0.1%   -1.9%      0.0%   17.5%      14.0%     40.3%      27.2% 19.2%        11.6%
2003        1779     19.1%  11.8%      -1.7%    -0.2%   1.2%       0.0%   -2.9%     -0.2%   25.0%       8.5%     34.6%      22.3% 15.3%         8.6%
Overall     27636    22.4%  15.8%      -0.9%    -0.1%   1.4%       0.0%   -2.3%     -0.1%   21.2%      12.4%     43.3%      29.9% 19.7%        12.1%




                                                                     36
Table 2: Are ownership changes caused primarily by large increases and decreases
of at least 2.5 percent?

The table shows results of annual ordinary least squares regressions of the percentage
D&O ownership change on decomposed changes in percentage ownership. The two
independent variables, large negative change and large positive changes, are defined as
follows. Large negative change is equal to the change in D&O ownership if D&O
ownership is smaller than -2.5%, and zero otherwise. Large positive change is equal to
the change in D&O ownership if D&O ownership is larger than 2.5%, and zero
otherwise. The last row reports coefficients from a pooled time-series/cross-sectional
regression. All coefficients are highly significant. The sample is described in detail in
section 2.



              Fiscal     Number      Large neg.   Large pos.   Adjusted
               Year       of obs.      change       change     R-square
              1988      845          1.002        0.997        0.986
              1989      1396         0.998        1.002        0.990
              1990      1404         1.000        1.000        0.989
              1991      1532         0.996        1.004        0.991
              1992      1588         0.995        1.004        0.990
              1993      1688         0.995        1.004        0.990
              1994      1812         0.998        1.002        0.982
              1995      1761         0.997        1.003        0.988
              1996      1575         1.000        1.000        0.987
              1997      1746         0.999        1.001        0.989
              1998      2134         1.004        0.997        0.986
              1999      2313         1.008        0.993        0.985
              2000      2270         1.002        0.998        0.986
              2001      2070         1.003        0.998        0.989
              2002      1743         1.006        0.991        0.984
              2003      1779         0.999        1.000        0.990
              Pooled    27636        1.000        1.000        0.988




                                            37
     Table 3: Summary Statistics of data by data source
     The table reports means and medians of the variables employed in the regressions. Variables are reported by database of origin. The first two columns report
     means and medians for all firm-year observations in which neither a large increase or decrease of at least 2.5% in D&O ownership is observed. Columns 3 and 4
     report means and medians across all firm-year observations in which a decrease of at least 2.5% in D&O ownership is observed. Columns 5 and 6 report means
     and medians across all firm-year observations in which an increase of at least 2.5% is observed. The last three columns report p-values of Wilcoxon rank tests for
     equality of medians across the three groups. From the main Compact Disclosure database, we derive all variables for D&O ownership. From the
     CompactDisclosure Director database, we derive changes in the chief executive officer and chairman of the board position. From the CRSP database, we
     calculate firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous two fiscal years, annualized average daily NYSE turnover, annualized average daily NASDAQ
     turnover, idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a market model and based on daily returns, and years since the first listing on CRSP. From the Compustat
     database, we derive research and development expenditures over assets; a no R&D dummy equal to 1 if the firm has missing research and development
     expenditures for that year; a dividend payer indicator variable, equal to 1 if the firm has paid a dividend in that year; the logarithm of book-value-of-assets;
     capital expenditures over assets; a proxy for Tobin’s q, defined as the ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets, where the market value is
     calculated as the sum of the book value of assets and the market value of common stock less the book value of common stock and deferred taxes; free cash flow,
     defined as EBITDA over sales; property, plant, and equipment over total assets; and leverage, defined as total liabilities over book value of assets. All Compustat
     variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% level, respectively

                                                                                                                                          Wilcoxon Test of equality of
                                           No change                     Large Drop                  Large Increase                            medians (p-values)
                                           18609 obs.                     6015 obs.                    3488 obs.                   No chg. vs.   No chg. vs.      Lg. drop vs.
                                        Mean     Median               Mean     Median               Mean     Median                Large drop   Lg. increase      Lg. increase
CompactDisclosure Variables
Percentage ownership                     18.9%      11.0%              24.4%      20.6%              36.3%      32.9%                0.000           0.000            0.000
Percentage ownership (t-1)               18.9%      11.1%              34.1%      30.7%              27.4%      23.3%                0.000           0.000            0.000
Percentage ownership (t-2)               19.5%      11.7%              35.2%      32.4%              28.6%      25.1%                0.000           0.000            0.000
Change in percentage ownership            0.0%       0.0%              -9.7%       -6.4%              8.9%       5.2%                0.000           0.000            0.000
Ownership > 20%                          34.4%       0.0%              51.1%      100.0%             73.5%      100.0%               0.000           0.000            0.000
Ownership > 30%                          23.9%       0.0%              32.4%        0.0%             54.8%      100.0%               0.000           0.000            0.000
Ownership > 40%                          16.1%       0.0%              18.6%        0.0%             38.8%       0.0%                0.000           0.000            0.000
Ownership > 50%                           9.9%       0.0%              10.0%       0.0%              26.1%       0.0%                0.890           0.000            0.000




                                                                                     38
   Table 3, continued
                                        No change            Large Drop           Large Increase      Wilcoxon Test of eq. of medians (p-values)
                                    18609 observations    6015 observations      3488 observations    No-drop vs.   No-drop vs.     Lg. drop vs.
                                    Mean      Median      Mean      Median       Mean     Median      Large drop    Lg. increase    Lg. increase
Compustat Variables
R&D / assets                          0.04         0.00     0.06          0.00     0.05        0.00         0.000          0.000           0.000
No R&D dummy                          0.52         1.00     0.52          1.00     0.47        0.00         0.450          0.000           0.000
Dividend Payer                        0.38         0.00     0.16          0.00     0.19        0.00         0.000          0.000           0.000
Log (book value of assets)            5.38         5.21     4.36          4.28     4.16        4.08         0.000          0.000           0.000
Capex / assets                        0.07         0.05     0.07          0.05     0.07        0.04         0.000          0.000           0.000
Q                                     1.95         1.39     2.26          1.51     1.62        1.18         0.000          0.000           0.000
Free Cash Flow                        0.09         0.11     0.03          0.09     0.03        0.08         0.000          0.000           0.000
PPE / Assets                          0.31         0.26     0.27          0.20     0.28        0.22         0.000          0.000           0.002
Leverage                              0.42         0.41     0.42          0.40     0.44        0.43         0.165          0.000           0.000

CompactDisclosure – Directors
Concurrent change in CEO            10.6%         0.0%     12.7%       0.0%      11.1%        0.0%          0.000          0.386           0.031
Concurrent change in COB             8.7%         0.0%     12.3%       0.0%       8.7%        0.0%          0.000          0.969           0.000
Change in CEO over next year         9.1%         0.0%     10.2%       0.0%       8.6%        0.0%          0.010          0.367           0.011
Change in COB over next year        10.0%         0.0%      9.1%       0.0%       9.8%        0.0%          0.108          0.814           0.345

CRSP Variables
Concurrent return                   16.1%        4.3%      46.2%      13.1%      16.0%       -3.0%          0.000          0.000           0.000
Concurrent industry return          18.5%       12.1%      25.6%      16.1%      16.0%        9.8%          0.000          0.000           0.000
Concurrent market return            12.8%       14.0%      14.5%      15.2%      11.3%       13.7%          0.000          0.001           0.000
Lagged return                       15.9%        2.3%      30.6%       7.1%       8.0%       -6.7%          0.000          0.000           0.000
Lagged industry return              13.6%        9.2%      14.0%       8.9%      12.9%        8.4%          0.393          0.028           0.205
Lagged market return                11.1%       13.6%      10.7%      13.0%      12.3%       13.7%          0.627          0.000           0.001
Turnover NYSE                         0.38        0.00       0.19       0.00       0.19        0.00         0.000          0.000           0.002
Turnover NASDAQ                       0.85        0.15       1.14       0.67       0.87        0.42         0.000          0.000           0.000
Idiosyncratic volatility              0.04        0.03       0.04       0.04       0.05        0.04         0.000          0.000           0.024
Years since first listing on CRSP    17.46       12.10      10.22       6.67      12.72        8.76         0.000          0.000           0.000




                                                                     39
Table 4: Probit regressions of large changes in ownership on economic determinants
The table reports marginal effects of a probit regression of large decreases (column 1) and large increases (column2) in
D&O ownership. The dependent variable is equal to one if ownership decreases (increases) by more than 2.5%, and
zero otherwise. The regressions are estimated on the pooled time-series and cross-sectional sample. The independent
variables are: the percentage of director and officer ownership at the beginning of the year, research and development
expenditures over assets; a No R&D dummy, equal to 1 if the firm has missing research and development expenditures
for that year; a dividend payer indicator variable, equal to 1 if the firm has paid a dividend in that year; the logarithm of
book-value-of-assets; capital expenditures over assets; free cash flow, defined as EBITDA over sales; property, plant,
and equipment over total assets; leverage, defined as total liabilities over book value of assets; annualized average daily
NYSE turnover if traded on NYSE, and zero, otherwise; annualized average daily NASDAQ turnover if traded on
NASDAQ, and zero, otherwise; idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a market model and based on daily returns;
firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous fiscal year; firm-, industry- and market-returns over the current
fiscal year; years since the first listing on CRSP; and indicator variables equal to one if the firm has a concurrent
change in the chairman or CEO position. All accounting variables are sampled at the end of the previous fiscal year.
The regressions include year-fixed effects (not reported). Columns 3 and 4 contain mean and standard deviation of the
independent variables to facilitate the interpretation of the marginal effects. Standard errors (not reported) are corrected
for clustering at the firm level. (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance of the underlying coefficient at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                           Large                           Sample
                                                      Large drop          Increase                  Mean        Std. Dev.
 D&O ownership (t-1)                                    0.507***         -0.044***               0.223         0.202
 R&D / assets                                           0.112***         -0.190***               0.047         0.091
 No R&D dummy                                           0.005             0.005                  0.379         0.485
 Dividend payer                                        -0.047***         -0.020***               0.324         0.468
 Log (book value assets)                               -0.008***         -0.033***               5.211         1.889
 Capex / assets                                         0.099*           -0.121***               0.071         0.069
 Free cash flow                                        -0.031***         -0.018*                 0.075         0.261
 PPE / Assets                                          -0.052***          0.017                  0.301         0.22
 Leverage                                               0.019             0.071***               0.424         0.221
 Turnover NYSE                                          0.027***         -0.017***               0.353         0.585
 Turnover NASDAQ                                        0.019***         -0.005**                0.932         1.46
 Idiosyncratic volatility                              -0.977***          0.371***               0.038         0.021
 Concurrent return                                      0.034***         -0.006***               0.233         1.117
 Concurrent industry return                             0.038***         -0.028***               0.2           0.431
 Concurrent market return                              -0.013             0.030                  0.126         0.193
 Lagged return                                          0.023***         -0.015***               0.189         0.994
 Lagged industry return                                 0.018            -0.023***               0.137         0.381
 Lagged market return                                   0.015             0.054*                 0.108         0.184
 Years since first listing on CRSP                     -0.003***          0.000                  15.745        15.148
 Concurrent change in chairman                          0.094***         -0.007                  0.092         0.29
 Concurrent change in CEO position                      0.026***          0.002                  0.107         0.309
 Number of observations                              21792             21792
 Observed probability                                   0.207             0.120
 Predicted probability                                  0.172             0.100
 Pseudo-R2                                              0.138             0.082




                                                            40
Table 5: Large changes in ownership on changes in explanatory variables

The table reports marginal effects of a probit regression of large decreases (column 1) and large increases
in ownership (column2) on changes in dependent variables. The dependent variable in column 1 (column 2)
is equal to one if ownership drops (increases) by more than 2.5%, and zero otherwise. The regressions are
estimated on the pooled time-series and cross-sectional sample. The independent variables are: the
percentage of director and officer ownership at the beginning of the year and the change in D&O ownership
over the previous year. Research and development expenditures over assets; a No R&D dummy, equal to 1
if the firm has missing research and development expenditures for that year; a dividend initiation
(termination) variable, equal to 1 if the firm has started (ceased) to pay a dividend; the logarithm of book-
value-of-assets; capital expenditures over assets; free cash flow, defined as EBITDA over sales; property,
plant, and equipment over total assets; leverage, defined as total liabilities over book value of assets;
annualized average daily NYSE turnover if traded on NYSE, and zero, otherwise; annualized average daily
NASDAQ turnover if traded on NASDAQ, and zero, otherwise; idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a
market model and based on daily returns; firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous fiscal year;
firm-, industry- and market-returns over the current fiscal year. All accounting variables are calculated as
changes from two fiscal years prior to the end of the previous fiscal year. The regressions include year-
fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors (not reported) are corrected for clustering at the firm level.
(***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance of the underlying coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

                                                          Large drop         Large increase
             Level of D&O ownership                        0.534***          0.143***
             Change in D&O ownership                      -0.257***         -0.181***
             Change R&D / assets                           0.310***         -0.130**
             Change in No R&D dummy                       -0.019            -0.006
             Dividend initiation                          -0.002            -0.020
             Dividend termination                         -0.025             0.045**
             Change in Log (book value assets)             0.092***         -0.054***
             Change in Capex / assets                     -0.099*           -0.048
             Change in Free cash flow                      0.009             0.021
             Change in PPE / Assets                        0.102*           -0.017
             Change in Leverage                            0.027             0.078***
             Change in Turnover NYSE                      -0.004            -0.001
             Change in Turnover NASDAQ                     0.007*           -0.008**
             Change in Idiosyncratic volatility           -0.245             0.339
             Concurrent return                             0.036***         -0.004
             Concurrent industry return                    0.058***         -0.029***
             Concurrent market return                     -0.051             0.038
             Lagged return                                 0.023***         -0.013*
             Lagged industry return                        0.036***         -0.020**
             Lagged market return                          0.016             0.080**
             Concurrent change in COB                      0.090***         -0.012
             Concurrent change in CEO                      0.024**          -0.006
             Number of observations                      17040             17040
             Observed probability                          0.195             0.115
             Predicted probability                         0.169             0.106
             Pseudo R2                                     0.116             0.038




                                                    41
Table 6: Decomposition of ownership changes and changes in explanatory variables
The table reports marginal effects of probit regressions of the decomposition of large decreases (column 1-3) and large
increases (column4-6) in ownership on changes in dependent variables. The decomposition is done as in Helwege,
Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007). The dependent variables in columns 1 to 4 are defined as follows. In column 1, it is equal to
one if the change in shares held by insiders causes the large decrease of 2.5% or more in ownership. In column 2, it is
equal to one if the change in shares outstanding causes the large decrease in ownership. The dependent variables of
columns 3 and 4 are defined accordingly for large increases in ownership. The regressions are estimated on the pooled
time-series and cross-sectional sample. The independent variables are expressed as changes and are defined as: the
percentage of director and officer ownership at the beginning of the year, research and development expenditures over
assets; a No R&D dummy, equal to 1 if the firm has missing research and development expenditures for that year; a
dividend initiation (termination) indicator variable, equal to 1 if the firm started (ceased) to pay a dividend in that year;
the logarithm of book-value-of-assets; capital expenditures over assets; free cash flow, defined as EBITDA over sales;
property, plant, and equipment over total assets; leverage, defined as total liabilities over book value of assets;
annualized average daily NYSE turnover if traded on NYSE, and zero, otherwise; annualized average daily NASDAQ
turnover if traded on NASDAQ, and zero, otherwise; idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a market model and based
on daily returns; firm-, industry- and market-returns over the previous fiscal year; firm-, industry- and market-returns
over the current fiscal year. All accounting variables are calculated as changes from two fiscal years prior to the end of
the previous fiscal year. The regressions include year-fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors (not reported) are
corrected for clustering at the firm level. (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance of the underlying
coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                  Large decreases [2.5%]                         Large increases [2.5%]
                                           Numerator         Denominator                  Numerator          Denominator
                                           decrease          increase                     increase           decrease
Level of D&O ownership                        0.343***          0.189***                     0.081***           0.038***
Change in D&O ownership                      -0.205***         -0.058***                    -0.162***          -0.028***
Change R&D / assets                           0.087             0.163***                    -0.100*            -0.026*
Change in No R&D dummy                       -0.017             0.008                       -0.003              0.000
Dividend initiation                          -0.017             0.008                       -0.020             -0.002
Dividend termination                         -0.011            -0.013                        0.045**            0.004
Change in Log (book value assets)             0.027***          0.045***                    -0.040***          -0.009***
Change in Capex / assets                     -0.035            -0.033                       -0.026             -0.013
Change in Free cash flow                      0.017             0.008                        0.001              0.010***
Change in PPE / Assets                        0.002             0.053*                       0.000             -0.005
Change in Leverage                           -0.000             0.037**                      0.080***           0.002
Change in Turnover NYSE                      -0.019**           0.015**                      0.001             -0.003
Change in Turnover NASDAQ                     0.003             0.005**                     -0.008**           -0.001*
Change in Idiosyncratic volatility            0.015            -0.289**                      0.316              0.026
Concurrent return                             0.004*            0.016***                    -0.001             -0.003***
Concurrent industry return                    0.039***          0.023***                    -0.020**           -0.005**
Concurrent market return                     -0.059            -0.001                        0.017              0.001
Lagged return                                 0.006**           0.012***                    -0.007             -0.004***
Lagged industry return                        0.015*            0.021***                    -0.013             -0.004*
Lagged market return                         -0.010            -0.013                        0.018              0.018*
Concurrent change in COB                      0.088***         -0.004                       -0.006             -0.004**
Concurrent change in CEO                      0.025***         -0.004                       -0.002             -0.002
Observed probability                          0.130             0.069                        0.094              0.017
Predicted probability                         0.112             0.050                        0.089              0.010
Pseudo-R2                                     0.080             0.163                        0.023              0.121




                                                             42
Table 7: Changes in Q and changes in ownership
The table reports coefficients from firm-fixed effects regressions of changes in q on lagged ownership changes and
changes in other control variables. The dependent variable is the change from year t-1 to year t of a proxy for Tobin’s
q, defined as the ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets, where the market value is calculated as
the sum of the book value of assets and the market value of common stock less the book value of common stock and
deferred taxes. The first and third columns include the change in ownership, the second and fourth column decompose
the change in ownership into positive and negative changes, and the fifth and sixth column includes two indicator
variables equal to one if ownership increases (decreases) by at least 2.5%. The other independent variables are: the
logarithm of book-value-of-assets; property, plant, and equipment over total assets; idiosyncratic volatility estimated
from a market model and based on daily returns; free cash flow, defined as EBITDA over sales; research and
development expenditures over assets; a No R&D dummy, equal to 1 if the firm has missing research and development
expenditures for that year; capital expenditures over assets; annualized average daily NYSE turnover if traded on
NYSE, and zero, otherwise; annualized average daily NASDAQ turnover if traded on NASDAQ, and zero, otherwise;
and lagged firm returns over the two previous fiscal years. All accounting variables represented changes from year t-2
to year t-1. The regressions include year-fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for
clustering at the firm level. (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance of the underlying coefficient at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                      (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
Change in Ownership                0.524***                       0.270*
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.140)                        (0.150)
Positive Change                                   0.470**                         0.522**
          (from t-2 to t-1)                      (0.215)                         (0.232)
Negative Change                                   0.555***                        0.112
          (from t-2 to t-1)                      (0.212)                         (0.223)
Large Increase (2.5%) (t-1)                                                                       0.062**        0.069***
                                                                                                 (0.026)        (0.026)
Large drop (2.5%) (t-1)                                                                          -0.092***      -0.021
                                                                                                 (0.026)        (0.026)
Change in Log (Book value)        -0.659***      -0.659***       -0.467***       -0.467***       -0.651***      -0.463***
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.068)        (0.068)         (0.068)         (0.068)         (0.068)        (0.068)
Change in Log (Book value)         0.138**        0.139**         0.130*          0.128*          0.136*         0.127*
          squared                 (0.070)        (0.070)         (0.077)         (0.077)         (0.070)        (0.077)
Change in PPE / Assets            -0.202         -0.203          -0.488**        -0.486**        -0.220         -0.492**
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.211)        (0.211)         (0.210)         (0.211)         (0.210)        (0.210)
Change in PPE / Assets            -0.221         -0.224          -0.270          -0.260          -0.230         -0.271
          squared                 (1.592)        (1.593)         (1.701)         (1.700)         (1.583)        (1.693)
Change in Idiosyncratic Vol.       0.310          0.309           0.619           0.635           0.360          0.651
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.820)        (0.820)         (0.849)         (0.850)         (0.820)        (0.850)
Change in Free cash flow          -0.122         -0.122           0.033           0.033          -0.121          0.033
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.108)        (0.108)         (0.108)         (0.108)         (0.107)        (0.108)
Change in R&D / Assets            -0.478         -0.477          -0.625          -0.624          -0.472         -0.623
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.389)        (0.389)         (0.405)         (0.405)         (0.389)        (0.405)
No R&D dummy                       0.027          0.027           0.029           0.029           0.029          0.029
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.083)        (0.083)         (0.080)         (0.080)         (0.083)        (0.080)
Change in CapEx / Assets          -0.598***      -0.598***       -0.191          -0.190          -0.591***      -0.193
          (from t-2 to t-1)       (0.182)        (0.182)         (0.180)         (0.180)         (0.182)        (0.180)
Change in Turnover NYSE                                          -0.093***       -0.094***                      -0.093***
          (from t-2 to t-1)                                      (0.033)         (0.033)                        (0.033)
Change in Turnover NASD                                          -0.115***       -0.115***                      -0.115***
          (from t-2 to t-1)                                      (0.019)         (0.019)                        (0.019)
Return (from t-2 to t-1)                                         -0.103***       -0.104***                      -0.104***
                                                                 (0.021)         (0.021)                        (0.021)
Return (from t-3 to t-2)                                         -0.103***       -0.103***                      -0.103***
                                                                 (0.015)         (0.015)                        (0.015)
Observations                      21389          21389           20403           20403           21389          20403
Number of clusters                4744           4744            4515            4515            4744           4515
R-squared                          0.10           0.10            0.12            0.12            0.10           0.12


                                                            43
Table 8: Changes in Q and changes in shares held and total shares outstanding
The table reports coefficients from firm-fixed effects regressions of changes in q on lagged ownership changes and
changes in other control variables. The dependent variable is the change from year t-1 to year t of a proxy for Tobin’s
q, defined as the ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets, where the market value is calculated as
the sum of the book value of assets and the market value of common stock less the book value of common stock and
deferred taxes; capital expenditures over assets. The large change of at least 2.5% in director and officer ownership is
decomposed into changes caused by an increase or decrease in shares held by directors and officers, and changes
caused by an increase or decrease in shares outstanding. The decomposition is done as in Helwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz
(2007). Columns 1 and 2 include indicator variables that are equal to one if there was a large change in the numerator
or denominator, and zero otherwise. Columns 3 and 4 include the actual change in the numerator and denominator,
conditional on a large change. The other independent variables are: the logarithm of book-value-of-assets; property,
plant, and equipment over total assets; idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a market model and based on daily
returns; free cash flow, defined as EBITDA over sales; research and development expenditures over assets; a No R&D
dummy, equal to 1 if the firm has missing research and development expenditures for that year; capital expenditures
over assets; annualized average daily NYSE turnover if traded on NYSE, and zero, otherwise; annualized average daily
NASDAQ turnover if traded on NASDAQ, and zero, otherwise; and lagged firm returns over the two previous fiscal
years. All accounting variables represented changes from year t-2 to year t-1. The regressions include year-fixed effects
(not reported). Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the firm level. (***), (**), and (*)
indicate statistical significance of the underlying coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                             (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)
Large decrease in shares held (t-1)                      -0.010           0.007              0.309          -0.030
                                                         (0.030)         (0.029)            (0.222)         (0.230)
Large increase in shares outstanding (t-1)               -0.237***       -0.102**           -1.087***       -0.474
                                                         (0.049)         (0.049)            (0.293)         (0.309)
Large increase shares held (t-1)                          0.049*          0.055*             0.376*          0.436*
                                                         (0.029)         (0.029)            (0.216)         (0.230)
Large decrease in shares outstanding (t-1)                0.072           0.087*            -0.540          -0.526
                                                         (0.047)         (0.047)            (0.388)         (0.402)
Change in Log (Book value (from t-2 to t-1))             -0.622***       -0.453***          -0.644***       -0.461***
                                                         (0.068)         (0.069)            (0.069)         (0.069)
Change in Log (Book value squared                         0.143**         0.131*             0.156**         0.141*
                                                         (0.070)         (0.077)            (0.072)         (0.079)
Change in PPE / Assets (from t-2 to t-1)                 -0.222          -0.490**           -0.209          -0.481**
                                                         (0.210)         (0.210)            (0.209)         (0.210)
Change in PPE / Assets, squared                          -0.157          -0.244             -0.253          -0.279
                                                         (1.579)         (1.690)            (1.587)         (1.694)
Change in Idiosyncratic Vol. (from t-2 to t-1)            0.357           0.642              0.370           0.680
                                                         (0.816)         (0.849)            (0.818)         (0.849)
Change in Free cash flow (from t-2 to t-1)               -0.120           0.032             -0.120           0.030
                                                         (0.107)         (0.108)            (0.107)         (0.108)
Change in R&D / Assets (from t-2 to t-1)                 -0.444          -0.605             -0.446          -0.603
                                                         (0.386)         (0.404)            (0.387)         (0.404)
No R&D dummy (from t-2 to t-1)                            0.025           0.029              0.022           0.025
                                                         (0.082)         (0.080)            (0.081)         (0.078)
Change in CapEx / Assets (from t-2 to t-1)               -0.584***       -0.193             -0.589***       -0.191
                                                         (0.181)         (0.180)            (0.180)         (0.180)
Change in Turnover NYSE (from t-2 to t-1)                                -0.091***                          -0.093***
                                                                         (0.033)                            (0.033)
Change in Turnover NASD (from t-2 to t-1)                                -0.113***                          -0.115***
                                                                         (0.019)                            (0.019)
Return (from t-2 to t-1)                                                 -0.101***                          -0.100***
                                                                         (0.021)                            (0.021)
Return (from t-3 to t-2)                                                 -0.101***                          -0.102***
                                                                         (0.015)                            (0.015)
Observations                                           21389            20403             21389            20403
Number of clusters                                     4744             4515              4744             4515
R-squared                                                0.10             0.12              0.10             0.12


                                                           44
Table 9: Changes in Tobin’s Q and changes in shares held and total shares
outstanding by ownership quintile
The table reports coefficients from firm-fixed effects regressions of changes in q on lagged ownership changes and
changes in other control variables by ownership quintile. The large change of at least 2.5% in director and officer
ownership is decomposed into changes caused by an increase or decrease in shares held by directors and officers, and
changes caused by an increase or decrease in shares outstanding. The decomposition is done as in Helwege, Pirinsky,
and Stulz (2007). Columns 1 through 5 include indicator variables that are equal to one if there was a large change in
the numerator or denominator of inside ownership, and zero otherwise The dependent variable is the change from year
t-1 to year t of a proxy for Tobin’s q, defined as the ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets,
where the market value is calculated as the sum of the book value of assets and the market value of common stock less
the book value of common stock and deferred taxes. The other independent variables are the same as in table 8, column
2. The regressions include year-fixed effects (not reported). Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering
at the firm level. (***), (**), and (*) indicate statistical significance of the underlying coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

                                                    quint 1         quint 2        quint 3        quint 4         quint 5
Large decrease in shares held (t-1)                 -0.041          -0.012         0.108          -0.004          -0.011
                                                    (0.112)         (0.094)        (0.080)        (0.062)         (0.059)
Large increase in shares outstanding (t-1)          0.014           -0.368**       0.006          -0.167*         -0.185**
                                                    (0.345)         (0.186)        (0.118)        (0.097)         (0.093)
Large increase shares held (t-1)                    -0.113          0.085          0.096          0.074           -0.029
                                                    (0.220)         (0.113)        (0.074)        (0.061)         (0.048)
Large decrease in shares outstanding (t-1)          -0.295          1.242          -0.058         0.109           0.038
                                                    (0.361)         (0.757)        (0.132)        (0.108)         (0.069)
Change in Log (Book value)                          -0.293          -0.786***      -0.547**       -0.384***       -0.272**
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.189)         (0.201)        (0.269)        (0.131)         (0.123)
Change in Log (Book value)                          0.334           0.400**        0.139          0.121           0.212
         squared                                    (0.281)         (0.161)        (0.300)        (0.135)         (0.140)
Change in PPE / Assets                              -0.532          -1.518*        -0.603         0.308           0.048
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.449)         (0.827)        (0.573)        (0.580)         (0.366)
Change in PPE / Assets                              -2.991          4.032          0.724          -1.186          -1.596
         squared                                    (3.285)         (9.095)        (2.200)        (2.704)         (2.412)
Change in Idiosyncratic Vol.                        0.360           -1.395         5.806**        0.034           0.552
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (3.235)         (3.191)        (2.670)        (1.916)         (1.288)
Change in Free cash flow                            0.020           0.252          -0.163         -0.119          0.038
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.325)         (0.314)        (0.259)        (0.262)         (0.209)
Change in R&D / Assets                              0.817           0.459          -1.859*        -1.250          0.583
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.918)         (0.730)        (1.127)        (1.072)         (1.611)
No R&D dummy                                        0.011           0.194          0.034          0.076           -0.091
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.157)         (0.212)        (0.287)        (0.168)         (0.149)
Change in CapEx / Assets                            -0.220          0.230          -0.686         -0.538          -0.097
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.535)         (0.601)        (0.526)        (0.403)         (0.275)
Change in Turnover NYSE                             -0.124**        -0.036         -0.128*        -0.008          -0.070
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.054)         (0.079)        (0.074)        (0.170)         (0.119)
Change in Turnover NASD                             -0.171***       -0.069         -0.110**       -0.134***       -0.102
         (from t-2 to t-1)                          (0.057)         (0.046)        (0.044)        (0.041)         (0.072)
Return (from t-2 to t-1)                            -0.210***       -0.150**       -0.123***      -0.070          -0.050
                                                    (0.056)         (0.059)        (0.045)        (0.059)         (0.048)
Return (from t-3 to t-2)                            -0.116**        -0.148***      -0.097***      -0.094***       -0.081***
                                                    (0.047)         (0.049)        (0.035)        (0.036)         (0.031)
Observations                                        4374            4186           4057           3982            3804
Number of clusters                                  1098            1498           1548           1497            1285
R-squared                                           0.14            0.14           0.15           0.16            0.10




                                                           45
Table 10: Changes in Tobin’s Q and concurrent changes in ownership
The table reports coefficients from firm-fixed effects regressions of changes in q on concurrent ownership changes and
concurrent changes in other control variables. The dependent variable is the change from year t-1 to year t of a proxy
for Tobin’s q, defined as the ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of assets, where the market value is
calculated as the sum of the book value of assets and the market value of common stock less the book value of common
stock and deferred taxes; capital expenditures over assets. The first column includes indicator variables for large
increases and decreases in director and officer ownership. The second and third columns decompose the large change in
director and officer ownership into changes caused by a large increase or decrease in shares held by directors and
officers, and changes caused by a large increase or decrease in shares outstanding. The decomposition is done as in
Helwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007). Column 2 includes an indicator variable equal to one if the respective condition is
met, and zero otherwise. Column 3 includes the magnitude of the change in the numerator or denominator, conditional
on a large change occurring. The other independent variables are: the logarithm of book-value-of-assets; property,
plant, and equipment over total assets; idiosyncratic volatility estimated from a market model and based on daily
returns; free cash flow, defined as EBITDA over sales; research and development expenditures over assets; a No R&D
dummy, equal to 1 if the firm has missing research and development expenditures for that year; capital expenditures
over assets; annualized average daily NYSE turnover if traded on NYSE, and zero, otherwise; annualized average daily
NASDAQ turnover if traded on NASDAQ, and zero, otherwise; and lagged firm returns from year t-2 to t-1. All
accounting variables represented changes from year t-1 to year t. The regressions include year-fixed effects (not
reported). Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the firm level. (***), (**), and (*) indicate
statistical significance of the underlying coefficient at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                           (1)                  (2)                (3)
Large increase in ownership (t)                        0.047*
                                                      (0.027)
Large decrease in ownership (t)                        0.163***
                                                      (0.027)
Large decrease shares held (t)                                           -0.009              -0.508**
                                                                         (0.028)             (0.214)
Large increase in shares outstanding (t)                                  0.457***            2.345***
                                                                         (0.050)             (0.302)
Large increase in shares held (t)                                         0.071**             0.392
                                                                         (0.031)             (0.238)
Large decrease in shares outstanding (t)                                 -0.087**             0.594
                                                                         (0.042)             (0.370)
Change in Log (Book value (from t-1 to t))           -0.696***           -0.746***           -0.719***
                                                     (0.069)             (0.069)             (0.068)
Change in Log (Book value squared                    -0.210**            -0.221***           -0.256***
                                                     (0.083)             (0.083)             (0.079)
Change in PPE / Assets (from t-1 to t)               -1.125***           -1.126***           -1.136***
                                                     (0.204)             (0.203)             (0.203)
Change in PPE / Assets, squared                      -0.486              -0.632              -0.467
                                                     (1.295)             (1.273)             (1.282)
Change in Idiosyncratic Vol. (from t-1 to t)        -10.352***          -10.293***          -10.420***
                                                     (0.928)             (0.925)             (0.924)
Change in Free cash flow (from t-1 to t)              0.672***            0.668***            0.674***
                                                     (0.111)             (0.110)             (0.110)
Change in R&D / Assets (from t-1 to t)                0.818**             0.748**             0.758**
                                                     (0.363)             (0.358)             (0.361)
No R&D dummy (from t-1 to t)                         -0.121              -0.114              -0.106
                                                     (0.086)             (0.084)             (0.087)
Change in CapEx / Assets (from t-1 to t)              0.696***            0.703***            0.699***
                                                     (0.205)             (0.203)             (0.203)
Change in Turnover NYSE (from t-1 to t)               0.282***            0.270***            0.276***
                                                     (0.039)             (0.039)             (0.039)
Change in Turnover NASD (from t-1 to t)               0.259***            0.250***            0.253***
                                                     (0.022)             (0.022)             (0.021)




                                                          46
Return (from t-2 to t-1)    -0.106***    -0.110***    -0.107***
                            (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.021)
Observations               20453        20453        20453
Number of clusters         4518         4518         4518
R-squared                    0.15         0.16         0.16




                               47
