NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGGREGATE IMPLICATIONS OF CREDIT MARKET IMPERFECTIONS
Kiminori Matsuyama
Working Paper 13209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13209

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

This paper is prepared for NBER 22nd Annual Conference on Macroeconomics, March 30-31, 2007.
It is a highly condensed version of lecture series given at various places (Kyoto, LSE, Northwestern,
Toulouse, UCL, and Zurich) over the years, which has slowly evolved into the current form. (Most
recent lecture slides are available on my website.) My special thanks go to the graduate students who
attended these lectures. This paper benefits greatly from the comments by the editors, the discussants,
and other participants at the conference. I thank also those who attended the seminars at Chicago Fed,
Paris-I, and Washington University in St. Louis, where a broad outline of this paper was presented.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Kiminori Matsuyama. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Aggregate Implications of Credit Market Imperfections
Kiminori Matsuyama
NBER Working Paper No. 13209
June 2007
JEL No. E32,E44,F15,F36,O11,O16
ABSTRACT
Credit market imperfections provide the key to understanding many important issues in business cycles,
growth and development, and international economics. Recent progress in these areas, however, has
left in its wake a bewildering array of individual models with seemingly conflicting results. This paper
offers a road map. Using the same single model of credit market imperfections throughout, it brings
together a diverse set of results within a unified framework. In so doing, it aims to draw a coherent
picture so that one is able to see some close connections between these results, thereby showing how
a wide range of aggregate phenomena may be attributed to the common cause. They include, among
other things, endogenous investment-specific technical changes, development traps, leapfrogging,
persistent recessions, recurring boom-and-bust cycles, reverse international capital flows, the rise and
fall of inequality across nations, and the patterns of international trade. The framework is also used
to investigate some equilibrium and distributional impacts of improving the efficiency of credit markets.
One recurring finding is that the properties of equilibrium often respond non-monotonically to parameter
changes, which suggests some cautions for studying aggregate implications of credit market imperfections
within a narrow class or a particular family of models.
Kiminori Matsuyama
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
k-matsuyama@northwestern.edu

Road Map
1. Introduction
2. A Simple Model of Credit Market Imperfections: A Single Agent’s Perspective
3. Partial Equilibrium Models
3.1. Homogenous Agents: The Net Worth (Balance Sheet) Effect
3.2. Heterogeneous Agents: Distributional Implications
3.3. Heterogeneous Agents: Replacement Effects
4. General Equilibrium with Endogenous Saving: Capital Deepening vs. Net Worth Effects
5. General Equilibrium with Heterogeneous Projects
5.1. A Model with Pure Capital Projects: Endogenous Investment-Specific Technical Change
5.1.a: Procyclical Productivity Change
Dynamic Implications: Credit Traps
5.1.b: Counter-cyclical Productivity Change
Dynamic Implications: Leapfrogging & Cycles as a Trap
5.2. A Model with Private Benefits
Dynamic Implications: Credit Cycles
5.3. A Model with Pure Capital and Consumption Projects:
5.3.a: Persistence of Inefficient Recessions: Financial Accelerator
5.3.b: Inefficient Booms and Volatility
5.3.c: Hybrid Cases: Asymmetric Cycles & Intermittent Volatility
6. General Equilibrium with Heterogeneous Agents and Capital: Patterns of International Capital Flows
Dynamic Implications: Symmetry-Breaking and Endogenous Inequality
7. General Equilibrium with Heterogeneous Agents with Heterogeneous Projects: Patterns of International
Trade
8. General Equilibrium with Pure Price Effects: A Model of Polarization
Long Run Implications on Wealth Distribution
9. Concluding Remarks
References
Figures

1

“All happy families resemble one another. Each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”
Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina
1. Introduction
It is widely recognized that the market economy fails to allocate the credit to the most productive
investment projects because credit transactions are subject to agency problems. In the presence of such
imperfections, the borrower’s net worth—also known as the balance sheet condition—plays crucial roles in
allocating the credit across entrepreneurs, firms, industries, and nations. A change in the aggregate level of
wealth and a change in the distribution of wealth thus affect the equilibrium allocation of the credit and
hence patterns of investments. Furthermore, the resulting change in the investments causes a further change
in the level and distribution of wealth, which leads to a further change in the equilibrium patterns of
investments.
Stimulated in part by the advances made in the microeconomics of financial markets and corporate
finance over the last thirty years, the problems of credit market imperfections have recently found many
applications in business cycles, growth and development, and international economics. However, this
progress has left in its wake a bewildering array of individual models with seemingly conflicting results.
For example, do the imperfections add persistence to the macroeconomic dynamics, as suggested by
Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and others? Or, do they add volatility, as
suggested by Azariadis and Smith (1998), Aghion and Banerjee (2005) and Matsuyama (2004a)? If they are
responsible for causing fluctuations, is it because the misallocation of credit creates recessions or because it
creates boom-and-bust cycles? Does improving credit markets make fluctuations more or less volatile?
Does financial globalization alleviate or exacerbate the credit market imperfections? Do credit transactions
between the rich and the poor help to reduce or magnify the inequality among households?, etc.
This paper comes out of my conviction that credit market imperfections offer the key to
understanding a wide range of important issues. Yet, aggregate implications of credit market
imperfections are so rich and diverse that one should not expect to find a simple answer of any of the
above “either-or” questions. It should come as no surprise that they are so rich and diverse because they
depend on the manner in which different agents and/or different investments interact with each other,
which consequently affects amplification and propagation mechanisms. This suggests that the intuition
gained from studying a particular family of models can be misleading because the results may be driven
by the specific assumptions made about the set of agents and investment projects that are competing for
credit.
This paper offers a road map for understanding aggregate implications of credit market
imperfections. By bringing together a diverse set of results (many existing and some new) within a
unified framework, it aims to draw a coherent picture so that one is able to see some close connections

2

between seemingly conflicting results across many topics that are ordinarily treated separately or even
sometimes viewed as unrelated.2 To this end, I first develop a simple, highly abstract model of credit
market imperfections, which is meant to capture all sorts of agency problems that affect credit
transactions. Using this single model throughout, I examine the effects of credit market imperfections in
series of relatively simple equilibrium models. The discussion will be organized by the manners in which
different models “close the system,” i.e., based on the assumptions about the sets of agents and of projects
competing for the credit and about the price effects of different investment projects, which determine the
amplification and propagation mechanisms in these models. It will be shown how a wide range of
aggregate phenomena may be attributed to the common cause. They include, among other things,
endogenous investment-specific technical changes3, development traps, leapfrogging, persistence of
inefficient recessions, recurrent boom-and bust cycles, reverse international capital flows, the rise and fall of
inequality across nations, and the patterns of international trade. The framework is also used to investigate
some equilibrium and distributional impacts of improving the efficiency of credit markets.
One recurring finding is that the properties of equilibrium often respond non-monotonically to
parameter changes. For example, increasing borrower’s net worth first leads to a higher equilibrium rate
of return and then to a lower equilibrium rate of return; improving credit market first leads to increased
volatility and then to reduced volatility; productivity improvements first lead to greater inequality and
then to reduced inequality. Such non-monotonicity suggests some cautions for studying their effects
within a narrow class or a particular family of models. For example, in their attempts to understand the
effects of credit market imperfections, many authors study models with no credit market. Yet, there is no
reason to believe that the effects of an imperfect credit market are similar to those of no credit market. In
their attempts to understand the effects of improving the credit market, many authors compare models
with credit market imperfections and models with the perfect credit market. Yet, there is no reason to
believe the effects of (partially) improving credit markets are similar to those of eliminating credit market
imperfections completely.4

2

The existing surveys focus on a few specific areas of applications. See Bernake, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) for
business cycle propagation mechanisms; Banerjee-Duflo (2005) in development economics; Bertola, Foellmi,
Zweimueller (2006, Ch.7) for income distributions. Tirole (2005, Part VI, particularly Ch.13) is closest in spirit to this
paper, but it does not cover any applications in international economics. Gertler (1988) offers an interesting glimpse on
the state of the field before it became a major research topic.
3
Credit market imperfections could also cause endogenous fluctuations of TFP to the extent they affect financing of
working capital. I have chosen to focus on investment-specific technical change because of some recent studies
suggesting that investment-specific technical changes perform better than the traditional, neutral (TFP) technical
changes; see Greenwood, Hercowitz, Krusell (1997, 2000) and Fisher (2006).
4
In my view, anyone who believes in the credit market imperfections, at least seriously enough to do research in this
area, should never examine the impacts of any policy under the assumption that such a policy could eradicate the
imperfections. The most one could hope for in any policy is to improve the credit market.

3

2. A Simple Model of Credit Market Imperfections: A Single Agent’s Perspective
Let us start with a simple and highly abstract model of credit market imperfections, which will be
used as a building block in all the equilibrium models discussed below. Here, we will look at the problem
faced by a single agent (an entrepreneur or a firm) in isolation, taking its environment as exogenous.
The world lasts for two periods: 0 and 1. The agent is endowed with ω < 1 units of the input in
period 0 and consumes only in period 1. There are two ways of converting the period-0 input into the
period-1 consumption. First, the agent can run a non-divisible investment project, which converts one
unit of the input in period 0 into R units in consumption in period 1 by borrowing 1−ω at the gross market
rate of return equal to r. Second, the agent can lend x ≤ ω units of the input in period 0 for rx units of
consumption in period 1.
The agent’s objective is to maximize the period-1 consumption. By borrowing 1−ω to run the
project, the agent could produce R units of the consumption good, from which r(1−ω) units need to be
repaid, so that the period-1 consumption (and the utility) would be equal to U = R − r(1−ω) = R − r + rω.
This is greater than or equal to U = rω, the amount that the agent could consume by lending at the gross
market rate r, if and only if
(1)

R ≥ r.

(PC)

Thus, the project return needs to be higher than (or equal to) the opportunity cost of running the project in
order to make the agent eager (or willing) to borrow and invest. This constraint (as well as the analogous
constraints in all the models developed later) shall be called (PC) for Profitability Constraint.
Even when (PC) holds with strict inequality and hence the agent is eager to invest, credit market
imperfections might keep the agent from investing. To obtain credit, the agent must somehow generate to
the lenders the rate of return, r, which is determined by the market. However, for a variety of reasons, the
entire project output, R, may not be used for the purpose. To capture this in the simplest manner, it is
assumed that no more than a fraction, λ, of the project revenue can be pledged to the lenders for the
repayment. Thus, the agent can generate the rate of return required by the lenders, if and only if
(2)

λR ≥ r(1−ω).

(BC)

Only when this constraint is met, the agent is capable of borrowing and investing. This constraint (as
well as the analogous constraints in all the models developed later) shall be called (BC) for Borrowing
Constraint.5 Another way of looking at this constraint is b = 1−ω ≤ λR/r, which is to say that that
borrowing is limited by the present discounted value of the pledgeable revenue of the project, λR/r. This

5

Those who prefer the language of agency theory may want to refer to the Profitability Constraint as the Borrower’s
Incentive Compatibility (or Participation) Constraint and to the Borrowing Constraint as the Lenders’ Incentive
Compatibility Constraint (or Participation) Constraint.

4

constraint can also be rewritten as ω ≥ 1− λR/r, which states that a sufficiently high net worth would
overcome the credit market imperfection.6
For the investment to take place, the agent must be both willing and capable to borrow, that is,
only when both (PC) and (BC) are satisfied. Which of the two is a relevant constraint depends on λ + ω.
If λ + ω > 1, (PC) is more stringent than (BC). That is, the agent can borrow whenever he wants to
borrow. In this case, credit market imperfections do not affect the investment decision. If λ + ω < 1, on
the other hand, (BC) is more stringent than (PC). That is, credit market imperfections may affect
investment. Indeed, if 1 ≤ R/r < (1−ω)/λ, (PC) holds but (BC) does not, meaning that the agent cannot
initiate the profitable investment project due to the borrowing constraint.
In this simple, highly abstract model of credit market imperfections, the pledgeability, λ, is meant
to capture all sorts of agency problems that restrict the agent’s ability to finance the profitable investment
externally. The severity of these agency problems could depend on the project, the industry, or the
institutional factors that determine the general efficiency of credit markets, such as the quality of legal or
contractual enforcement, corporate governance, or more broadly the state of financial development of the
economy. For this reason, I will later allow the pledgeability parameter, λ, to vary across projects, across
industries or across countries in equilibrium models with many projects, many industries, or many
countries.
In this simple, highly abstract model of credit market imperfections, the input endowment, ω, is
meant to capture the entrepreneur’s net worth, the firm’s balance sheet condition, or, more broadly, the
borrower’s credit-worthiness. For this reason, I will later allow the net worth parameter, ω, to vary across
agents in equilibrium models with heterogeneous agents. It will also be allowed to depend on the past
investment when considering the dynamic implications of credit market imperfections.
Remark 1: The microeconomics of credit markets offers many different agency stories that could be used
to justify the assumption that the borrowers cannot fully pledge the project revenue.7 The simplest story
would be that they strategically default, whenever the repayment obligation exceeds the default cost.
Alternatively, each project is specific to the agent and requires his services to generate the maximum
revenue. Without his services, the revenue would be reduced. Then the borrower, by threatening to

6

Some authors call the inequality analogous to ω ≥ 1−λR/r “the collateral constraint,” while other authors call it “the
cash flow constraint,” or “the liquidity constraint.” In doing so, they assume that the borrower’s net worth held only
in collateralizeable assets or only in liquid assets could be used to satisfy the constraint. I deliberately avoid the use
of the terms “collateral” or “liquidity” because I am primarily concerned with the question of how the borrowing
constraint is affected by the (level of) borrower net worth, abstracting from the role of the borrower’s portfolio or
liquidity holdings. Needless to say, this is an important issue, but its careful treatment would require a much richer
framework than the one used in this paper.
7
See, e.g., Tirole (2005; Ch.3, Supplementary Sections).

5

withdraw his services, can renegotiate the repayment; see Hart and Moore (1994), Hart (1995), and
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). There is also the costly-state-verification approach of Townsend (1979),
used by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Boyd and Smith (1997) and others. See also the moral hazard
approach used by Holmstrom and Tirole (1997, 1998) and others. A large number of studies are devoted
to the issues of the relative merit (conceptual and/or empirical) of different agency stories; see, e.g., Hart
(1995, Ch.5, Appendix) and Paulsen, Townsend and Karaivanov (2006). In this paper, however, I will
not be concerned with the question of which stories offer most plausible or compelling explanations for
the microeconomic causes of credit market imperfections. Instead, I will simply treat credit market
imperfections as a fact of life, and proceed with investigating their aggregate or equilibrium
consequences, using the highly abstract, reduced form approach, which is meant to encompass all sorts of
agency problems discussed in the microeconomic literature.8
Remark 2: The careful reader must have undoubtedly noticed that I deliberately avoid the use of the
terms such as “debt capacity,” “interest rate,” and “loan market,” and instead use “borrowing constraint,”
“rate of return,” and “credit market.” This is because this paper is concerned with aggregate implications
of credit market imperfections, arising from broad external financing difficulties. Note that the borrowing
constraint arises due to the inability of the borrowers to pledge the entire project revenue to generate the
higher rate for the lenders, not because of any arbitrary restriction on the menus of the financial claims
that they can issue. The main issues addressed here are general enough that they are independent of the
financial structure. Indeed, the model is too abstract to make a meaningful distinction between the equity,
the debt, the bonds, or any other forms of financial claims, which should be viewed as an advantage of the
model.9

3. Partial Equilibrium Models
We have so far looked at only the single agent’s problem in isolation, holding all the prices as
exogenous, and without worrying about interactions among agents. Let us now start letting many agents
interact through equilibrium prices.

8

Broadly speaking, there are three reasons for this. First, the major causes of credit market imperfections, even if we
could identify them in certain specific cases, are likely to vary across investment types, industries, countries and
times. Second, at least qualitatively speaking, much of the aggregate and equilibrium implications of credit market
imperfections do not depend on the specific nature of the agency problems behind the imperfections. The last, and
perhaps the most important, reason is a practical one. This reduced form approach saves space, as well as the time
and effort of the reader. For example, this approach enables me to reproduce the key results of Bernanke and
Gertler (1989) and of Boyd and Smith (1997), each of which devoted many pages and appendices to explain the
optimal contract problem under costly state verification. In contrast, I needed only one short paragraph to describe
the borrowing constraint.
9
See Tirole (2005, p.119) who also argues for the benefits of separating the general issues of credit market
imperfections from the questions of the financial structure.

6

3.1.

Homogeneous Agents: The Net Worth (Balance Sheet) Effect
Let us now consider a continuum of homogenous agents with unit mass. As before, each agent is

endowed with ω < 1 units of the input at period 0 and consumes only at period 1. In addition to the
presence of many agents, the key difference is that the projects run by the agents convert the input into
capital. Capital is then used to produce the consumption good in period 1, with the CRS technology, F(k,
ζ), where k is the total supply of capital (which will be determined in equilibrium), and ζ is a vector of
“the hidden factors” in fixed supply. Let f(k) = F(k, ζ), which satisfies f′ > 0 > f″ and f′(0) = ∞. The
competitive factor markets reward each unit of capital by f′(k) and the residual, f(k) − kf′(k) > 0, goes to
the owners of “the hidden factors” in fixed supply.10
The agents have two means of converting the input endowments into consumption. First, each
agent can run a non-divisible investment project, which converts one unit of the input in period 0 into R
units of capital in period 1 by borrowing 1−ω at the market rate, r, which continues to be treated as
exogenous.11 Since each unit of capital earns f′(k) in consumption, each project generates Rf′(k) units of
the consumption good. Second, each agent can lend the input endowment in period 0 at the rate of return
equal to r, as before. Finally, the total supply of capital is given by k = Rn, where n is the number (or the
fraction) of the agents who borrow and invest. Both n and k = Rn are determined in equilibrium.
By borrowing 1−ω to run the project, the agent can consume U = Rf′(k) − r(1−ω). By lending at
the market rate, r, the agent can consume U = rω. By comparing the two, (PC) now becomes
(3)

Rf′(k) ≥ r.

(PC)

On the other hand, (BC) is now given by
(4)

λRf′(k) ≥ r(1−ω).

(BC)

Note that the two constraints in this model, (3) and (4), differ from those in the single agent’s problem, (1)
and (2), only in that the project revenue, R, is now replaced by Rf′(k), and hence become endogenous.
In equilibrium the investment takes place until one of the (BC) and (PC) becomes binding, so that
(5)

⎧ 1− ω ⎫
Rf ' (k ) = Max ⎨1,
⎬r
⎩ λ ⎭

(PC) + (BC)

This determines the equilibrium value of k.12 When λ + ω < 1, (5) becomes

10

The owners of the “hidden factors” play no active role in the economy other than supplying these factors
inelastically and absorbing the residual income. The hidden factors are introduced here merely to generate
diminishing returns to capital. Later, these “hidden factors” in fixed supply will be given an additional role when
this model is embedded in a dynamic setting to endogenize the borrower net worth.
11
One may think that the agents have access to a storage technology of return, r. Alternatively, this may be viewed
as a model of a small open economy or of an industry.
12
Eq. (5) implicitly assumes the interior solution, which can be ensured by imposing that Rf′(R) < r. Then, (5) holds
with 0 < k < R, which implies that 0 < n < 1.

7

(6)

⎛1−ω ⎞
Rf ' (k ) = ⎜
⎟r > r
⎝ λ ⎠

Thus, (BC) is binding but (PC) is not; the project return is strictly higher than the opportunity cost of the
project. All the agents are eager to invest, but no more agents can borrow and invest, because that would
violate (BC). In short, there is too little investment. In this case, improving the credit market, an increase
in λ, obviously leads to a higher investment. A higher ω also leads to a higher investment. This is the net
worth (or balance sheet) effect. As the borrower net worth improves, the agents need to borrow less,
which eases the borrowing constraint, and hence more investment will be financed. When λ + ω > 1, on
the other hand, (5) becomes
(7)

⎛1−ω ⎞
Rf ' (k ) = r > ⎜
⎟r .
⎝ λ ⎠

Thus, (PC) is binding and the level of investment is optimal. In this case, there is no net worth effect; a
higher ω would not affect the investment.
Remark 3: In this model, only the fraction n of the agents invests in equilibrium, which means that the
fraction 1−n of them becomes the lenders. This obviously raises the question, “How can the credit be
allocated only to a fraction of homogeneous agents?” When λ + ω > 1, this is not a problem, because
(PC) is binding; Rf′(k) = r. Thus, the agents are indifferent between borrowing and lending. However,
when λ + ω < 1, (PC) is not binding, Rf′(k) > r, so that the agents strictly prefer borrowing to lending.
There are two possible resolutions for this. First, we may think that the equilibrium allocation necessarily
involves credit rationing in this case. The credit is allocated randomly to the fraction n of the agents,
while the rest of the agents are denied credit.13 The latter have no choice but to become the lenders; they
would not be able to entice others to switch and become lenders by promising a higher return because that
would violate (BC). Second, we may view the homogeneous agent model as the limit case of some
heterogeneous agent models. For example, the agents may differ in their endowment, distributed
according to G(ω). Then, the equilibrium is given by the threshold level of the endowment, ωc, such that
the agents whose endowments are lower (higher) than ωc become the lenders (borrowers). Indeed, we
will shortly look at such a model with heterogeneous endowments. The above model may be obtained as
the limit when G(ω) converges to a single mass point.
Remark 4: Just in case one might suspect that the results here may be driven by the indivisibility of the
projects, not by credit market imperfections, the role of the indivisibility assumption here is more subtle
than one might think. In the literature, it is often argued that the equilibrium analysis of credit market
13

For example, imagine the following sequential service constraint: the market approves n credits on the first-come,
first-serve basis, and those agents whose credit applications are delayed (for some random reasons) will be denied.

8

imperfections is fundamentally difficult because it is necessary to model heterogeneous agents in order
for credit market transactions to take place. This is not true; credit market transactions can take place
even among homogeneous agents if there are some indivisibility constraints. In what follows, I find it
useful to assume the homogeneous agents within each economy when exploring the effects of
heterogeneity across projects or heterogeneity across countries. The indivisibility is assumed only to keep
the credit market active even among the homogeneous agents. To ensure that the results are not driven by
the indivisibility of the projects per se, it is assumed that a continuum of the agents have access to the
identical (indivisible) projects. This helps to convexify the aggregate production technologies. Having
said this, however, let us now look at some examples with heterogeneous agents.

3.2.

Heterogeneous Agents: Distributional Implications
Let us first allow the agents to differ in the input endowment, or the net worth, where ω is

distributed according to G(ω). Otherwise, the model is the same as above. In particular, the agents share
the same R, that is, they are equally productive as entrepreneurs.
With heterogeneous endowments, different agents face different (BC). For a given level of k,
only those with ω ≥ ωc ≡ 1 − λRf′(k)/r, can borrow. If (PC) holds strictly, Rf′(k) > r, all of these agents
invest. Hence, the total supply of capital is equal to R times the fraction of the agents satisfying (BC), so
that
(8)

⎡
⎛ λRf ' (k ) ⎞⎤
k = R ⎢1 − G⎜1 −
⎟⎥ .
r
⎝
⎠⎦
⎣

As the RHS of (8) is decreasing in k, this equation determines k uniquely. As long as Rf′(k) > r holds at
this solution, it is indeed the equilibrium value of k. If not, the equilibrium is given by Rf′(k) = r. In what
follows, let us assume that the parameters are such that the equilibrium is characterized by (8) with Rf′(k)
> r.
Both a lower r and a higher λ increase the RHS for a given k. Hence, both lead to a higher k.
The reason is simple. These changes increase the present discounted value of the pledgeable revenue,
which raises the borrowing limit. Hence, more agents can finance the project. One can also show that k
goes up, when the distribution of the net worth shifts to the right in the First-Order-Stochastic-Dominant
manner. This is a generalized version of the net worth effect discussed earlier.
Let us now see the distributional implications of improving the credit market. Let λ go up from
λ− to λ+. (Superscript “−” denotes the value before the change and superscript, “+” denotes the value after
the change.) As noted above, an increase in λ leads to an increase in k from k− to k+. This increase in k
occurs because a larger fraction of the agents are now able to finance their projects, which means that the

9

threshold level of the net worth has declined from ωc− = 1−λ−Rf′(k−)/r to ωc+ = 1−λ+Rf′(k+)/r. Therefore,
we need to distinguish three classes of agents. First, those with ω < ωc+ invest neither before nor after the
change. Hence, their utility (period-1 consumption) before and after the change are given by U−(ω) =
U+(ω) = rω. Second, those with ωc+ < ω < ωc− invest only after the change. Hence, their utility increases
from U−(ω) = rω to U+(ω) = Rf′(k+)−r(1−ω). Finally, those with ω > ωc− invest both before and after the
change. Hence, their utility declines from U−(ω) = Rf′(k−) − r(1−ω) to U+(ω) = Rf′(k+) − r(1−ω), because
f′(k) declines from f′(k−) to f′(k+). Figure 1a illustrates these welfare effects.14
Thus, not everyone gains from the credit market improvement. The middle class gains (as well as
the owner of the hidden factors, which are complementary inputs to capital in the production of the
consumption good), while the rich lose. The reason is that credit market imperfections operate like entry
barriers. The political economy implications should be clear. If the political power is in the hands of the
rich who have easy access to credit, the government has an incentive not to improve the credit market.

3.3.

Heterogeneous Agents: Replacement Effects
Let us now consider the case where the agents differ also in their productivity. More specifically,

each agent is identified by (ω, R) distributed according to G(ω, R). Figure 1b illustrates the two
constraints,
(9)

Rf′(k)/r ≥ 1

(PC)

(10)

ω ≥ ωc(k, R) ≡ 1 − λRf′(k)/r.

(BC)

The agents located to the right of the vertical line, R = r/f′(k), satisfy (PC), while the agents above the
negative-sloped line, ω = ωc(k, R) ≡ 1 − λRf′(k)/r, satisfy (BC). Only the agents satisfying both invest.
Thus, the aggregate supply of capital is given by the unique solution to the following equation:
(11)

k=∫

∞
r
f '( k )

∞
R ⎡∫
g (ω , R)dω ⎤dR
⎢⎣ ωc ( k ,R )
⎥⎦

Again, it is straightforward to show that k goes up in response to a lower r, a higher λ, and a First-Order
Stochastic Dominant shift of the net worth distribution to the right.
Let us look at the effects of an improved credit market more closely. An increase in λ from λ− to
λ+ leads to an increase in k from k− to k+, and hence to a decline in f′(k) from f′(k−) to f′(k+). These
changes move the vertical line to the right, and the negative-sloped line to the left, as shown by arrows in
Figure 1b. This means that four classes of the agents may be distinguished. Those in A stop investing.
Those in B continue investing. Those in C start investing. The rest never invest. This means that, as a
14

A change in r would have more complicated welfare effects, but its effects on k and ωc are straightforward: a rise
in r leads to a decline in k by raising ωc. This is roughly consistent with the evidence found by Gertler and Gilchrist
(1994) and others that small manufacturing firms are more sensitive to the tightening of monetary policy.

10

result of a credit market improvement, the rich but less productive agents in A are replaced by the poor
but more productive agents in C.15 Clearly, those in C are better off because they are now able to borrow
and invest in the profitable project, while those in A and in B are worse off because their projects become
less profitable due to the entry by the agents in C.
To explore further implications, let us now look at a more specific example. Imagine that there
are only two types of agents. Their relative productivity and net worth satisfy R1 < R2, ω1 > ω2, so that
type-1 agents are richer but less productive than type-2 agents. Let θ denote the share of Type-1.
Suppose furthermore that 1 − ω1 < (R1/R2)(1 − ω2) and consider the effects of an increase in λ from λ− to
λ+, where 1 − ω1 < λ− < (R1/R2)(1 − ω2) < λ+ < 1 − ω2. Then, for Type-1, (PC) is more stringent than (BC)
both before and after the change, and, for Type-2, (BC) is more stringent than (PC) both before and after
the change. Furthermore, when θ and r are chosen to satisfy the inequalities,

1 − ω2 f ' ( R1θ ) 1
f ' ( R2 (1 − θ )) 1 − ω2
>
≥
>
≥ +
,
−
r
R1
r
λ R2
λ R2
one can show that the equilibrium takes the following form:
•

Before the change (λ = λ−), R1 f ' (k − ) = r , where k − ≤ R1θ . That is, (PC) is binding for Type-1 and
(BC) is violated for Type-2. Some Type-1 invest, but no Type-2 invest.

•

After the change (λ = λ+), λ+ R2 f ' (k + ) = r (1 − ω2 ) , where k + ≤ R2 (1 − θ ) . That is, (BC) is binding
for Type-2. (PC) is violated for Type-1. Some Type-2 invests, but no Type-1 invest.

Thus, with λ = λ−, only the unproductive but rich agents invest, none of whom is credit-constrained. With
λ = λ+, only the productive but poor agents invest, all of whom are credit-constrained. Furthermore,
aggregate investment (the total amount of the inputs going into the projects) may decline as a result of an
improvement in the credit market. This is because investment technologies improve endogenously, as the
credit shifts from the less productive agents to the more productive agents.
This is by no means a peculiar feature of the above example. More generally, a better credit
market does not necessarily mean that there are less credit-constrained among the active firms. Consider
the two extreme cases. If λ = 1, the credit market is perfect so that no firms are credit-constrained. If λ =
0, on the other hand, the credit market shuts down completely. Hence, only the firms that can self-finance
entirely operate so that no active firms are credit-constrained. Only in the intermediate cases should we
expect some active firms to be credit-constrained.

15

Aghion, Fally, and Scarpetta (2007) shows some evidence that, after a financial liberalization, the entry of small
firms force larger firms to scale down or to exit completely.

11

All the models so far have been in partial equilibrium in that the market rate of return required by the
lenders, r, is treated as exogenous. It is now endogenized in general equilibrium.

4. General Equilibrium with Endogenous Saving: Capital Deepening vs. Net Worth Effects
Let us go back to the homogeneous case, where all (investing) agents have the same R and ω. In
this section, we call them “entrepreneurs,” because we also add some agents, “savers”, who have no
access to the investment projects. The savers are endowed with ωo units of the input. In addition to the
period-1 consumption, they also consume some of the inputs in period 0. More specifically, they
maximize Uo = V(Co0) + Co1, subject to the budget constraint, Co1 = r(ωo −Co0), where V is an increasing,
concave function. Then they choose their saving, So = ωo − Co0, such that V'(ωo −So) = r, which defines
their saving function, So(r) ≡ ωo − (V')−1(r). Since the entrepreneurs save all of their endowment, the
aggregate saving of this economy, or the total inputs available to be used in the projects, is given by S(r)
≡ ω + So(r) = ω + ωo− (V')−1(r). Since these inputs are converted into capital at the rate equal to R, the
aggregate supply of capital is given by
k = RS(r) ≡ R[ω + ωo − (V')−1(r)],

(12)

(RC)

where (RC) stands for the Resource Constraint of the economy. As before, (PC) and (BC) of the
entrepreneurs are given by

⎧ 1− ω ⎫
Rf ' (k ) = Max ⎨1,
⎬r
⎩ λ ⎭

(5)

(PC) + (BC)

Eqs. (5) and (12) jointly determine k and r. These equilibrium conditions may be rewritten more
compactly as
(13)

ω + ωo − (V')−1(r) ≡ S (r ) = I (r ) ≡

⎛
1
⎧ 1− ω ⎫ r ⎞
( f ' ) −1 ⎜⎜ Max ⎨1,
⎬ ⎟⎟ .
R
⎩ λ ⎭R⎠
⎝

Figure 2a depicts eq. (13) by the intersection of the upward sloping aggregate saving schedule, S(r), and
the downward-sloping aggregate investment schedule, I(r).16 Note that S(r) depends on the aggregate
endowment, ω + ωo, while I(r) depends on the entrepreneur’s endowment, ω.
Figure 2b shows the effect of a higher endowment of the savers, which shifts the saving schedule
to the right, while keeping the investment schedule intact. An increase in the aggregate saving, which
finances the aggregate investment, means that more capital is produced. Due to diminishing returns, the
marginal productivity of capital declines, which leads to a low rate of return. In essence, this is the
standard neoclassical capital deepening effect.
16

The partial equilibrium model of the previous section may be viewed as a special case, where the saver’s
preferences are given by Uo = ρCo0 + Co1, so that the aggregate saving is infinitely elastic. One may also analyze the
case without the savers by looking at the special case where the aggregate saving is inelastic at S(r) = ω.

12

The effect of a higher λ, when (BC) is binding (λ + ω < 1), is shown in Figure 2c. The
investment schedule shifts to the right, while the saving schedule remains intact. By easing the borrowing
constraint, more entrepreneurs could borrow to finance their investment. With the upward-sloping supply
of saving, this raises the equilibrium rate of return. Redistributing the wealth from the savers to the
entrepreneurs (∆ω = –∆ωo > 0) would have the same effect, through the pure net worth effect.
The effect of a higher net worth of the entrepreneurs (∆ω > 0), when (BC) is binding (λ + ω < 1),
without the offsetting change in the saver’s wealth, may be viewed as a combination of the two effects
discussed above: the capital deepening effect, due to an increase in the aggregate saving, and the pure net
worth effect, which increases the aggregate investment. When the latter dominates the former, as shown
in Figure 2d, the equilibrium rate of return goes up.17 However, once the entrepreneur’s net worth
becomes high enough to make (BC) irrelevant (λ + ω > 1), a further increase in ω reduces the rate of
return, because only the capital deepening effect is at work. In short, the equilibrium rate of return may
respond non-monotonically to the borrower net worth. More generally, a low rate of return in equilibrium
could be a sign of either good or bad economic conditions. In Section 6, we will explore further
implications of this feature of the model in the context of a global economy.18

5. General Equilibrium with Heterogeneous Projects
It has been assumed so far that each agent has access to only one type of project. Let us now look
at a model where agents can choose which project to invest.
Again, we consider the world with homogenous entrepreneurs with unit mass, each of whom is
endowed with ω units of the input at period 0 and consumes only at period 1. To keep it simple, we
assume that there are no outside agents, “savers.” Despite that this makes the aggregate saving inelastic,
credit market imperfections and the net worth can still affect the equilibrium allocations by changing the
composition of credit flows.
Entrepreneurs can choose one (and only one) of J non-divisible projects (j = 1,2, …J). A Type-j
project converts mj > ω units of the inputs in period 0 into mjRj units in capital and mjBj units in the
17

For example, consider the case without the savers, so that the total saving is equal to ω. Then, k = Rω and from
(5), r = λRf′(Rω)/(1−ω). Simple algebra can show that this is increasing in ω in the range, η/(1+η) < ω < 1− λ,
where η ≡ − log(f′)/log(k) = − kf″/f′ is the elasticity of the marginal productivity of capital.
18
Here, the effects of exogenous changes in ω and ωo (as well as λ) on k are studied. What if we also allow for some
feedback from k to ω and ωo? Imagine that the entrepreneur’s net worth and the saver’s net worth in period t, ωt and
ωot, jointly determined kt+1, as described above, which in turn determines that ωt+1 = W(kt+1) and ωot+1 = Wo(kt+1).
(This can be justified, for example, by embedding our two-period agents into the overlapping agents framework, as
discussed later.) The dynamics of this economy then depends on how a change in k affects the distribution of the
wealth between the entrepreneurs and the savers. Aghion, Banerjee and Piketty (1999) conducted analysis along this
line in a similar setting, and found the case of endogenous cycles, where periods of low investment, during which
the wealth distribution is shifted toward the savers, alternate with periods of high investment, during which the
wealth distribution is shifted towards the entrepreneurs.

13

consumption good. Thus, the projects may differ in the set-up cost, productivity, as well as the types of
the goods produced (and their compositions). By running a project-j, the agent can consume mj[Rjf′(k) +
Bj] − r(mj− ω) = mj[Rjf′(k) + Bj − r] + rω in period 1. Since the agent can always consume rω by lending,
the Profitability Constraint for a Type-j Project (PC-j) is given by
Rjf′(k) + Bj ≥ r.

(14)

(PC-j)

We introduce the credit market imperfections by assuming that only a fraction λj of capital and a fraction
µj of the consumption good are pledgeable to the lenders. Then, the Borrowing Constraint for a Type-j
Project (BC-j) is given by
mj[λjRjf′(k) +µjBj] ≥ r(mj −ω),

(15)

(BC-j).

Both (PC-j) and (BC-j) need to be satisfied for the credit to flow into type-j projects.
Figure 3 shows the graph of

⎫⎪
⎧⎪ λ R f ' (k ) + µ j B j
rj (ω ) ≡ Min⎨ j j
, R j f ' (k ) + B j ⎬ .
1− ω / mj
⎪⎭
⎪⎩

(16)

Both (PC-j) and (BC-j) are satisfied if and only if r ≤ rj(ω). In other words, this graph shows the maximal
rate of return that a type-j project can generate to the lenders without violating (PC-j) nor (BC-j). As
shown, the graph is increasing in ω when (BC-j) is the relevant constraint. The reason is that a higher net
worth eases the borrowing constraint as the entrepreneurs need to borrow less. This makes it possible for
them to promise a higher rate of return to the lenders. The graph is flat when (PC-j) is the relevant
constraint.
To describe the equilibrium formally, let nj denote the measure of type-j projects initiated (and of
the agents who invest in type-j projects). Since each type-j projects require mj units of the input, the
aggregate saving equals the aggregate investment if and only if
(17)

ω = ∑j(mjnj).

Since each type-j project produces mjRj units of capital, the total supply of capital is given by
(18)

k = ∑j(mjRjnj).

Finally, as the agents compete with one another for credit and they can choose freely among all the
projects, credit goes only to the projects which have the highest rj(ω) and hence generate the highest rate
of return to the lenders, which can be expressed as
(19)

⎫⎪
⎧⎪ λ R f ' (k ) + µ j B j
, R j f ' (k ) + B j ⎬ ; nj ≥ 0 (j = 1, 2,…J),
r = Max {ri (ω )} ≥ rj (ω ) ≡ Min⎨ j j
i =1, 2 ,... J
1− ω / mj
⎪⎭
⎪⎩

where the two inequalities in (19) are the complementarity slackness conditions. The equilibrium of this
economy is fully characterized by (17)-(19).
Let us now look at some special cases.

14

5.1.

A Model with Pure Capital Projects: Endogenous Investment-Specific Technical Change:19
Suppose Bj = 0 for all j = 1, 2, …, J. Thus, the projects do not differ in the compositions of the

output; they all produce homogeneous capital. In this case, (16) is simplified to
(20)

r j (ω )

⎧⎪ λ j
= Min⎨
f ' (k )
⎪⎩1 − ω / m j

⎫⎪
,1⎬ R j
⎪⎭

Note that the projects can be ranked according to the RHS of (20), which is independent of k, and hence
independent of the allocation of the credit. This means that the equilibrium allocation of the credit has a
bang-bang feature. That is to say, generically, all the credit goes to only one type of project at each given
level of the net worth and when a change in the net worth affects the credit composition, the effect is
abrupt and drastic: the credit switches completely from one type to another. Needless to say, this is
neither realistic nor robust feature of the model, but it greatly helps to simplify the exposition.20
5.1.a.

Procyclical Productivity Change:
Let us begin with the case where J = 2, and R2 > R1 > λ1R1> λ2R2. In words, there are trade-offs

between productivity and agency problems. Project 2 is more productive, hence appealing to the
borrowers, while Project 1 offers more pledgeable return per unit of investment, which makes them
potentially “safer” or “more secure” alternatives for the lenders. Such trade-offs can be important when
some advanced projects that use leading edge technologies may be subject to bigger agency problems
than some mundane projects that use well-established technologies.
Figures 4a and 4b show two ways in which the graphs of (20) for j = 1 and 2 could intersect with
each other. In both cases, there is a critical net worth level, ωc, below which all the credit flows to type-1
projects (n1 = 1 − n2 = 1) and above which all the credit flows to type-2 projects (n1 = 1 − n2 = 0). Then,
from (17) and (18), we can show that the equilibrium supply of capital is
(21)

1

if ω < ωc,

2

if ω ≥ ωc,

k = RJ(ω)ω, where J(ω) =

as shown in Figure 4c. Thus, a higher net worth can raise the productivity of the investment technologies
used from R1 to R2. In short, the investment productivity changes procyclically through the credit
channel. The intuition should be clear. With a low net worth, the agents have to rely heavily on
borrowing. Thus the saving flows into type-1 projects, which generate the higher rate of pledgeable
return.21 When net worth improves, the borrowers need to borrow less, which enables the entrepreneurs
19

This case is taken from Matsuyama (2007).
One could remove this feature by letting the endowment be distributed according to G(ω) and by studying the
effects of shifts in G(ω). The analysis here may be viewed as the limit case where G(ω) converges to a single mass.
21
One may call this effect “flight to safety” (as opposed to “flight to quality”), following Barlevy (2003), who also
developed a model in which the credit composition shifts toward lower productivity projects during recessions.
20

15

to offer the higher return to the lenders with type-2 projects, despite that they generate the lower
pledgeable return per unit of investment.
The equilibrium rate of return is now given by
(22)

⎫⎪
⎧⎪ λJ (ω )
r (ω ) = Min⎨
,1⎬ RJ (ω ) f ' ( RJ (ω )ω )
⎪⎩1 − ω / mJ (ω ) ⎪⎭

Note that a higher net worth affects the equilibrium rate of return through three separate channels. First, it
allows the borrowers to pledge more to the lenders per unit of lending. Second, the credit composition
may shift toward more productive projects. These two channels work in the direction of a higher rate of
return. Offsetting this is the usual capital deepening effect, which works in the direction of a lower
return. The overall effect can go either way.
Let us briefly consider the implications of an increase in λj. One may think that a better corporate
governance or contractual enforcement would always cause the credit to flow into the more productive
investment projects. That is certainly the case, if the improvement raises λ2. But what if it raises λ1?
Look at Figure 4b. In this case, a higher λ1 leads to a higher ωc. This offers some cautions. If an attempt
to improve corporate governance is more effective for the well-established industries, where the nature of
the agency problems are relatively well understood (type-1 projects), it would end up preventing the
saving from flowing into new, but more productive technologies, run by small venture capital, where the
nature of the agency problems are less understood (type-2 projects).22
Dynamic Implications: Credit Traps
We have so far treated ω as exogenous. Let us now explore the dynamic implications of
procyclical investment-specific technological changes by allowing some positive feedback from k to ω.
To keep it simple, we follow Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and consider the world where the economy
consists of a sequence of overlapping generations à la Diamond (1965). Time is discrete and extends
from zero to infinity (t = 0, 1, 2, …). In each period, a new generation of the homogenous agents arrives
and stays active for two periods. For generation-t (those “born” in period t), their “period 0” is period t
and their “period 1” is period t+1. They differ from the two-period agents discussed above only in that,
instead of being endowed with a fixed ω, they are endowed with ζ, “the hidden factors” in fixed supply,
which are used with the capital stock produced by generation-(t−1), kt, in the production of the final good,
F(kt, ζ), (where the final good may be used both as the consumption good and the input for the investment
project.) They thus earn and save ωt = f(kt) − ktf′(kt) ≡ W(kt) during period t. Then, at the end of period t,
they enter the credit relationship among themselves and produce kt+1, which will become available in
period t+1, and used to produce the final good with “the hidden factors” in fixed supply supplied by
22

Recall that Figure 4b is applied when m2/m1 < (1−λ1)/(1−λ2R2/R1) < 1.

16

generation-(t+1). The dynamics of this overlapping generations economy are described simply by
replacing ω by W(kt) and k by kt+1 in eq. (21), which becomes
(23)

1

if ω < ωc,

2

if ω ≥ ωc.

kt +1 = RJ (W ( k t ))W (kt ) , where J(ω) =

For any initial condition, k0, the entire equilibrium trajectory can be obtained simply by iterating (23)
forward.23
In what follows, let us assume that W(0) = 0, W(k)/k is monotonically decreasing, with limk→0
W(k)/k = ∞ and limk→∞ W(k)/k = 0, which is the case if f(k) = kα, with 0 < α < 1. Under these
assumptions, the dynamics of the form, kt+1 = RjW(kt), are characterized by monotone convergence to the
unique positive steady state, for any fixed j. In other words, without heterogeneous projects, or without
credit market imperfections, the dynamics of the economy look like the standard neoclassical one-sector
model à la Solow. This may not be the case with (23), because credit market imperfections cause
endogenous productivity changes in investment technologies.
Figure 4d illustrates one of three generic cases. It shows the case where k* < kc < k**, where k*,
k**, and kc are defined by k* ≡ R1W(k*), k** ≡ R2W(k**), and W(kc) ≡ ωc. There are two stable steady
states, k* and k**. The lower one, k*, may be interpreted as a credit trap. In this steady state, the net
worth is low so that the saving flows into the projects that generate the higher pledgeable return per unit
of investment, although they produce less capital. The resulting lower supply of capital leads to a lower
price of the endowment held by the next generation of entrepreneurs, and hence a low net worth. Which
steady state the economy will converge to depends entirely on the initial condition. If the economy starts
below kc, it converges monotonically to k*. If the economy starts above kc, it converges monotonically to
k**. Thus, kc may be viewed as the critical threshold level for economic development.24
5.1.b.

Countercyclical Productivity Change
Consider now the case where J = 2 with R2 > R1 > λ2R2 > λ1R1, and m1/m2 < (1−λ2R2/R1)/(1−λ1) <

1. Thus, type-1 projects are less productive and generate less pledgeable rate of return than type-2
projects. However, the set up cost is much smaller for type-1 projects, so the agents need to borrow much
less to invest into these projects, which may give type-1 projects advantage over type-2 projects. For
23

This conversion to the dynamic framework is simple in part because the “hidden factors” do not include durable
assets, such as the land. Otherwise, the borrower net worth in period t would depend on the asset prices in period t,
which depends on the future trajectory of the economy, which in turn depends on the investment and the borrower’s
net worth in period t. Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Kiyotaki (1998) argued that such asset price movements
make amplification quantitatively significant. This conjecture has been studied by Kocherlakota (2000),
Krishnamurthy (2003), Cooley, Marimon and Quadrini (2004), and Cordoba and Ripoll (2004).
24
The space constraint prevents me from discussing many broad methodological issues associated with poverty trap
models; see Azariadis and Stachurski (2005) and Matsuyama (2005b) on these issues.

17

example, type-1 projects could represent family operated farms or other small businesses, while type-2
projects represent the investments in the corporate sector. Or, type-1 projects represent traditional light
industries, such as textile and furniture, which require a relatively small initial expenditure, while type-2
projects represent modern heavy industries, such as steel, industrial equipments, petrochemical, and
pharmaceutical industries that require a relatively large initial expenditure.
Figure 5a shows that the graphs of (20) for j = 1 and 2 intersect twice with each other. For an
intermediate value of ωc < ω < ωcc, all the credit goes to type-1 projects, n1 = 1 − n2 = 1. Otherwise, all
the credit goes to type-2 projects, n1 = 1 − n2 = 0. Therefore, the equilibrium supply of capital is now
given by
(24)

k = RJ(ω)ω, where J(ω) =

2

if ω < ωc

1

if ωc < ω < ωcc,

2

if ω > ωcc,

as shown in Figure 5b. When the net worth is very low, the entrepreneurs must rely almost entirely on
external finance, so that the saving flows into type-2 projects that generate more pledgeable return per
unit of investment. As the net worth rises, the entrepreneurs can offer a more attractive rate of return with
type-1 projects than with type-2 projects, because they need to borrow little for type-1 projects. Hence, a
rise in the net worth leads to a shift of the credit toward less productive projects. If the net worth rises
even further, then the borrowing need becomes small enough for type-2 projects that the credit shifts back
to more productive type-2 projects.
In this case, a higher λ1 reduces ωc and hence expands the range in which the savings flow into
the more productive type-2 projects, which offers a caution when thinking about alleviating credit market
imperfections targeted to small businesses.
Dynamic Implications: Leapfrogging and Credit Cycles as a Trap
Let us explore the dynamic implications by replacing ω by W(kt) and k by kt+1 in (24) to obtain

(25)

kt +1 = RJ (W ( kt ))W (kt ) , where J(ω) =

2

if ω < ωc

1

if ωc < ω < ωcc,

2

if ω > ωcc,

Figures 5c and 5d illustrate two possibilities among many. In Figure 5c, kc < k* < kcc < k**, where kc and
kcc are defined by W(kc) ≡ ωc and W(kcc) ≡ ωcc, and the two stable steady states, k* and k**, are again
defined by k* ≡ R1W(k*) and k** ≡ R2W(k**). If kc < k0 < kcc, the economy converges monotonically to
k*. If k0 > kcc, the economy converges monotonically to k**. Hence, as long as we focus our attention to
the range above kc, the dynamics look similar to Figure 4d. However, it can be more complicated if the
economy starts below kc. After the initial phase of growth, the economy will converge to k*, if it falls

18

into the intermediate interval, (kc, kcc). However, if R2W(kc) > kcc, the economy could bypass this stage
and converge to k**, as indicated by the arrows in Figure 5c. In this case, the long run performance of
the economy depends sensitively on the initial condition.25 Furthermore, it suggests the possibility of
leapfrogging. That is, an economy that starts at a lower level may take over another economy that starts
at a higher level.26 In Figure 5d, k* < kc < kcc < k** and R2W(kc) < kcc. For k0 < kcc, the economy
fluctuates indefinitely.27 Along these credit cycles, an improvement in the current net worth causes a shift
in the credit towards the less productive projects that contribute less to the future net worth. The resulting
decline in the net worth causes the credit to shift back towards the projects that help more to build the net
worth in the following period. For k0 > kcc, on the other hand, the economy converges monotonically to
the unique stable steady sate, k**. Thus, this may also be viewed as another example of credit traps
except that the traps here take the form of cycles around kc, instead of the lower steady state, k*.

5.2.

A Model with Private Benefits
A higher net worth might also shift the composition of credit toward less “socially productive”

projects, when the agents are attracted to running some “socially unproductive” projects, because they
generate more “private benefits,” “personal satisfaction” or some other consumption values, which mean
little to the lenders. To capture this idea, let R1 < R2, and B1 > B2 = 0 with λ1 = λ2 = 1 and µ1 = µ2 = 0.
Thus, capital is fully pledgeable, but the consumption good is not pledgeable at all. Type-1 projects are
less “socially productive” than type-2, but it is a lot of fun to run type-1 projects. Let ∆R ≡ R2−R1 > 0.
From (17)-(19), one can show that k = R2ω if ω < ωc ≡ (∆R/R2)m1 or ∆Rf'(R2ω) ≥ B1; k = R1ω if ω ≥ ωc
and ∆Rf'(R1ω) ≤ B1. If ω ≥ ωc and ∆Rf'(R1ω) > B1 > ∆Rf'(R2ω), then ∆Rf'(k) = B1, which means R1ω < k
< R2ω. In words, all the credit goes to type-2 projects either when the agents cannot borrow for type-1
projects or the private benefits of type-1 projects are not big enough to compensate its low productivity in
capital when everybody else invests in type-2; all the credit goes to type-1 projects when the agents can
borrow for type-1 projects and the private benefits of type-1 projects are big enough when everybody else
invests in type-1. Otherwise, the credit goes to both types so that the total productivity (i.e., including the
private benefit) are equalized between type-1 and type-2.
Figure 6a illustrates the case where B1 > ∆Rf'((R1/R2)∆Rm1). Then,
Mathematically, for any ε > 0, there exist open intervals, I* and I** ⊂ (0, ε), such that, as t Æ ∞, kt Æ k* for k0 ∈
I* and kt Æ k** for k0 ∈ I**.
26
For example, imagine that only type-1 projects, textile and other industries that emerged at the time of the first
industrial revolution are available initially and some countries, say Britain, have succeeded in reaching the steady
state, k*. Then, the second industrial revolution arrives and type-2 projects, some new technologies like chemical
and steel industries, are born. Britain, located in k*, is unable to switch to the new technologies, while some, but not
all, latecomers, say Germany, come from behind and take over the technology leadership by successfully adopting
the new technologies.
27
Although these figures depict period-2 cycles, the fluctuations can take a more complicated form.
25

19

(26)

2

if ω < ωc,

1

if ω ≥ ωc.

k = RJ(ω)ω, where J(ω) =

In this case, the agents enjoy running type-1 projects so much that they will do so whenever they are rich
enough to borrow, that is, ω ≥ ωc ≡ (∆R/R2)m1.
Dynamic Implications: Credit Cycles
Again, we can look at the dynamic implications by setting ω = W(kt) and k = kt+1 in eq. (26).
Figure 6b shows the possibility of credit cycles. During booms, a high net worth allows the agents to
pursue projects that generate personal satisfaction but less capital, which slows down the economy.
During recessions, the agents cannot pursue such projects, hence the credit goes to projects that generate
more capital, which leads to the next boom. Note that the welfare implications of these credit cycles are
very different from those shown in Figure 5d. Here the booms occur as a result of the misallocation of
credit, and they end when a sufficiently high net worth eventually corrects the misallocation. If the credit
markets were perfect, and the agents could fully pledge their “private benefits” to the lenders, the booms
would not occur and without the booms the economy would never experience slowdowns. In contrast, the
recessions along the cycles shown in Figure 5d occur as a result of the misallocation of credit.

5.3.

A Model with Pure Capital and Consumption Projects:
Now let us look at the case where J =2 with R1 = R > R2 = 0 and B1 = 0 < B2 = B. Thus, type-1

projects produce only capital, while type-2 projects produce only the consumption good.
The equilibrium conditions, (17) through (19), now become
(27)

ω = m1n1 + m2n2

(28)

k = m1Rn1

(29)

⎧ λ1
⎫
⎧ µ2
⎫
Min ⎨
,1⎬ Rf ' (k ) = r ≥ Min⎨
,1⎬ B ; n2 ≥ 0.
⎩1 − ω / m1 ⎭
⎩1 − ω / m2 ⎭

Note that (29) contains the complementary slackness condition only for type-2. Since only type-1
projects produce capital, f ' (0) = ∞ ensures n1 > 0, hence the first equality in (29).
Figure 7 shows the equilibrium in the absence of credit market imperfection (λ1 = 1, µ2 = 1),
which is given by
(30)

Rω

if ω < ωc,

Rωc,

if ω ≥ ωc,

k=

20

where ωc is now defined by Rf ' ( Rωc ) ≡ B . Thus, all the credit goes to the capital-generating project
until its return becomes equal to the return of the consumption-generating project, which absorbs all
additional credit.
5.3.a.

Persistence of Inefficient Recessions: Financial Accelerator
Starting from this benchmark, let us introduce the credit market imperfection to the capital-

generating type-1 projects (λ1 < 1 and µ2 = 1). With a sufficiently small λ1, there is an interval of ω, in
which some of the credit flows into type-2 projects (k < Rω), despite that type-1 generates a higher return
than type-2 projects, Rf'(k) > B, as shown in Figure 8a. This under-investment to type-1 projects occurs
because (BC-1) is binding: Rf'(k) > λ1Rf'(k)/(1−ω/m1) = B. The graph is upward-sloping over this
interval, because a higher net worth shifts the credit flows from the consumption-generating type-2 to the
capital-generating type-1 projects by easing (BC-1).
By setting ω = W(kt) and k = kt+1, one can easily see how a credit market imperfection of this
kind introduces persistence into the dynamics. Figures 8b through 8d show three possibilities.28 Figure
8b replicates the key result of Bernanke and Gertler (1989). There is a unique steady state, k*, which is
characterized by the under-investment. Now imagine that the economy is hit by a one-time shock, which
temporarily reduces the productivity of the final goods production. Without the credit market
imperfection, the economy would go back to its steady state, RW(kc), after one period. With the credit
market imperfection, however, the economy goes back only gradually towards its steady state, k*, as
indicated by the arrow. Even though the shock itself is temporary, it reduces the current net worth, which
tightens the borrowing constraint, reducing the future investment. This in turn reduces future net worth,
and so on. In short, the credit multiplier or financial accelerator mechanism creates an echo effect,
transforming the i.i.d. shocks into positive serial correlations. In Figure 8c, the unique steady state is k* =
RW(kc), in which the marginal productivity is equalized across projects and there is no under-investment.
However, the financial accelerator is at work at lower ranges. Thus, when the economy starts with a low
capital stock, the credit market imperfection slows down the recovery process, prolonging the inefficient
recessions. In Figure 8d, this mechanism is so strong that it creates two stable steady states, the lower of
which is characterized by the under-investment, and the economy may be permanently trapped into a
recession. All of these cases imply persistence because the type of investment that helps to enhance the
future borrower net worth is subject to credit market imperfections.
5.3.b.

Inefficient Booms and Volatility:29

28

As shown in all these figures, the graph intersects with the 45° line no more than twice. This can be proved in the
same way as the proof in Matsuyama (2004, p.865; Lemma).
29
This and the next cases are based on Matsuyama (2004a).

21

Let us now introduce the credit market imperfection to type-2 projects instead (λ1 = 1 and µ2 < 1).
With a sufficiently small µ2, there is an interval of ω for which the credit continues to flow into the
capital-generating type-1 projects, even after that the return of type-1 projects becomes lower than type-2
projects (k > Rωc), as shown in Figure 9a. This over-investment to type-1 projects occurs because (BC-2)
is binding, that is, µ2B/(1−ω/m2) ≤ Rf'(k) < B. Note that the graph is non-monotonic. It is initially
upward-sloping, because all the additional credit go to type-1 projects because net worth is too low for
type-2 projects to be financed: µ2B/(1−ω/m2) < Rf'(Rω) < B. Eventually, net worth becomes sufficiently
high so that some credit flows into type-2 projects: µ2B/(1−ω/m2) = Rf'(k) < B. In this range, the graph is
downward-sloping because further increase in net worth shifts the credit flow from the capital-generating
type-1 to the consumption-generating type-2 projects by easing (BC-2).
The non-monotonicity of the graph carries over to the dynamics. Instead of putting persistence
into the dynamics, a credit market imperfection of this kind puts volatility into the dynamics. It may
generate over-shooting, oscillatory convergence, or endogenous fluctuations. In Figure 9b, its unique
steady state is unstable and the economy fluctuates indefinitely within the interval I. One can show that
the two conditions are necessary for endogenous fluctuations (as well as oscillatory convergence and
over-shooting) to occur. First, B needs to be sufficiently high; otherwise, credit would never flow into the
type-2 projects. Second, µ2 can be neither too high nor too low. The intuition is simple. If type-2
projects suffer from major agency problems (a small µ2), they are never financed. (Just think of the case
µ2 = 0, which completely shuts down the credit for type-2.) Hence, credit always goes only to type-1
projects. If type-2 projects are subject to minor agency problems (a large µ2), they are financed as soon as
they become more productive than type-1 projects. (Just think of the case µ2 = 1, which brings us back to
the perfect credit market case.) Endogenous fluctuations occur only for intermediate values of µ2. That
is, the condition requires that the agency problems associated with the consumption-generating type-2
projects are too big to be financed when the net worth is low, but small enough to be financed when the
net worth is high.30 Again, the welfare implications of these fluctuations are similar to the case of Figure
6b and opposite of Figure 5d. That is, the misallocation of credit causes booms, which collapse when a
sufficiently high borrower net worth corrects the misallocation of the credit.
An interesting extension is to add some exogenous sources of fluctuations to this model. For
example, suppose that B may change over time. Recall that B needs to be big enough for the graph to
30

Aghion, Banerjee and Piketty (1999) also showed that endogenous cycles occur when the parameter representing
the degree of credit market imperfection has an intermediate value. They interpreted it as saying that countries at an
intermediate level of financial development are subject to volatility. This may be an appropriate interpretation in the
context of their model, but not here. Recall that we are looking at situations where the agents have access to many
investment opportunities and face no borrowing constraint when financing the capital-generating projects, and
seeing what might happen when we change the imperfections that affect the financing of alternative projects which
could divert the credit flow away from the capital producing projects. One could argue that a better credit market
might be more prone to financing such alternative projects, thereby diverting the credit flow away.

22

look as in Figure 9b. If it is not big enough, the downward-sloping part of the graph is located far to the
right so that the RW(kt) intersects with the 45 ° line at k**. If B permanently stays small, then the
economy converges to k**. However, imagine that every once in a while B becomes big enough to make
the graph look as in Figure 9b. With occasional arrivals of alternative investment opportunities, which
divert the credit away from the capital-generating projects, the economy fluctuates around k*, below k**,
at least until B becomes small again.
5.3.b. Hybrid Cases: Asymmetric Cycles and Intermittent Volatility
The two previous cases offer seemingly conflicting views of credit market imperfections, one
suggesting persistence, the other suggesting volatility. However, they are not actually conflicting. Indeed,
each might capture different phases of business cycles as the following hybrid model illustrates.
Let J = 3 with R1 = R > R2 = R3 = 0, B1 = 0, B2 > B3 > 0, and λ1, µ2 < 1, µ3 = 1. Thus, type-1 is
the only capital-generating projects, while there are now two different types of consumption-generating
projects (type-2 and type-3). Between the two, type-2 is more productive than type-3, but type-3 is not
subject to the borrowing constraint. One could show, under certain parameter values,
• Type-2 projects become irrelevant for a small ω (because they cannot satisfy the borrowing
constraints) so that type-1 projects effectively compete with type-3.
• Type-3 projects become irrelevant for a large ω (because more productive type-2 projects can be
financed) so that type-1 effectively compete with type-2.
In other words, the model looks like the “persistence of inefficient recessions” model within the lower
range, and the “inefficient booms and volatility” model within the higher range.
The dynamics may now look like Figure 10a, combining the features of Figure 8c and Figure 9b.
In this case, there is no stable steady state. The equilibrium path is characterized by asymmetric cycles,
along which the economy goes through a slow recovery from recessions, and, once in booms, experiences
a period of high volatility, and then, plunges into recessions.31 Alternatively, the dynamics may look like
Figure 10b, combining the features of Figure 8d and Figure 9b. In this case, there is a unique steady state,
k*.
Now consider the following thought experiment. Imagine that the economy is regularly hit by
some i.i.d. shocks, shaking the graph up and down. Figure 10b represents the situation when the size of a
shock is below a certain threshold level, while Figure 10a represents the situation when the size of a
shock slightly exceeds the threshold level. Then, for most of the time, the economy fluctuates around k*,
exhibiting the financial accelerator mechanism à la Bernanke and Gertler (1989). However, the

31

For the empirical evidence for the business cycle asymmetry, see, for example, Falk (1986), Sichel (1993), and
Acemoglu and Scott (1997).

23

economy encounters intermittently bubble-like asymmetric boom-and-bust cycles, during which it
experiences volatility much larger than the shock that triggers it.

6. General Equilibrium with Heterogeneous Agents and Capital: Patterns of International Capital
Flows
We have so far assumed that capital produced is homogeneous. Let us now look at a model with
heterogeneous capital, where different agents produce different types of capital. One context in which
this problem arises naturally is the case where the agents differ in their countries of residence and capital
they produce are nontradeable.32
Imagine the world economy, consisting of two countries; North and South. The structure of each
country is given by the model with endogenous saving discussed in section 4. The two countries share
the identical technologies and preferences, but they may differ in λ, ω, and ωo. To avoid a taxonomical
analysis, let us assume 1 > λN ≥ λS > 0, 1 > ωN ≥ ωS > 0, and 1 > ωNo ≥ ωSo > 0. Both the input
endowment and the consumption good can be traded between the two countries. This allows the agents to
lend and borrow across the borders. On the other hand, it is assumed that capital (as well as the hidden
factors) is nontradeable. Let us also assume that only the entrepreneurs in the North (South) know how to
produce capital used in the production of the consumption good in the North (South).33 We use this
model to explore the implications of credit market imperfections on the patterns of international capital
flows and economic development.34
The autarky equilibrium of each country is obtained from (5) and (12) by adding the subscripts, j
= N or S, as follows:
(31)

kj = R[Sj(rj)] = R[ωj + ωoj − (V')−1(rj)].

(32)

⎧⎪ 1 − ω j ⎫⎪
Rf ' (k j ) = Max⎨1,
⎬r j
⎪⎩ λ j ⎪⎭

(RC-j)
(PC-j)+(RC-j)

Or, from (13),
(33)

S j ( rj ) =

kj
R

= I j ( rj )

where Sj(rj) ≡ ωj + ωoj − (V')−1(rj) and I j (r ) ≡

⎛
1
⎪⎧ 1 − ω j ⎫⎪ r ⎞⎟
( f ' ) −1 ⎜ Max⎨1,
⎬ ⎟ (j = N or S).
⎜
R
λ
⎪⎭ R ⎠
⎪
j
⎩
⎝

32

Another context in which this problem arises naturally is the case where different agents have expertise in different
industries and/or technologies and capital are highly specialized in a specific industry or technology.
33
Or, the entrepreneur’s productivity, R, declines substantially when operating abroad. This assumption effectively
rules out the foreign direct investment. Later, some implications of relaxing this assumption will be discussed.
34
Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2006) and Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (forthcoming) offer overviews of the
empirical patterns. The model here extends Matsuyama (2005a, Section 2) by adding the savers.

24

Suppose now that the two countries become fully financially integrated so that the agents from
both countries can lend and borrow their input endowments across the borders and repay in the
consumption good without additional costs. By “without additional costs,” is meant, among other things,
that the pledgeability in each country, λj, is independent of the location of the lenders. Of course, one
could think more generally that the borrowers can pledge the fraction φλj (0 ≤ φ ≤ 1), when borrowing
from abroad. Here, however, the analysis is restricted to the two extreme cases of the autarky φ = 0 and
the full financial integration, φ = 1.35
Full financial integration leads to a Rate of Return Equalization (RRE) across the two countries,

⎫
⎫
⎧ λ
⎧ λ
Min⎨ N ,1⎬ Rf ' (k N ) = r = Min⎨ S ,1⎬ Rf ' (k S ) ,
⎩1 − ω N ⎭
⎩1 − ωS ⎭

(34)

(RRE)

where f′(0) = ∞ ensures the interior solution, kN, kS > 0. The world-wide resource constraint (WRC) is
given by
(35)

kN + kS = R[SN(r) + SS(r)] = R[ωN + ωoN + ωS + ωoS − (V')−1(r)]. (WRC)36

The world equilibrium is determined by (34)-(35), which can also be rewritten as
(36)

S N (r ) + S S (r ) =

k N + kS
= I N (r ) + I S (r ) .
R

When λS/(1−ωS) ≥ 1, which also implies λN/(1−ωN) > 1, (RRE) becomes simply f′(kN) = r = f′(kS),
or equivalently, kN = kS. In this case, (BC) is not binding in either country, so that the movement of
international capital flows is entirely dictated by the difference in marginal productivity. As a result of
financial integration, the investment in South is financed by the lending from North, and capital flows
until the difference in marginal productivity is eliminated.
Even when λS/(1−ωS) < 1, so that (BC) is binding in South, the lending flows from North to
South, if the two countries differ mostly in the saver’s wealth. This is illustrated by Figure 11a, which
assumes λN = λS, ωN = ωS, ωoN > ωoS. Then, the two countries share the same investment schedule, while
North’s investment schedule is located to the right of South’s. Hence, the autarky rate of return is lower
in North than in South (rN < rS). With financial integration, the rates of return are equalized. The
equilibrium rate of return is now given by [SN(r) + SS(r)]/2 = IN(r) = IS(r), as shown by the intersection of
the (common) investment schedule and the average saving schedule (depicted by the upward-sloping
dotted curve). North experiences a rise in its rate of return, which increases its saving and reduces its
35

Of course, a priori, there is no reason to believe that the effect is monotone in φ so that the following results should
be interpreted with great caution. However, dealing with the intermediate cases would substantially complicate the
analysis, as one would have to take into account two separate borrowing constraints, one for the domestic and one
for the international borrowings. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) and Aoki, Benigo, and Kiyotaki (2006) both
studied this issue in small open economy models.
36
It is assumed here that the two countries are of the equal size to minimize the notation, even though allowing for
different country sizes is straightforward.

25

investment, and hence run a current account surplus, while South experiences a fall in its rate of return,
which reduces its saving and increases its investment, and hence run a current account deficit. In short,
North’s saving flows to South to finance its development. This captures the standard neoclassical view of
the global financial integration.
The reverse flows occur, however, if North’s autarky rate of return is higher than South’s. In
Figure 11b, the two countries share the same saving schedule, while North’s investment schedule is
located to the right of South’s, hence, rN > rS. With financial integration, the rate of return is equalized at
the level given by the intersection of the (common) saving schedule and the average investment schedule
(depicted by the downward-sloping dotted curve). North (South) witnesses its rate of return to fall (rise),
its saving to fall (rise), and its investment to rise (fall), and hence its current account to turn into a deficit
(surplus). In short, the “capital flight” from South finances North’s investment. One way in which the
situation depicted in Figure 11b can occur is λN > λS, ωN = ωS, ωoN = ωoS. This case captures the view that
weak corporate governance and any other institutional factors contribute to financial insecurity in South
and hence capital flight from South to North. Another way in which the situation depicted in Figure 11b
can occur is λN = λS, ωN − ωS = ωoS − ωoN > 0. In this case, a larger share of the wealth is in the hand of
the savers in the South than in the North. Then, even though the two countries do not differ in the other
dimensions, the “capital flight” occurs from South to North. This is because the firms in the South have
weaker balance sheet conditions than the firms in the North. This makes the former more dependent on
external finance, which in turn makes them less credit-worthy. A financial integration forces the firms in
the South to compete with those in the North when financing their investments, which put the former in
disadvantage. As a result, South’s saving flows to finance North’s investment.
Figure 11c illustrates the case where λN = λS, ωN > ωS, ωoN = ωoS. In this case, North’s saving and
investment schedules are both located to the right of South’s. If the pure net worth effect dominates the
capital deepening effect, we have rN > rS.37 Again, this implies that, with financial integration, the saving
flows from South to North, because the firms in the South have the weaker financial position than those in
the North.38
Note that, in many of these cases, kN > kS continues to hold after the full financial integration, so
that the marginal productivity of investment remains higher in the South: Rf′(kN) < Rf′(kS). Obviously,
the assumption that only the local firms can produce the capital stock used in the production of the final
37

Again, for the case without the saver, rN > rS if η/(1+η) < ωS < ωN < 1− λN = 1 − λS. See Matsuyama (2005a,
section 2).
38
In their moral hazard model, Gertler and Rogoff (1990) demonstrated that capital flows from the rich to the poor
is muted in the imperfect information case, compared to the perfect information case. It is not clear whether the
reverse capital flows occur in their model, unless the net worth of the poor is negative. In the present model, the
reverse capital flows occurs even if the net worth of the Southern entrepreneurs is slightly less than that of the
Northern entrepreneurs.

26

good in each country, plays an important role in the analysis. If any firm from any country could operate
anywhere at the same productivity, the difference in marginal productivity would be eliminated by two-way
flows, in which some FDI flows from North to South (some agents in North produce capital in South), and
at the same time, the saving flows from South to North. Even if their productivity declines when operating
abroad, the two-way flows may occur, as long as their financial advantage is more than enough to offset the
productivity disadvantage of operating abroad.39
So far, it has been assumed that the two countries share the identical technologies. Obviously, if
North is more productive than South, the reverse capital flows could occur.40 For example, if RN > RS, the
capital flows from South to North even without credit market imperfections. However, it is difficult to
draw a sharp distinction between the two theories, one based on credit market imperfections and one
based on technological differences, because the technological differences may be caused by credit market
imperfections. Recall that credit market imperfections may often prevent the credit from flowing into the
most productive agents (in the model of section 3.3) or the most productive projects (in some models of
section 5). To the extent that credit market imperfections cause endogenous changes in investing
technologies, it would be a challenge to tell the two theories apart empirically.
Dynamic Implications: Symmetry-Breaking and Endogenous Inequality
In the above analysis, it is shown how the cross-country net worth distribution (ωN, ωS) affects the
cross-country distribution of the capital stock (kN, kS). Let us now introduce positive feedback from (kN, kS)
to (ωN, ωS). To keep it simple, let us remove the savers from the model. By replacing ωj by Wj(kjt) and kj
by kjt+1 in eq. (31), we obtain the dynamics of each country in autarky, as follows:
(37)

kjt+1 = RW(kjt)

(j = N or S),

which implies that each country converges monotonically to k*, where k* ≡ RW(k*).
From eq. (34)-(35), the dynamics of the world economy under financial integration are given by:
(38)

⎧
⎧
⎫
⎫
λN
λS
Min⎨
,1⎬ f ' (k Nt +1 ) = Min⎨
,1⎬ f ' (k St +1 )
⎩1 − W (k Nt ) ⎭
⎩1 − W (k St ) ⎭

(RRE)

(39)

k Nt +1 + k St +1 = R[W (k Nt ) + W (k St )] ,

(WRC)

which jointly determine (kNt+1, kSt+1) as a function of (kNt, kSt). Hence, from any initial condition, (kN0,
kS0), the equilibrium trajectory can be solved for by iterating (38) and (39) forward.

39

See Ju and Wei (2006, 2007) for some related analysis of the two-way flows of FDI and the lending. Similar
mechanisms might be at work at regional levels within a country. Savings in rural areas, instead of financing the
local businesses, may flow into big city financial centers, which finance the investment into the rural areas by big
businesses whose headquarters are located in metropolitan areas.
40
Lucas (1990), for example, argued that human capital externalities might be the reason why the saving does not
flow from the North to the South.

27

Let us look at the steady states. In what follows, let us restrict ourselves to the case where λN = λS
= λ, which means that the only possible source of heterogeneity across countries is in the initial capital
stocks.41 If the borrowing constraints are binding in both countries in steady state, the steady state
conditions are given by
(40)

f ' (k N )
f ' (k S )
=
1 − W (k N ) 1 − W (k S )

(RRE)

(41)

k N + k S = R[W (k N ) + W (k S )]

(WRC):

Figure 12 illustrates these conditions for an intermediate value of R. It shows that there are three steady
states. One of them, (SS), is symmetric, given by (kN, kS) = (k*, k*). The other two are asymmetric, (ASN)
and (ASS), given by (kN, kS) = (kH, kL) and (kN, kS) = (kL, kH), where kH > k* > kL. Furthermore, (SS) is
unstable because λf ' (k ) /[1 − W (k )] , is increasing at k = k*, so that the pledgeable rate of return in each
country is increasing in the steady state capital stock. The instability of (SS) seems to suggest that (ASN)
and (ASS) are stable. If this is the case, the two-country world economy develops unevenly under financial
integration. Thus, this captures the structuralist view that poor countries are unable to compete in integrated
capital markets against rich countries, which can offer financial security to the lenders and that the global
capital market contributes to uneven development of the world economy, creating the core-periphery
patterns or and the International Economic Order, or the World-System of the Rich and the Poor.42
While the above analysis is suggestive, verifying analytically the two “ifs” above is difficult.43 Instead
of the two-country case, Matsuyama (2004b) studied the above model with a continuum of countries and
showed analytically,
• In autarky, the world economy as a whole converges to the symmetric steady state, regardless of the
initial distribution of capital stocks across countries.
• For a sufficiently small λ, and for an intermediate range of R, financial integration causes a symmetrybreaking.44 That is, the symmetric steady state loses its stability and many asymmetric stable steady
states to emerge. In any stable steady state, some countries become richer than in autarky, while other

41

Sakuragawa and Hamada (2001) studied the case where only one country (South) suffers from the credit market
imperfections in a similar model.
42
The intellectual origin of this view can be traced back to the structuralism of Nurkse (1953), Myrdal (1957), and
Lewis (1977).
43
Incidentally, Boyd and Smith (1997) obtained the exactly same dynamics, (38)-(39), in their two-country model of
the credit market imperfection based on the costly state verification problem. They found numerical examples with
one unstable symmetry steady state and two stable asymmetric steady states. See also Kikuchi (2006), who
considered the case of two countries with unequal population sizes. His simulation shows that, if the country sizes
are similar, the asymmetric steady states are stable. However, he also found endogenous fluctuations around the
asymmetric steady states, when the countries sizes are sufficiently different.
44
Matsuyama (2005c) discusses the notion of symmetry-breaking and its applications to economics.

28

countries become poorer than in autarky. Thus, the world economy is endogenously divided into the
rich and the poor.
Two implications of these results deserve emphasis. First, this example demonstrates how a partial
improvement in the credit market (a move from φ = 0 to φ = 1, while keeping λ less than one) could have
dramatic distributional consequences that are perhaps surprising to many; Financial integration alleviates
the credit market imperfections in some countries and exacerbates the credit market imperfections in other
countries. Second, the instability of the symmetric steady state and the existence of asymmetric steady
states occur only for an intermediate value of R. This suggests the rise and fall of inequality across nations.
That is, as productivity R improves over time, the world economy may first experience divergence, as some
countries start taking off, and then follow by convergence, as other countries start catching up, thereby
generating the inverted U-curve patterns of inequality across nations.
`

One key assumption above is that “hidden factors” are nontradeable. This means that the

investment in one country would improve the future net worth of the entrepreneurs in the same country,
but not elsewhere. If these factors were freely tradeable, then the investment in one country would have
the same effect on the net worth in any country, which would eliminate the persistence of inequality
across countries. The interesting case would be when some of these factors are tradable at some positive
costs. Then, the investment demand would have bigger spillovers in the neighboring countries, which
might lead to some regional contagion effects as well as divergence at the global scale.

7.

General Equilibrium with Heterogeneous Agents with Heterogeneous Projects: Patterns of
International Trade
In all the models with heterogeneous agents above, it has been assumed that each agent has

access to only one type of projects. Let us now discuss a model with heterogeneous agents, where each
agent has access to a diverse set of projects, in the context of international trade.
Consider a variation of the Ricardian model with a continuum of tradeable goods, indexed by z ∈
[0,1], à la Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977). The economy is populated by a continuum of
homogeneous agents, each of whom is endowed with ω < 1 units of the input. Let us now call this input
labor, following the tradition of the trade literature. The preferences are given by symmetric CobbDouglas, so that demand for good z is D(z) = E/p(z), where p(z) is the price of good z and E is the
aggregate expenditure in this economy. To produce any tradeable good, the agents must run a project.
Each project in sector z requires one unit of labor and generates R units of good z. Each agent may run
one project or may simply become a worker, by supplying the labor endowment to other agents.
Since any project requires one unit of labor, and the labor endowment of any agent is ω < 1, each
agent who runs the project must employ 1−ω units of labor supplied by those who do not run the project.

29

Let w be the wage rate, which the employers can pledge to pay to the workers after the project has been
completed and the output has been sold. By running a project in sector z, the entrepreneur earns p(z)R,
out of which they pay the wage bill, w(1−ω), so that they consume p(z)R − w(1−ω). By not running the
project and supplying labor, they consume wω. Hence, any agent is willing to run the project in sector z
if and only if p(z)R − w(1−ω) ≥ wω, and equivalently,
(42)

p(z)R ≥ w,

(PC-z)

where (PC-z) stands for the Profitability Constraint for Sector z. This constraint may not be binding,
because the employers can pledge only a fraction of the project revenue for the wage payment. The
employers in sector z can pledge only λ(z)p(z)R, where λ(z) is continuous and strictly increasing with the
range from zero to one. Because of the partial pledgeability, the projects in sector z take place if and only
if they satisfy
λ(z)p(z)R ≥ w(1−ω),

(43)

(BC-z)

where (BC-z) stands for the Borrowing Constraint for Sector z. Note that the pledgeable fraction of the
project revenue, λ(z), is now sector-specific. The assumption that it is strictly increasing means that the
sectors are indexed such that the agency problems underlying the borrowing constraint are bigger in lower
indexed sectors.
The Cobb-Douglas preferences ensure that, in autarky, the economy produces in all the sectors.
Thus, both (PC-z) and (BC-z) must be satisfied for all z. Furthermore, for each z, one of them must be
binding; otherwise, no agent would become workers. Therefore,
(44)

p(z)/w = max{1, (1−ω)/λ(z)}/R.

It is decreasing in λ(z) < 1−ω and constant for λ(z) > 1−ω. Note that, for λ(z) < 1−ω, (BC-z) is binding
and p(z)R > w. In the sectors plagued by big agency problems, each project must earn higher revenues in
order to assure the workers for their wage payment. The higher prices and higher project revenues in
these sectors are due to the difficulty of obtaining the credit, which restricts the entry in these sectors.45
To see this, let n(z) denote the number of projects run in sector z. Then, the total output in sector z is
n(z)R, which must be equal to D(z) in autarky. Thus, E = p(z)D(z) = p(z)n(z)R. Hence, (44) becomes
(45)

n(z) = min{1, λ(z)/(1−ω)}E/w,

which is increasing in λ(z) < 1−ω and constant for λ(z) > 1−ω. Since each project requires one unit of
labor, and the aggregate labor endowment is equal to ω, the resource constraint in this economy is given
by
(46)

1

∫ n( z )dz = ω.
0

45

This means that the entrepreneurs are not indifferent between the sectors. They prefer running the project in lowerindexed sectors. See Remark 3 for how to allocate the credit when the agents are not indifferent.

30

Summing up (45) for all z and using (46) yields
(47)

n(z) =

min{1, λ ( z ) /(1 − ω )}
1

∫

0

min{1, λ ( s ) /(1 − ω )}ds

ω,

which implies n(z) < ω for low z and n(z) > ω for high z.46 This restricted entry and the resulting excess
profits enable the incumbent firms to satisfy their borrowing constraints in low-indexed sectors.
Now, suppose that the world economy consists of two countries of the kind analyzed above,
North and South. They have identical parameters except λ(z) and ω. Furthermore, it is assumed that
λN(z) = λNΛ(z) and λS(z) = λSΛ(z), where Λ(z) is continuous and increasing in z with the range from zero
to one, and 0 < λN, λS < 1. This means that the agency problems underlying the borrowing constraint have
two components; Λ(z) depends on the technologies and other sector-specific factors, and λN, and λS
depend on corporate governance, legal enforcement and other country-specific factors that determine the
overall level of financial development in these economies. In what follows, let us assume (1−ωN)/λN <
(1−ωS)/λS.
From (44), the autarky prices in North and South, pN(z) and pS(z), are now given by
(48)

pj(z)/wj = max{1, (1−ωj)/λjΛ(z)}/R

(j = N, S).

Since (1−ωN)/λN < (1−ωS)/λS, eq. (48) implies that pN(z)/wN ≤ pS(z)/wS for all z and pN(z)/wN < pS(z)/wS
for z such that Λ(z) < (1−ωS)/λS, as shown in Figure 13a. This means that the credit market imperfections
effectively become the source of North’s absolute advantage over South.
Hence, when North and South trade with each other, the equilibrium relative wage must satisfy
wN > wS, so that South gains comparative advantage in high indexed sectors. Figure 13b shows the
patterns of comparative advantage. North, whose credit market functions better and whose entrepreneurs
are richer and hence more credit-worthy, specializes and exports in the lower indexed sectors that suffer
from bigger agency problems. South specializes and exports in higher indexed sectors, which are subject
to smaller agency problems. The relative wage rate and the marginal sector, Λ(zc) = Λc, are determined
by the balanced trade condition.47

8.

General Equilibrium with Pure Price Effects: A Model of Polarization

46

Note that the binding borrowing constraints in low-indexed sectors give rise to positive profits. The total profit in
sector z is equal to E − wn(z), which is positive for λ(z) < 1 − ω and zero for λ(z) > 1 − ω. Summing it up across all
the sectors and using (46) verifies that the aggregate profit Π is given by Π = E − wω. Hence, the aggregate income
Y satisfies Y = wω + Π = E.
47
This section is taken from Matsuyama (2005a, section 3). Earlier studies that looked at credit-based explanations
of the patterns of trade include Kletzer and Bardhan (1087) and Becker (2002). See Manova (2006a, 2006b) and
Wynn (2005) for more recent examples. This is a part of the growing literature that seeks the institutional origins of
comparative advantage, such as Acemoglu, Antras, and Helpman (forthcoming), Costinot (2006), Levchenko
(forthcoming), Nunn (forthcoming), and Vogel (forthcoming).

31

In all the models we have looked at so far, credit market imperfections distort the allocation of
resources. In the following model, credit market imperfections do not distort the allocation of resources,
and yet, they have distributional implications through their effects of prices. The model is clearly very
special, but it helps to highlight how the net worth effect could operate through prices rather quantities.
Consider a continuum of agents with unit mass, whose input endowment in period 0 is distributed
according to G(ω). In addition to lending x ≤ ω units of the input in period 0 for rx units of consumption
in period 1, each agent now has access to an investment project with the variable scale I ≥ m, which
converts I units of the input into RI units in consumption in period 1. To operate this project at the scale
equal to I, the agent needs to borrow I−ω at the market rate equal to r. Here, m is the minimum
investment requirement, i.e., investing I < m generates nothing. As before, each agent maximizes the
period-1 consumption. By running this project at the scale, I ≥ m, the agent can consume U = RI − r(I−ω)
= (R − r)I + rω. By lending, the agent can consume U = rω. Therefore, if R < r, the agent prefers
lending; if R = r, the agent is indifferent; and if R > r, the agent wants to borrow and invest as much as
possible.
However, the agent can pledge only the fraction λ of the project revenue, hence facing the
following borrowing constraint:
λRI ≥ r(I−ω)

(49)

(BC).

If r ≤ λR, the agent would borrow and invest by infinite amount, which would never occur in equilibrium.
However, for λR < r < R, the agent would borrow and invest up to its borrowing limit, as long as it also
satisfies the minimum investment requirement, m. This means that, for λR < r < R, the investment
demand schedule by an agent with the input endowment, ω, is given by
−1

⎛ λR ⎞
I(ω) = ⎜1 −
⎟ ω
r ⎠
⎝

⎛
⎝

if ω ≥ ωc ≡ m⎜1 −

λR ⎞

⎟,
r ⎠

and zero otherwise. Therefore, the credit market equilibrium is given by
(50)

Aggregate Saving =

∫

∞

o

⎛ λR ⎞
ωdG (ω ) = ⎜1 −
⎟
r ⎠
⎝

−1

∫

∞

m (1− λR / r )

ωdG (ω ) = Aggregate Investment

for λR < r < R. Figure 14a illustrates this condition. The vertical line represents the LHS of (50), while
the downward-sloping curve represents the RHS of (50). For a sufficiently small λ, i.e., if

λ<∫

m (1−λ )

0

ωdG (ω )

∫

∞

0

ωdG (ω ) , the vertical line intersects with the downward-sloping part of the

aggregate investment schedule, ensuring that λR < r < R holds in equilibrium. In this equilibrium, the
relatively rich become the borrowers; they borrow as much as possible from the relatively poor, who have
no choice but to lend to the rich. In this model, what separates the rich from the poor is their relative

32

position in the wealth distribution. They do not have to be rich by any absolute standard, because the
equilibrium rate of return always adjusts to make sure that some agents would have to become lenders,
while others would become borrowers.
Now suppose that λ is reduced further. This shifts down the aggregate investment schedule.
However, the aggregate investment does not change, due to the inelastic aggregate saving. The overall
effect is hence a reduction in r such that λ/r remains constant, which also means that ωc remains intact.
Thus, a change in λ has no effects on the allocation of resources, as r moves endogenously to offset any
effect that λ might have.
However, it has distributional effects, as seen by calculating the period-1 consumption for each
agent as follows:

(51)

⎛
⎝

λR ⎞

⎛
⎝

λR ⎞

(1 − λ ) R
ω
1 − λR / r

if ω ≥ ωc ≡ m⎜1 −

rω

if ω < ωc ≡ m⎜1 −

⎟
r ⎠

U(ω) =

⎟
r ⎠

which is illustrated by Figure 14b. Note that the marginal return of having an additional unit of the input
differs across the agents. For the poor, it is equal to r, which is strictly lower than the project return, R,
because the credit market imperfection prevents the poor from borrowing to invest. For the rich, on the
other hand, it is equal to (1−λ)R/(1−λR/r), which is strictly higher than R, because of the leverage effect.
That is, the credit market imperfections enable them to borrow at the market rate strictly lower than the
project return, R. It is precisely due to the leverage effect that makes the rich wanting to borrow as much
as possible, which is precisely the reason why their (BC) is binding, i.e., eq. (49) holds with equality for
the rich. The arrows depict the effects of a lower λ, which reduces r. By moving the terms of trade
against the poor lenders and in favor of the rich borrowers, this further magnifies the disparity of the
marginal returns on wealth between the rich and the poor.
Long Run Implications on Wealth Distribution: What would happen to the wealth distribution if
we allow for some feedback from U(ω) to ω? Following Banerjee and Newman (1993) and Galor and
Zeira (1993), imagine that each agent has an offspring, to whom he leaves the bequest, which is an
increasing function of U(ω). Since the shape of U(ω), including the threshold level of wealth, ωc, is a
function of G(ω), this determines the dynamic evolution of wealth distribution, Gt+1(•) = Φ(Gt(•)), which
can be iterated to solve for the long run wealth distribution from any initial distribution. In some cases,
the long run distribution converges to a single mass point, regardless of the initial distribution. This
occurs if a fast wealth accumulation by the rich and their strong investment demand drives up the
equilibrium rate of return so much that the poor lenders could also accumulate their wealth by lending,

33

which helps them to cross over the threshold level of wealth. This is the case where the rich’s wealth
“trickles down” to the poor through the credit market. In other cases, the long run distribution converges
to a two-point distribution, regardless of the initial distribution. The credit market causes an endogenous
polarization of the society between the rich and the poor. The rich maintain a high level of wealth in part
because of the cheap credit offered by the poor, who have no choice but to lend their small saving to the
rich. In some other cases, the long run distribution depends on the initial distribution, exhibiting the
history dependence.48

9.

Concluding Remarks
Credit market imperfections provide the key to understanding many important issues in business

cycles, growth and development, and international economics. Recent progress in these areas, however, has
left in its wake a bewildering array of individual models with seemingly conflicting results. Using the same
single model of credit market imperfections throughout, this paper brought together a diverse set of results
within a unified framework. In so doing, it showed how a wide range of aggregate phenomena may be
attributed to credit market imperfections. They include, among other things, endogenous investmentspecific technical changes, development traps, leapfrogging, persistent recessions, recurring boom-and-bust
cycles, reverse international capital flows, the rise and fall of inequality across nations, and the patterns of
international trade. The framework is also used to investigate some equilibrium and distributional impacts
of improving the efficiency of credit markets. One recurring finding is that the properties of equilibrium
often respond non-monotonically to parameter changes, which suggests some cautions for studying
aggregate implications of credit market imperfections within a narrow class or a particular family of models.
Although the simple framework used in this paper enabled me to discuss many issues within the
limited space, it has some limitations. First, it is highly restrictive in the dynamic feedback mechanisms.
For example, it rules out endogenous savings by the investing agents, and hence the possibility that they
may accumulate the net worth in anticipation of their future financing needs, the issue addressed by
Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990), Buera (2006), and others. The model also rules out the possibility that
the borrower’s net worth might depend on the future allocation of credit through the equilibrium
determination of durable assets owned by the borrowers, the issue addressed by Shleifer and Vishny (1992),
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and Kiyotaki (1998). The model also assumes that all the projects are
completed in one period. This rules out any issues associated with multistage financing, such as project
48

In essence, this is what is shown by Matsuyama (2000). The literature on the evolution of household wealth
distributions under credit market imperfections is vast. In addition to the three studies already mentioned, see
Aghion and Bolton (1997), Freeman (1996), Matsuyama (2006), Mookherjee and Ray (2002), Piketty (1997). Just
as in the macro dynamics, the implications of the credit market imperfections on the long run wealth distribution
depend sensitively on the assumptions about the way different households interact with each other, which cannot be
explained here due to the space constraint. A proper exposition of this literature would require a whole new paper.

34

terminations and refinancing, as addressed by Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman
(2006) and Gertler (1992). More importantly, allowing for such multi-period projects is essential for
understanding the liquidity implications of credit market imperfections, as shown by Holmstrom and Tirole
(1997, 1998) and Kiyotaki and Moore (2002, 2005a, 2005b). Second, the pledgeablity λ, which measures
(inversely) the severity of agency problems behind the credit market imperfections, has been treated as
exogenous. To the extent that it reflects the state of financial development, we would like to introduce some
feedback mechanisms from the investments to the credit market efficiency in order to address the two-way
causality between economic growth and financial development, the issue addressed by Acemoglu and
Zilibotti (1997), Greenwood and Smith (1997), Martin and Rey (2004), and Saint-Paul (1992). To the
extent that it reflects the quality of legal or contractual enforcement and other institutional factors, we would
like to endogenize it in order to address some political economy issues. Finally, aggregate implications of
credit market imperfections have been examined in the otherwise neoclassical competitive framework.
While this is useful for isolating the effects of credit market imperfections, it would be interesting to
examine how credit market imperfections might interact with other departures from the neoclassical
framework. For example, introducing credit market imperfections into the monopolistic competitive
framework, also rich and diverse in its aggregate implications as pointed out by Matsuyama (1995, 1997),
would be essential for understanding how credit market imperfections affect the process of product
innovation, firm entry dynamics, as well as agglomeration economies.
I believe that incorporating these additional elements into the present framework would only
strengthen the basic message of the paper. Credit market imperfections are rich and diverse in the aggregate
implications and they provide the key to understanding a wide range of important issues. What has been
discussed here is merely the tip of the iceberg.

35

References
Acemoglu, D., P. Antras, and E. Helpman, “Contrasts and Technology Adoption,” American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Acemoglu, D., and A. Scott, “Asymmetric Business Cycles: Theory and Time-Series Evidence,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, December 1997, 501-533.
Acemolgu, D., and F. Zilibotti, “Was Prometheus Unbounded by Chance? Risk, Diversification, and
Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105, 709-751.
Aghion, P., and A. Banerjee, Volatility and Growth, Oxford University Press, 2005.
Aghion, P., A. Banerjee, and T. Piketty, “Dualism and Macroeconomic Volatility,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1999.
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton, "A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Development," Review of Economic
Studies, 64, April 1997, 151-172.
Aghion, P., T. Fally, and S. Scarpetta, “Credit Constraints as a Barrier to the Entry and Post-Entry
Growth of Firms,” Economic Policy, 2007.
Aoki, K., G. Benigno, N. Kiyotaki, “Adjustment to Capital Account Liberalization,” LSE and Princeton,
2006.
Azariadis, C., and B.D.Smith, “Financial Intermediation and Regime Switching in Business Cycles,”
American Economic Review, 1998, 88(3), 516-536.
Azariadis, C., and J. Stachurski, “Poverty Traps,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,
Handbook of Economic Growth, 2005, 295-384.
Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo, “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development Economics,” in
Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, 2005.
Banerjee, A. V., and A. F. Newman, "Occupational Choice and the Process of Development," Journal of
Political Economy, 101, April 1993, 274-298.
Barlevy, G., “Credit Market Frictions and the Allocation of Resources Over the Business Cycle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, November 2003, 1795-1818.
Beck, T., “Financial Development and International Trade: Is There a Link?” Journal of International
Economics, 57, 2002, 107-131.
Bernanke, B. S. and M. Gertler, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American
Economic Review, 1989, 79(1), 14-31.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, “The Financial Accelerators in a Quantitative Business
Cycle Framework,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of
Macroeconomics, 1999, pp.1341-1393.

36

Bertola, G., R. Foellmi, and J. Zweimueller, Income Distributions in Macroeconomics, Princeton,
Princeton University Press, 2006.
Boyd, J. H., and B. Smith (1997), “Capital Market Imperfections, International Credit Markets, and
Nonconvergence,” Journal of Economic Theory, 73, 335-364.
Buera, F., “Persistence of Poverty, Financial Frictions, and Entrepreneurship,” Working Paper,
Northwestern University, 2006.
Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy, “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, December 2001.
Clementi and H. Hopenhayn, “A Theory of Financial Constraints and Firm Dynamics,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, February 2006.
Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini, “Aggregate Consequences of Limited Contract Enforcement,”
Journal of Political Economy, August 2004, 817-847.
Cordoba, J-C., and M. Ripoll, “Credit Cycles Redux,” International Economic Review, 45, November
2004, 1011-1046.
Costinot, A., “On the Origin of Comparative Advantage,” UCSD Working Paper, 2006.
DeMarzo, PM. and M. J. Fishman, “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contrasting,” Stanford and
Northwestern University Working Paper, 2006.
Diamond, P. A.: “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review, 1965, 55,
1026-1050.
Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer and P. A. Samuelson, “Comparative Advantage, Trade, and Payments in a
Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review, 1977, 67, 823-839.
Falk, B., “Further Evidence on the Asymmetric Behavior of Economic Time Series over the Business
Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 94, October 1986, 1096-1109.
Fisher, JDM, “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology Shocks,” Journal of
Political Economy 2006.
Freeman, S., “Equilibrium Income Inequality among Identical Agents,” Journal of Political Economy, 104,
October 1996, 1047-1064.
Galor, O., and J. Zeira, “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of Economic Studies, 60,
January 1993, 30-52.
Gertler, M., “Financial Structure and Aggregate Economic Activity: An Overview,” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, 1988.
____, “Financial Capacity and Output Fluctuations in an Economy with Multiperiod Financial
Relationship,” Review of Economic Studies, July 1992.

37

Gertler, M., and S. Gilchrist, “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior of Small
Manufacturing Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1994.
Gertler, M., and K. Rogoff, “North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic Capital Market
Inefficiencies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1990, 26, 245-266.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell, “Long-Run Implications of Investment-Specific
Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 1997, 87(3), 342-362.
______, “The Role of Investment-Specific Technological Change in the Business Cycle,” European
Economic Review, 2000, 44(1), 91-115.
Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic, “Financial Development, Growth and Distribution of Income,” Journal
of Political Economy, 1990.
Greenwood, J. and B. Smith, “Financial Markets in Development, and Development of Financial
Markets,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1997.
Hart, O., 1995, Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford University Press.
Hart, O., and J. H. Moore, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1994, 109, 841-879.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real Sector,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112, August 1997, 663-691.
Holmström, B., and J. Tirole, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy,
106, February 1998.
Ju, J. and S. J. Wei, “A Solution to Two Paradoxes of International Capital Flows,” IMF, 2006.
____, “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of International Capital Flows,” IMF, 2007.
Kikuchi, T., “Inequality of Nations and Endogenous Fluctuations in a Two-Country Model,” Bielefeld
University, 2006.
Kiyotaki, N., “Credit and Business Cycles,” Japanese Economic Review, 1998.
Kiyotaki, N. and J. H. Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105(2), 211-248.
____, “Evil is the Root of All Money,” American Economic Review, May 2002,
____, “Financial Deepening,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2005a, 3(2-3), 701-713.
____, “The 2002 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture: Liquidity and Asset Prices,” International Economic
Review, May 2005b, 46, 317-349.
Kletzer, K., and P. Bardhan, “Credit Markets and Patterns of International Trade,” Journal of
Development Economics, 27, 1987, 57-70.
Kocherlakota, N. R., Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Summer 2000, 2-10.

38

Kose, M., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S-J. Wei, “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal,” Journal of
Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Krishnamurthy, A., “Collateral Constraints and the Amplification Mechanism,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 111, August 2003, 277-292.
Levchenko, A., “Institutional Quality and International Trade,”Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Lewis, W.A.: The Evolution of the International Economic Order, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1997.
Lucas, R.E., Jr. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries,” American Economic Review,
May 1990.
Manova, K., “Credit Constraints in Trade: Financial Development and Export Composition,” Harvard,
2006a.
____, “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms and International Trade,” Harvard, 2006b.
Martin, P., and H. Rey, “Financial Super-Markets: Size Matters for Asset Trade,” Journal of International
Economics, December 2004, 335-361.
Matsuyama, K., “Complementarities and Cumulative Processes in Models of Monopolistic Competition,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 1995, 33, 701-729.
____, “The 1996 Nakahara Lecture: Complementarity, Instabiltiy, and Multiplicity,” Japanese Economic
Review, 48, September 1997: 240-266.
____, “Endogenous Inequality,” Review of Economic Studies, 2000, 67(4), pp.743-759.
____, “The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly: An Inquiry into the Causes and Nature of Credit Cycles,”
Northwestern University, 2004a.
____, “Financial Market Globalization, Symmetry-Breaking, and Endogenous Inequality of Nations,”
Econometrica, 2004b, 72(3), 853-884.
____, “Credit Market Imperfections and Patterns of International Trade and Capital Flows,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 2005a, 3(2-3), 714-723.
____, “Poverty Traps,” forthcoming in Larry E. Blume, and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition, Macmillan, forthcoming, 2005b.
____, “Symmetry-Breaking,” forthcoming in Larry E. Blume, and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition, Macmillan, forthcoming, 2005c.
____, “The 2005 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture: Emergent Class Structure,” International Economic Review,
2006, 47(2), 327-360.
____, “Credit Traps and Credit Cycles,” American Economic Review, 97, March 2007, 503-516.
Mookherjee, D., and D. Ray, “Is Equality Stable?” American Economic Review, 92, May 2002, 253-259.
Myrdal, G.: Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions, London: Duckworth, 1957.

39

Nunn, N., “Relation-Specificity, Incomplete Contacts, and Patterns of Trade,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Nurkse, R.: Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries, New York: Blackwell, 1953.
Paulsen, A., and R. Townsend, and A. Karaivanov, “Distinguishing Limited Liability from Moral Hazard in
a Model of Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2006.
Piketty, T., "The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and the Interest Rate with Credit Rationing," Review
of Economic Studies, 64, April 1997, 173-189.
Prasad, E., R. G. Rajan, and A. Subramanian, “Patterns of International Capital Flows and Their
Implications for Economic Development,” in The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy
Implications, The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2006.
Saint-Paul, G. Technology Choice, Financial Markets and Economic Development. European Economic
Review 36, 1992, 763–81.
Sakuragawa, M., and K. Hamada, “Capital Flight, North-South Lending, and Stages of Economic
Development,” International Economic Review, 2001.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach,”
Journal of Finance, September 1992.
Sichel, D. E., “Business-Cycle Asymmetry: A Deeper Look,” Economic Inquiry, 31, April 1993. 224-236.
Tirole, J., The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2005.
Townsend, R. M. (1979), “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verification,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 21, 221-272.
Vogel, J., “Institutions and Moral Hazards in Open Economies” Journal of International Economics,
forthcoming.
Wynn, J., “Wealth as a Determinant of Comparative Advantage,” American Economic Review, 95, March
2005, 226-254.

40

Figure 1a: Distributional Impacts

Figure 1b: Replacement Effects

ω

U(ω)
1

A

B

1−λ−
Rf′(k−)−r
1−λ+

Rf′(k+)−r

C
ωc+

O

ωc−

ω

O

r/f'(k−) r/f'(k+) r/λ+f'(k+) r/λ−f'(k−)

Figure 2a: General Equilibrium with Endogenous Saving

r

I (r ) =

⎛
1
⎧ 1− ω ⎫ r ⎞
( f ' ) −1 ⎜⎜ Max⎨1,
⎬ ⎟⎟
R
⎩ λ ⎭R⎠
⎝

S(r) = ω+ωO−(V')−1(r)

O

k/R

41

R

Figure 2b: Capital Deepening Effect: ∆ω0 > 0

r

S(r) = ω+ωO−(V')−1(r)

I(r)
k/R

O

Figure 2c: Net Worth Effect: ∆ω = −∆ω0 > 0 (and ∆λ > 0) for λ + ω < 1.

r

S(r)

I (r ) =

1
⎛ (1 − ω )r ⎞
( f ' ) −1 ⎜
⎟
R
⎝ λR ⎠

k/R

O

Figure 2d: Combined Effects: ∆ω > 0, for λ + ω < 1,

r

S(r)

I(r)
O

k/R
42

Figure 3:

(BC-j)

rj(ω)
(PC-j)
Rj f '(k)+Bj

λjRj f '(k)+µjBj
ω

mj

O
Figure 4a

Figure 4b

r2(ω)/f '(k)

r2(ω)/f '(k)
R2

R2

R1

R1

r1(ω)/f '(k)

λ1R1

λ1R1

λ2R2

λ2R2
ω

ωc

O

Figure 4c: Procyclical Productivity Change

r1(ω)/f '(k)

ω

ωc

O

Figure 4d: Credit Traps

k
R2ω

45°

kt+1

R2W(kt)
R1W(kt)

R1ω

O

ωc

ω

O

k*

kc k**

kt

43

Figure 5a

Figure 5b

k

r2(ω)/f '(k)

R2
R1

R2ω

r1(ω)/f '(k)

λ2R2
R1ω
λ1R1
ωc

O

O

ω

ωcc

Figure 5c: Leapfrogging

ωc

ω

ωcc

Figure 5d: Credit Cycles as a Trap

45°

kt+1

O
kc k* kcc k**

kt+1

45°

kt

kt

O

Figure 6a

k* kc kcc k**

Figure 6b: Credit Cycles

k
kt+1

R2ω

45°

R1ω
(f')−1(B1/∆R)

O

(∆R/R2)m1

kt

ω
O

k* kc

k**

44

Figure 7: Perfect Credit Case

k
Rωc

O

ω

ωc

Figure 8a: Under-investment of Type-1

Figure 8b: Financial Accelerator

kt+1
k

RW(kt)

45°

λ1Rf'(k) = B(1−ω/m1)
Rωc

RW(kc)

ωc

O

m1(1−λ1)

ω

kc

O

Figure 8c: Slow Recovery

kt

Figure 8d: Multiple Steady States

kt+1

kt+1
45°

W−1(m1(1−λ1))

45°

RW(kc)

RW(kc)

O

k* W−1(m1(1−λ1))

kt

O

W−1(m1(1−λ1))

kt

45

Figure 9a: Over-Investment to Type-1

Figure 9b: Inefficient Booms and Volatility

kt+1
k

45°
RW(kt)

(1−ω/m2)Rf'(k) = Bµ2

k*

Rωc

I

RW(kc)

ωc

O

m1(1−µ2)

ω
O

k0

I
Figure 10a

k**

kt

Figure 10b

kt+1

kt+1
45°
45°

k*

k0

kt

kt

k*

46

Figure 11a: Neoclassical View of Financial Integration (λN = λS, ωN = ωS, ωoN > ωoS)

SS(r)

r

SN(r)

rS

rN

IN(r) = IS(r)

O

kS/R

kN/R

Figure 11b: Capital Flight (I): λN > λS, ωN = ωS, ωoN = ωoS; OR
Capital Flight (II); λN = λS, ωN − ωS = ωoS − ωoN > 0.

SN(r) =SS(r)

r
rN

rS
IS(r)
O

IN(r)

kS/R kN/R

Figure 11c: Capital Flight (III): λN = λS, ωN > ωS ωoN = ωoS.

SS(r)

r

SN(r)
rN
rS

IS(r)
O

kS/R

IN(r)

kN/R
47

Figure 12: Symmetry-Breaking and the Emergence of Core-Periphery Patterns

kS
W−1(1)
kH

(WRC)

ASS

kN = kS

k*

SS

f−1(1)

(RRE)

kL
O

ASN
kL

Figure 13a: Patterns of Absolute Advantage

pN(z)/wN

f−1(1)

k* kH

W−1(1)

kN

Figure 13b: Patterns of Comparative Advantage

pS(z)/wS

wN/R

pN(z)

wS/R

pS(z)

1/R

O

(1−ωN)/λN

(1−ωS)/λS

Λ(z)

O (1−ωN)/λN Λc (1−ωS)/λS

Λ(z)

48

Figure 14a

Figure 14b

(1 − λ ) R
ω
1 − λR / r

U(ω)

r

Rω
⎛ λR ⎞
⎜1 −
⎟
r ⎠
⎝

R

−1

∫

∞

m (1− λR / r )

ωdG (ω )

rω

λR

O

∫

∞

o

ω
ωdG (ω )

O

m(1−λR/r)

49

