NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION DIFFUSION EFFECTS IN INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS' COMMON STOCK PURCHASES:
COVET THY NEIGHBORS' INVESTMENT CHOICES
Zoran Ivkovich
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 13201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13201

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We extend our gratitude to an anonymous discount broker for providing the data on individual investors'
positions, trades, and demographics. Special thanks go to Terry Odean for his help in obtaining and
understanding the data set. Both authors acknowledge the financial support from the College Research
Board at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. We thank Jean Roth of the NBER for assistance
with the 1990 Census data. We also thank seminar participants at the University of Florida and the
University of Illinois for their comments and feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2007 by Zoran Ivkovich and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Information Diffusion Effects in Individual Investors' Common Stock Purchases: Covet Thy
Neighbors' Investment Choices
Zoran Ivkovich and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 13201
June 2007
JEL No. D14,D83,G11
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between households' stock purchases and stock purchases made by their neighbors.
A ten percentage point increase in neighbors' purchases of stocks from an industry is associated with
a two percentage point increase in households' own purchases of stocks from that industry. The effect
is considerably larger for local stocks and among households in more social states. Controlling for
area sociability, households' and neighbors' investment style preferences, and the industry composition
of local firms, we attribute approximately one-quarter to one-half of the correlation between households'
stock purchases and stock purchases made by their neighbors to word-of-mouth communication.
Zoran Ivkovich
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
ivkovich@uiuc.edu
Scott Weisbenner
Department of Finance
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
304C David Kinley Hall
1407 W. Gregory Drive
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
weisbenn@uiuc.edu

Despite the fact that individuals collectively hold about one-half of the U.S. stock market,
information diffusion effects among individual investors—the relation between the investment
choices made by an individual investor’s neighborhood and the investor’s own investment
choices—have received relatively little attention in the academic literature, probably because of
the lack of detailed data. If present, such effects undoubtedly can affect individual investors’
asset allocation decisions. Moreover, trades based on information diffusion might be sufficiently
correlated and condensed in time to affect stock prices.
In the domain of institutional investors, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) study word-ofmouth effects among mutual fund managers and find that “…a manager is more likely to hold (or
buy, or sell) a particular stock in any quarter if other managers in the same city are holding (or
buying, or selling) that same stock.” This study complements their work by ascertaining whether
such trading patterns are a broader phenomenon. For example, individual investors may seek to
reduce search costs and circumvent their lack of expertise by relying on word-of-mouth
communication with those around them. Indeed, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) present a model
in which stock market participation may be influenced by social interaction. Such social
interaction can serve as a mechanism for information exchange via “word-of-mouth” and/or
“observational learning” (Banerjee (1992), Ellison and Fudenberg (1993, 1995)). Duflo and Saez
(2002, 2003) present evidence of peer effects in the context of retirement plans. They find that an
employee’s participation in retirement plans and choices within those plans are affected by
participation decisions and choices made by other employees in the same department.
In the international arena, Feng and Seasholes (2004) present evidence of herding effects
among individual investors who hold individual brokerage accounts in the People’s Republic of
China. A unique feature of their data (investors seeking to place trades in person can` do so only

1

in the brokerage house in which they opened their accounts) enables Feng and Seasholes to
disentangle word-of-mouth effects from common reaction to releases of public information.
They find that common reaction to public information (trades placed across branches in the same
region, local to the company), rather than word-of-mouth effects (trades placed in the same
branch), seems to be a primary determinant of herding in that context.
Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) find that proximity to corporate headquarters, the
language of communication with investors, and the company’s CEO’s cultural origin are
important determinants of Finnish households’ stock investments. Whereas these findings could
be consistent with word-of-mouth effects influencing portfolio choice, they could also reflect
households’ tastes for familiarity—preference to invest in companies that disseminate annual
financial reports in their native tongues or feature a CEO with the same origin.
We study information diffusion effects among U.S. individual investors by using a
detailed data set of common-stock investments 35,673 U.S. households made through a large
discount brokerage in the period from 1991 to 1996. Throughout the paper, we loosely refer to
the correlation between households’ investments and their neighbors’ investments as
“information diffusion.” This term is intended to encapsulate several potential reasons why such
correlation exists—word-of-mouth effects, similarity in preferences, as well as common local
reaction to news. To further characterize information diffusion and word-of-mouth effects, we
consider state-level measures of sociability and find that the level of sociability prevailing in the
state to which the household belongs (likely a strong correlate of the presence of word-of-mouth
effects) can explain a significant portion of the overall diffusion effect. Moreover, we
disentangle the diffusion into the influences of common preferences, structure of the local
industry, and word-of-mouth effects.

2

Putting our results in perspective and comparing them with the findings from Feng and
Seasholes (2004) delivers a new, richer understanding of the different mechanisms that govern
individuals’ investment decisions across various societies. Indeed, whereas Feng and Seasholes
(2004) report that individual investors’ correlated investment decisions are driven by common
reaction to locally-available news, with no evidence of word-of-mouth effects among Chinese
investors, our estimates suggest that word-of-mouth effects among U.S. investors are strong,
particularly in more social areas. This discrepancy is consistent with the differences in the
fundamental characteristics of the two societies. Freedom House, which has been producing
annual ratings of political and civil rights for more than 200 countries for the past three decades
(Freedom House (2004)), has ranked the U.S. among the highest and the People’s Republic of
China among the lowest along the dimension of civil liberties. An essential ingredient of the civil
liberties score is prevalence of open and free discussion (or absence thereof). Coupled with the
fact that many, if not most companies in the People’s Republic of China are at least partly
government-owned, it is very plausible that exchanging investment-relevant information in a
society deprived of open and free discussion and many other civil liberties is rare and modest.
Even within the U.S., there is variation in sociability (e.g., membership in clubs, trust in
other people). If word-of-mouth is an important contributor to households’ stock purchases, the
observed correlation in a household’s portfolio allocation and that of its neighbors should be
higher in the more social areas. Other explanations for information diffusion effects, such as
correlated preferences and common local reaction to news, should not vary with the sociability
of the community. Using state-level variation in sociability measures enables us to differentiate
among the competing hypotheses that can explain trading patterns of U.S. investors.

3

Overall, we find a strong information diffusion effect (“neighborhood effect”): a ten
percentage point increase in purchases of stocks from an industry made by a household’s
neighbors is associated with an increase of two percentage points in the household’s own
purchases of stocks from that industry. We pay particular attention to the differentiation between
information diffusion effects related to local stocks (defined as companies headquartered within
50 miles from the household) and the effects related to non-local stocks. Whereas the key
neighborhood effects—similarity in preferences, the impact of the structure of the local industry,
and word-of-mouth—can prevail among the investments both local and non-local to the
household, most of those effects will likely be far more pronounced among local investments
because, as demonstrated for both professional money managers (Coval and Moskowitz (2001))
and individual investors (Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)), the flow of value-relevant
information regarding local companies appears to be higher and of better quality than the
comparable flow regarding remote, non-local companies.
Not surprisingly, we indeed find that information diffusion effects are considerably
stronger for local purchases than for non-local ones. For example, if the neighborhood’s
allocation of local purchases to a particular industry increases by ten percentage points, a
household tends to increase its own allocation of local purchases to the industry by a comparable
amount. This result adds another dimension to the already documented high degrees of
individual investors’ locality, both in the U.S. (Ivković and Weisbenner (2005), Zhu (2002)) and
abroad (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), Massa and Simonov (2006)): not only do investors tend
disproportionately to invest locally, but there are also strong information diffusion effects in their
neighborhood.

4

We further find that a household’s sensitivity to neighbors’ investment choices increases
with the population of the household’s community. Such diffusion in stock trading affects
individual investors’ asset allocation decisions. For example, although residents in larger
metropolitan areas have substantially more diverse investment opportunities and tend to invest
more in local stocks, we find that their local stock investments tend to remain just as
concentrated as those made by residents of less populated communities (who have a significantly
smaller pool of potential local investments). This tendency is consistent with the notion that
residents in more populous geographic areas might be exposed to word-of-mouth effects to a
higher degree than residents in less highly populated areas.
Finally, to disentangle the contributions of correlated preferences and the structure of the
local economy to the observed correlation between individual investors’ stock purchases and
those of their neighbors from “word-of-mouth” effects, we conduct two tests. First, we consider
the level of sociability of the state to which the household belongs and find that the relation
between industry-level household purchases and neighborhood purchases is substantially
stronger among households in the more sociable states. Second, we consider the households’
own preferences (as revealed by the composition of their respective portfolios across industries
at the beginning of each quarter), preferences of the households’ respective neighborhoods (as
revealed by the composition of the neighborhoods’ aggregate portfolios), as well as the
composition of local firms and workers by industry. We find that one-quarter to one-half of the
overall diffusion effect among both local and non-local investments cannot be attributed to these
sources. We regard the remaining portions of the diffusion effect as a conservative lower bound
on the impact of word-of-mouth communication effects on household trading decisions.
Disentangling the overall information diffusion effect into word-of mouth communication and

5

other diffusion effects potentially yields further insight as to how correlated trading among
individuals may influence stock prices.
Our results complement and extend those of Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005), suggesting
that word-of-mouth effects are a broad phenomenon that affects financial decisions made by both
mutual fund managers and individual investors. The two studies provide evidence supportive of
word-of-mouth effects using different techniques, thereby adding to the robustness of the overall
finding. Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) rule out alternative explanations for correlated trading
patterns by examining trading activity before and after Regulation FD and by focusing on trades
in stocks for which investor relations are unlikely to be a contributing factor (stocks not local to
the managers and small stocks). In this paper, we disentangle possible explanations for correlated
trading patterns by exploiting differences in sociability of communities across the U.S., as well
as introducing several controls for similarity in investment preferences within the community (as
manifested by previous household investment decisions) and the composition of the local
economy.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the data and
summary statistics. We present our basic findings concerning information diffusion, the impact
of the size of the population residing in the household’s community, and dissipation of diffusion
effects with distance from the household in Section 2. We examine the role of sociability and
identify the contributions of correlated preferences, the structure of the local economy, and
word-of-mouth communication to overall diffusion in individuals’ investment choices in Section
3. Section 4 concludes.

6

1. Data and Descriptive Statistics
1.1 Data
The primary data set, obtained from a large discount broker, consists of individual investors’
monthly positions and trades over a six-year period from 1991 to 1996. It covers the investments
that 78,000 households made through the discount broker, including common stocks, mutual
funds, and other securities. Each household could have as few as one and as many as 21 accounts
(the median number of accounts per household is two). The information associated with each
trade includes the account in which the trade was made. A separate data file contains the
information associated with each account, including the household to which the account belongs.
This structure of the data allows us to associate with each trade the household that made it. For
further details see Barber and Odean (2000).
In this paper we focus on the common stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq
exchanges. Common stock investments constitute roughly three-quarters of the total value of
household investments through the brokerage house in the sample. We use the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database to obtain information on stock prices and returns
and COMPUSTAT to obtain several firm characteristics, including company headquarters
location (identified by its state and county codes). We use the headquarters location as opposed
to the state of incorporation because firms often do not have the majority of their operations in
their state of incorporation. 1
We exclude the stocks that we could not match with CRSP and COMPUSTAT; they were
most likely listed on smaller exchanges. We also exclude stocks not headquartered in the
continental U.S. The resulting “market”—the universe of stocks about which we could obtain
the necessary characteristics and information—is representative of the overall market. For

7

example, at the end of 1991 the “market” consists of 5,478 stocks that cover 89% of the overall
market capitalization at the time.
The sample of households used in this study is a subset of the entire collection of
households for which we could ascertain their zip code and thus determine their location. We
obtained the latitude and longitude for each of the zip codes from the U.S. Census Bureau’s
Gazetteer Place and Zip Code Database. Company locations come from the COMPUSTAT
Annual Research Files, which contain the information regarding company headquarters’ county
codes. Finally, we identify the latitude and longitude for each county from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s Gazetteer Place and Zip Code Database as well. We use the standard formula for
computing the distance d(a,b) in statutory miles between two points a and b as follows:

d(a,b) = arccos{cos(a1)cos(a2)cos(b1)cos(b2)+cos(a1)sin(a2)cos(b1)sin(b2)+sin(a1)sin(b1)} r,

(1)

where a1 and b1 (a2 and b2) are the latitudes (longitudes) of the two points (expressed in radians),
respectively, and r denotes the radius of the Earth (approximately 3,963 statutory miles).
The sample size necessitates two adjustments. First, instead of fitting regressions based
on individual stocks we aggregate all the buys in each quarter by assigning firms to one of the
following 14 industry groups based on their SIC codes: mining, oil and gas, construction, food,
basic materials, medical/biotechnology, manufacturing, transportation, telecommunications,
utilities, retail/wholesale trade, finance, technology, and services. Moreover, although 35,673
households purchased common stocks at some point during the sample period, in each quarter
we consider only the households that made some purchases during the quarter. In sum, there are
23 complete quarters in the sample period (1991:1 to 1996:3), 14 industries, and 7,000 to 9,000
households that made stock purchases in a quarter. This leads to a total of 2,678,004
8

observations, where each observation has several control variables, as well as 322 industryquarter dummy variables (14 industries x 23 quarters).
In most analyses, we relate the industry composition of a household’s purchases during a
quarter to the industry composition of all the purchases of the household’s neighbors (households
located within 50 miles) made during the quarter, plus appropriate controls. We choose this
distance because there is evidence that 50 miles captures most of one’s social interactions. 2
Finally, in some analyses we relate the extent of information diffusion to the sociability
that prevails in the area surrounding the household. To capture sociability, we use state-level
values of the Comprehensive Social Capital Index, as collected and presented in Putnam (2000). 3
We classify households according to their state’s Comprehensive Social Capital Index and split
the sample of households into sociable and non-sociable ones, where the breakpoint is the
sociability measure of the median household in the sample. 4

1.2 Summary Statistics
Table 1 summarizes quarterly household stock purchases at the industry level. Summary
statistics are reported annually, as well as for the entire sample period (bottom row of the table).
The first column presents the number of household-quarter-industry (h, t, i) combinations in a
given year such that household h made at least one purchase in quarter t in industry i. The second
column tallies the number of distinct households appearing in the sample in a given year. The
third column lists average dollar values of households’ quarterly purchases, where median values
are reported in parentheses underneath the mean values. The last column breaks down the
purchases according to their distances from the household (i.e., whether the firm headquarters is
located within 50 miles of the household). There are a total of 191,286 “purchases”—householdquarter-industry (h, t, i) combinations for which there was a purchase by household h in quarter t
9

in industry i—with 16,000-20,000 households making purchases each year, for a total of 35,673
distinct households throughout the sample period. The distribution of the dollar values of
quarterly purchases is skewed; whereas the mean quarterly purchase was around $29,000, the
median value was substantially smaller, around $8,000. The fourth column shows individual
investors’ disproportionate preference for local stocks (17.1% of all purchases), a phenomenon
studied in Ivković and Weisbenner (2005) and Zhu (2002).

2. Information Diffusion Effects
2.1 Basic Regression Specification
We begin by classifying individual stock purchases made by household h in quarter t into
industries i = 1, 2, … , 14 and compute fh,t,i, the dollar-weighted share of a household’s quarterly
buys in each industry. 5 In various analyses, the aggregation into 14 industries is done across all
stock purchases, local purchases only, and non-local purchases only. Moreover, for each
household h and each quarter t we also compute F−50h, t , i , i = 1, 2, … , 14, that is, the proportion
of buys made by all neighboring households within 50 miles from household h (excluding
household h) in each of the 14 industries. For presentational convenience, throughout the paper
the household industry shares fh,t,i are expressed in percentage points (that is, they are multiplied
by 100), whereas neighboring household industry shares are not. Finally, we employ industryquarter effects to allow for market-wide variation in demand across industries and time by
defining 322 dummy variables Dt,i, t = 1, …, 23 (from quarter 1991:1 to 1996:3), and i = 1, 2, …
, 14. These controls ensure that our results are not driven by, for example, technology stocks
beating analysts’ expectations, which belong to the common information set that may affect

10

buying patterns of all investors, but rather reflect the differences in households’ propensity to
purchase technology stocks across different communities. In sum, the basic regression is:

f h ,t ,i = β

F−50
h ,t ,i

23 14

+∑

∑ γt ,i Dt ,i + εh,t ,i

(2)

t =1 i =1

For the basic specification without controls other than the 322 dummy variables, the null
hypothesis is that information diffusion effects (“neighborhood effects”) do not exist, that is, that
the coefficient β is zero. A positive β would suggest the presence of information diffusion
effects.
We next address the correlation structure of the error term: observations are independent
neither within each household-quarter combination (industry shares necessarily need to add up to
one) nor across time (households’ preferences are unlikely to change at quarterly frequency). It
follows that the OLS regression estimation, although consistent, would produce biased standard
errors. Thus, we report the standard errors and resulting tests of statistical significance based
upon a robust estimator that clusters observations at the household-quarter level for all
regressions.
There are several reasons why U.S. individuals’ investment choices might be related to
those made by their neighbors. At the outset, we note that individual investors might be reacting
to the same publicly available information to which their neighbors are reacting. Such tendencies
may cause correlated trading. Indeed, Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2006) document that trading
patterns are correlated across individual investors and Barber and Odean (2005) find that
individual investors are inclined to buy stocks that have attracted attention. These correlated
trading patterns are not necessarily surprising in light of exposure to (the same) publicly

11

available information, as well as to the pronounced presence of the disposition effect (Odean,
1998), tax-motivated trading (Ivković, Poterba, and Weisbenner (2005)), or other behavioral
phenomena that might prevail among individual investors, yet need not be driven by information
diffusion effects. Our basic set of 322 industry-quarter dummy variables seeks to control for
these and other trading factors that do not vary across communities (e.g., when a stock price
reaches an all-time high, it does so for all investors) and thereby to allow our specifications to
pick up information diffusion effects.
2.2 Information Diffusion Effects for Purchases
We present the results of fitting the regression from Equation (2) in Panel A of Table 2. Within
the panel, each row pertains to a different dependent variable. The first row of the panel pertains
to the industry share breakdown fh,t,i computed across all buys. Running the basic regression,
without any controls other than the 322 industry-quarter dummies, produces the highly
statistically significant estimate of 20.7 and thus suggests that a 10 percentage point change in
the neighbors’ allocation of purchases in an industry is associated with a nearly 2.1 percentage
point change in the household’s own allocation of purchases in the industry. 6
As discussed in the introduction, information diffusion that prevails among local and
non-local stocks may be different. Similarity in preferences, the structure of the local industry,
and word-of-mouth effects are likely stronger among local investments. This inquiry is also
motivated by studies of local bias among both institutional investors (Coval and Moskowitz
(1999)) and individual investors (Ivković and Weisbenner (2005) and Zhu (2002)). These studies
find that both groups of investors are biased toward holding disproportionately more local stocks
in their portfolios. Moreover, Coval and Moskowitz (2001) and Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)

12

present evidence that local investments outperformed non-local ones among mutual fund
managers and individual investors, respectively.
Separate consideration of local purchases 7 and non-local purchases, reported in the next
two rows of Table 2, Panel A, indeed reveals that local information diffusion effects are larger
than the non-local ones by an order of magnitude (119.3 vs. 8.4). For example, if the
neighborhood’s allocation of purchases to a particular industry increases by ten percentage
points, a household tends to increase its own allocation of local purchases to the industry by a
comparable amount. This result adds another dimension to the already documented high degrees
of individual investors’ locality, both in the U.S. (Ivković and Weisbenner (2005), Zhu (2002))
and overseas (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), Massa and Simonov (2006)), by suggesting the
possibility that strong information diffusion effects could contribute to individual investors’ local
bias.

2.3 Information Diffusion Effects for Sales and Positions
In Panels B and C of Table 2 we also examine the extent to which households’ sale and holding
decisions are correlated with those of their neighbors. We find a similar pattern of results for sale
decisions as we do for purchase decisions. For example, estimates from Panel B suggest that a 10
percentage point change in the neighbors’ sales of stock in an industry is associated with a 3.0
percentage point change in the household’s own sales of stock in the industry.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the correlation between the composition of a household’s
positions across industries and that of their neighbors is substantially larger than those for
purchases (the coefficients are larger in magnitude by 50% to 100% across the three samples).
This larger correlation reflects the fact that positions are the combination of both past purchase
decisions and the returns accrued on those investments. The larger correlation for positions
13

relative to trades mirrors the results reported for mutual fund managers in Hong, Kubik, and
Stein (2005).
For the remainder of the paper, we focus on households’ purchase decisions because they
are unconstrained, that is, households are free to purchase any stock, and they represent
households’ active financial decisions. By contrast, in the absence of short selling, sale decisions
are limited to the stocks already held (essentially no investors in our sample sold stocks short).
Thus, a correlation in selling activity could simply represent an underlying correlation in the
original buying activity of those stocks. Moreover, a correlation in positions could in part simply
reflect households’ inertia, as households could hold similar stocks over a long period of time
(and thus experience similar movements in the value of their portfolio positions). 8

2.4 Information Diffusion Effects and Local Population Size
In this section we stratify households according to the size of the population that resides within
50 miles from the household. We define four categories: 0-1 million residents, 1-2.5 million
residents, 2.5-5 million residents, and more than 5 million residents. Not surprisingly, the size of
the local population and the diversity of local companies are positively related (i.e., local
population and the Herfindahl index of industry concentration are negatively correlated).
Specifically, the Herfindahl index of the industry composition of firms local to the average
household decreases from around 0.5 to around 0.2 as the population increases from 0-1 million
local residents to more than 5 million local residents. 9 Yet, although the average dollar amount
of quarterly purchases of local individual stocks increases from $13,000 to $22,400 as the size of
the local population increases from 0-1 million to more than 5 million local residents, the
Herfindahl index of households’ local purchases across industries remains virtually unchanged—
it drops only very slightly from 0.99 to 0.95. Thus, although residents in larger metropolitan
14

areas have substantially more diverse investment opportunities and tend to invest more into local
stocks, they tend to remain very focused in their industry allocation. This tendency is consistent
with the notion that residents in more populous geographic areas might be exposed to
information diffusion effects to a higher degree than residents in less highly populated areas. To
confirm this intuition, we run a simple modification of the basic regression from Equation (2) on
subsamples selected by the type of purchase (all buys, local buys, and non-local buys) wherein
information diffusion effects are interacted with indicator variables representing local population
size (0-1 million, 1-2.5 million, 2.5-5 million, more than 5 million). The coefficient estimate
presented in the table for a particular population group represents the total information diffusion
effect for that group (i.e., the sum of the diffusion effect for the 0-1 million group and the
interaction term for that particular population group).
Across all three regressions presented in Table 3, information diffusion effects in
purchases increase with population size. Stronger effects in larger metropolitan areas may stem
from a greater flow of investment-relevant information through increased availability of
information sources (e.g., business-oriented magazines and newspapers) and advertising efforts,
both of which are subject to economies of scale and are typically more substantial in larger
metropolitan areas.

2.5 Dissipation of Information Diffusion Effects with Distance from the Household
One would expect information diffusion effects to dissipate as the distance from the household
increases. To test this hypothesis, we define regions surrounding the household at increasingly
larger distances as follows: 0-50 miles, 50-70.7 miles, 70.7-86.6 miles, 86.6-100 miles, … ,
141.4-150 miles. These regions each cover a geographic area of the same size (502 π = 7,854
square miles). We then run a regression similar to Equation (2), except, instead of having one
15

50
50 − 71
information diffusion regressor F−50
h,t ,i , the specification now has nine ( F− h,t ,i , Fh,t ,i ,
−87
87 −100
−112
−122
−132
−141
−150
, Fh100
, Fh112
, Fh122
, Fh132
, and Fh141
). The results are
Fh71
,t ,i , Fh,t ,i
,t , i
,t , i
,t , i
,t ,i
, t ,i

presented graphically in Figure 1. Across all three panels, that is, for all buys, local buys, and
non-local buys, the pattern is the same: there is a rapid and fairly steady exponential decline of
the information diffusion coefficients with distance from the household. As one might suspect, a
household’s purchases of non-local stocks are relatively more sensitive to the decisions made by
members of more distant communities than its purchases of local stocks are. That is, going
beyond the 50-mile community leads to a substantially faster decline in information diffusion
effects in the domain of local stocks than in the domain of non-local stocks.

2.6 Robustness Checks
An issue of potential concern for local information diffusion is that the effect might be driven by
some form of inside trading: those who work for a company may be trading in their own
company stock and may be selectively releasing pertinent information to their relatives and close
friends. We regard this effect as somewhat distinct from the other aspects of information
diffusion because the information the investors would receive is likely much more precise than
the information available through word-of-mouth effects, exposure to local news, influence of
company’s presence through advertising efforts, company-sponsored events, or social interaction
with company employees.
Unfortunately, the data set does not provide information about the investors’ current and
past employers. We control for the own-company stock explanation, however, by focusing on the
plausible assumption that, if a household’s local purchase is motivated by inside information, it
is likely to be the household’s largest local trade in that quarter. Accordingly, we compute for

16

each household h in quarter t the industry composition of local purchases excluding the single
largest stock purchase made by household h in quarter t. In unreported analyses, we find that this
specification yields estimates of the local information diffusion effect that are even somewhat
larger than the estimates based on the full sample of local investments (152.5 versus 119.3).
Therefore, we do not find evidence that trading in own-company stock drives the estimated
information diffusion effects among local investments.
Another issue of potential concern is that the estimates of local information diffusion may
be induced by the dominant presence of a company (or industry) in a household’s neighborhood.
Taking a drastic example, suppose there is only one company (or multiple companies all
belonging to the same industry) local to the household. The opportunity set for local investments
is therefore very focused and the inability to invest locally into any other industry may bias the
results. To assess the impact of industry dominance in the local opportunity set, in unreported
analyses we estimate regressions for local purchases on a subsample of purchases—householdquarter-industry (h,t,i) combinations for which the weight of industry i in the portfolio of firms
local to household h does not exceed the threshold of 50%, that is, the observations not plagued
by the domination of a single company (or industry) in the community. The regression
coefficient remains essentially the same; it declines only very slightly, from 119.3 to 111.3,
which suggests that the “one-company town” issue does not drive local information diffusion.

3. Disentangling Information Diffusion Effects
The results presented in Section 2 suggest that the stock purchases made by households are
strongly related to those made by their neighbors, consistent with word-of-mouth effects playing
a strong role in household investment decisions. However, such a correlation in trading activity

17

could also reflect an underlying similarity in preferences or the industry composition of local
firms. In regard to U.S. investors, studies have found correlated trading patterns both for
institutional investors (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005)) and individual investors (Barber, Odean,
and Zhu (2006)). Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) consider alternative interpretations to their
finding that mutual fund managers engage in word-of-mouth communication and tilt their
portfolios accordingly. They use three sets of tests to assess the possibility that their results are
driven by inside information obtained by the money managers directly from company executives
(which they tem the “local-investor-relations” activity). First, their results are unaffected even if
all local stocks are excluded from their regressions. Second, their results are robust among
smaller stocks (which, on average, have fewer resources at their disposal to pursue “localinvestor-relations” activities). Finally, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) consider the postRegulation FD period and show that their results persist in the aftermath of explicit regulation
that prohibits companies to engage in selective dissemination of information, suggesting once
again that “local-investor-relations” strategies do not drive their regression results.
As Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) point out, none of these “local-investor-relations”
alternative explanations are likely to dominate the arena of individual investors. In fact, Feng and
Seasholes (2004) report that Chinese individual investors’ correlated investment decisions are
driven by common reaction to locally-available news, with no evidence of word-of-mouth effects
on stock trades. However, given the differences in the fundamental characteristics of the U.S.
and Chinese societies (i.e., differences in civil liberties such as open and free discussion), it is
plausible that motivations for stock purchases could also be substantially different across the two
cultures.

18

Moreover, it is important to differentiate among competing sources of the overall
information diffusion effect among U.S. individual investors because they likely have different
levels of influence on the market. For example, word-of-mouth effects may create a more
dynamic exchange of information that may lead to a ripple effect of further information
dissemination, which in turn may have an impact on stock prices.
Thus, we devise two alternative strategies to disentangle the sources of the observed
correlation between a household’s stock purchases and those of its neighbors. The first strategy
considers the sociability of a household’s state. Using the comprehensive state-wide sociability
measure from Putnam (2000) (available for all 50 states except Alaska and Hawaii), we assign a
certain level of sociability to every household in our sample, and then define a dummy variable
associated with each household that labels it as a household in either a high or a low sociability
area. We interact that dummy variable with the neighborhoods’ industry-level purchases. Within
the United States, there is variation in sociability (i.e., membership in clubs, trust in other people,
etc.) across states. If word-of-mouth is an important contributor to a household’s stock
purchases, then the observed correlation in a household’s portfolio allocation and that of their
neighbors should be higher in more social areas. Other explanations for information diffusion
effects, such as correlated preferences and common local reaction to news, should not vary with
the sociability of the community. We interpret the coefficients associated with sociability, which
represent the increased influence of neighbors’ investment choices on an individual’s own
portfolio in social areas relative to less social communities, as measures of the word-of-mouth
effects.
The second strategy considers three key contributions to the overall information diffusion
effect, namely, word-of-mouth communication, correlated preferences (which may incorporate

19

common local reaction to news events), and the structure of the local economy. We use the
composition of the neighborhood’s aggregate portfolio to reveal the neighborhood’s preferences
and the accumulation of their reactions to past news. Analogously, we use the composition of a
household’s own portfolio position to reveal its own preferences and accumulated reactions to
past news. We further use the degree of conformity of the household portfolio composition to the
portfolio composition of the neighborhood to identify households with preferences and reactions
similar to their neighbors’, as well as those whose preferences and reactions are very different
from their neighbors’. Upon controlling for the composition of households’ neighborhood
portfolios and households’ own portfolio compositions, as well as the structure of the local
economy, we view the correlation between the household’s stock purchases and those of its
neighbors that survives such rigid controls as a conservative lower bound on the magnitude of
the word-of-mouth effect.
Strikingly, our estimates of the contribution of word-of-mouth communication are very
similar across households that conformed to their neighbors very closely and those that held very
disparate portfolios. This finding is reassuring because it suggests that the strategy we employed
to control for the effect of common preferences and the cumulative common reactions to news
did not lead to materially different estimates of the word-of-mouth effect across the two sets of
households.

3.1 Controlling for Word-of-Mouth Effects: The Area Sociability Proxy
In this section we report the results of the analyses in which we identify a proxy for the word-ofmouth effect and interact that measure with diffusion coefficients in a regression specification
very similar to that from Equation (2). Our proxy for the word-of-mouth effect is the sociability
of the area surrounding a household. To capture sociability, we use state-level values of the
20

Comprehensive Social Capital Index, as collected and presented in Putnam (2000). 10 We define a
dummy variable that indicates high and low area sociability levels by classifying households
according to their state’s Comprehensive Social Capital Index (Putnam, 2000) and splitting the
households into sociable and non-sociable ones (the breakpoint is the sociability measure of the
median household in the sample). Further recognizing that sociability effects may be stronger in
the areas with more population, we also develop a specification in which we interact the
diffusion coefficient with both the sociability dummy and the population measures (as defined in
Section 2.4 and Table 3).
Table 4 presents the results of both analyses across all buys, local buys, and non-local
buys (Panels A, B, and C, respectively). Within each panel, the first section reports regression
results for specifications involving area sociability measures only, whereas the second section
reports results of the more complicated specifications that also include interactions with
population measures.
Focusing first on the specifications without population interactions, diffusion effects are
considerably stronger among households located in the more sociable areas. A ten percentage
point increase in neighbors’ purchases of stocks from an industry is associated with a 1.5
percentage point increase in the household’s own purchases of stocks from that industry in nonsocial areas, while the diffusion effect increases to 2.5 percentage points for households in social
states. Thus, the correlation in household purchases is significantly stronger in the states that are
more sociable (i.e., in the states in which individuals are more inclined, for example, to be
members of clubs and to trust each other). For all buys and non-local buys, the increased
influence of neighbors’ investment choices on an individual’s own portfolio in more social areas
relative to less social areas (a proxy for the word-of-mouth effect) is 40% (10.0/24.6 and 3.0/9.8,

21

respectively) of the total information diffusion effect. For local buys, the “word-of-mouth” share
of the total correlation between neighborhood and household purchases is 17% (20.1/119).
Specifications that also incorporate population interactions yield similar relative increases
across all population groups, with the exception of the households located in the smallest
communities (surrounded by fewer than 1 million people within a 50-mile radius), for which
increased sociability does not translate into any statistically significant changes in information
diffusion. Parallel to the results from Table 3, the correlation in stock picks increases with the
increase of population, and, broadly speaking, so does the incremental contribution of area
sociability (the coefficients in the bottom row of each of the six analyses reported in Table 4).
These results suggest that word-of-mouth communication is an important contributor to
information diffusion effects, amounting to perhaps one to two-fifths of the overall correlation
between individual and community stock purchases.

3.2 Controlling for Correlated Preferences and Structure of Local Economy
3.2.1 The Role of Correlated Preferences A potential source of correlated purchases among
households in a geographic area is that those households may have similar preferences.
Individual investors might be influenced by their neighbors’ investment choices because they
wish to conform and keep pace with their neighbors’ wealth and investment habits (Bernheim
(1994), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Shore and White (2003)). Moreover, to the extent
that individuals choose their place of residence according to their preferences, and those tend to
be correlated among the residents of the same geographic area, it is possible that similar tastes
might govern investment decisions even without explicit communication with their neighbors.
Finally, it is plausible that individual investors’ own preferences are correlated over time;

22

individuals might have an inclination to conform to some of their previous investment choices
(e.g., favoring stocks from the same industry as they previously did).
To explore the effect of correlated preferences, we define two variables for each (h, t)
observation. First, we define the industry composition of stock positions of neighboring
households (excluding household h itself) at the end of quarter t–1. Second, we define the
industry composition of stock positions of the household itself at the end of quarter t–1. The
inclusion of these two position-related variables in the specification explicitly accounts for any
underlying correlation in trading activity attributable to a similarity in preferences within a
community that manifests itself in a similarity of stock purchases within the community or a
similarity in an individual’s own stock preferences over time. This approach requires merging
purchases in quarter t with positions at the end of quarter t–1. Although there is substantial
overlap between household identifiers for trades and positions in the database, the matching is
imperfect and it allowed us to retain around two-thirds of the original observations used in
previous analyses.
3.2.2 The Structure of the Local Economy Companies routinely seek to generate a certain
presence in the local community. One immediate effect of such endeavors is investors’ enhanced
familiarity with local companies, generated through social interaction with employees and
company efforts such as local advertising and sponsoring local events. Investors’ propensity to
invest in the companies (industries) they are familiar with, and perhaps even informed about,
undoubtedly constitutes one important facet of information diffusion. Moreover, the local
presence of a company may enhance the probability of circulation of very precise, inside
information, an issue we addressed to a certain extent in Section 2.

23

To capture the impact of the structure of the local economy, we define variables that
characterize the distribution of the local economy and local labor force across industries.
Specifically, for each (h, t, i) observation we define two variables: the fraction of market value of
publicly-traded companies local to household h in quarter t in industry i and the fraction of the
labor force local to household h in quarter t employed in industry i. 11
Including these two variables should pick up both the effects that stem from familiarity
with local companies and the potential direct company-stock effect. For example, if there are
many employees working for construction companies in the area, a household’s propensity to
invest in construction firms could stem from word-of-mouth effects—social interaction between
these employees and other households—or from those employees’ propensity to invest in their
own company stock (company-stock effects).
3.2.3 The Results The results of relating the industry composition of a household’s investments
to the neighborhood’s preferences, the household’s own preferences, and the structure of the
local economy are presented in Table 5. Panel A has three sections, containing estimates for all
buys, local buys, and non-local buys, respectively. Within each section, we first show the
baseline result, which corresponds very closely with the corresponding baseline result in Table 2,
Panel A. 12 The following row in each section shows the results with the two additional
independent variables that capture preferences for industry allocation. Both variables are
statistically significant, which suggests that households’ purchases across industries are related to
the common preferences that prevail in their neighborhoods, as well as their own revealed
preferences (as described by their current stock positions). For example, the point estimates
suggest that households entering the quarter with a stock portfolio fully concentrated in a
particular industry allocate 31 to 48 percentage points more of their quarterly purchases to that

24

same industry. The point estimate of β, interpreted as the information diffusion effect unrelated
to such preferences (i.e., the word-of-mouth component), is equal to one-half of the magnitude of
the estimated effect of the overall information diffusion for all buys and non-local buys, and to
one-third for local buys.
The third row in each section of Panel A includes the variables that capture the structure
of the local economy. Both local-economy variables are positively related to the allocation of
household purchases across industries and are statistically significant, although they tend to
attenuate the estimate of β to a much lesser degree than the two variables related to preferences.
Whereas the effect of the structure of the local economy is present for all the subsamples, the
impact is by far the strongest for local buys. Specifically, a 10 percentage point change in the
presence of a certain industry (as measured by firm values) is associated with a 4.7 percentage
point change in the allocation of a local household’s local purchases across industries. The
impact of the industry-level structure of the local labor force is also noticeable (1.4 percentage
point change), though it is not as strong. The higher correlations of the local economy variables
with local buys could partially reflect company-stock issues, namely, the propensity to invest in a
firm for which household members work (or have worked). On the other hand, the significant
correlations of the local economy variables with non-local buys likely do not reflect this concern;
instead, they likely reflect the notion that households’ familiarity with local investment
opportunities influences households’ non-local investments as well.
The fourth row in each section features the results of relating the industry composition of
a household’s investments to both preferences (the neighborhood’s and the household’s own)
and the structure of the local economy. Estimates of the effects of all the four variables are
positive and statistically significant. Most importantly, the point estimate of β, interpreted as the

25

information diffusion effect unrelated to either preferences or the structure of the local economy,
approximately equals one-half of the magnitude of the estimated effect of the overall information
diffusion for all buys and non-local buys, and one-third for local buys. 13
The final analysis reported in Panel A of Table 5 seeks to capture differences among
households along unobservable characteristics by running the baseline regression from Equation
(2) with the inclusion of household-industry-level fixed effects. This is a very rigorous test
because it presents a higher standard than the baseline specification: it relates the change in a
household’s allocation of purchases to an industry from its time-series average allocation of
purchases to the industry with the change in its neighborhood’s allocation of purchases to the
industry from the neighborhood’s time series average allocation of purchases to the industry. For
example, an investor who likes technology stocks may happen to live in an area in which others
independently also happen to invest in technology stocks. Such a non-causal correlation would
lead toward the detection of diffusion effects in a cross-sectional regression even if investors
acted independently. By contrast, to identify diffusion effects in a panel regression requires that,
in response to a change in community technology stock investment, the household should change
its allocation to technology stocks in the same direction. Results in the last row of each section in
Panel A suggest that information diffusion effects remain strong in the household fixed-effects
framework, especially for local buys (3.6 for all buys; 17.7 for local buys; 2.4 for non-local
buys), though the magnitudes are substantially reduced compared to the cross-sectional analyses.
The extent to which households’ portfolios conform to those of their neighbors can serve
as a proxy for identifying households whose purchasing decisions are driven to varying degrees
by the desire to adhere (inadvertently or not) to the preferences and common news prevailing in
their neighborhood. For example, if a household shared the investment preferences with its

26

neighborhood and responded to news similarly to the way its neighborhood did, over time its
portfolio composition would be very similar to that of its community.
We sort households into two types according to the extent to which their household
portfolio allocations at the industry level conform to those of their neighbors; the metric we use
is the average absolute deviation in industry portfolio shares between a household and its
neighborhood. Results in Panels B and C of Table 5 suggest that, whereas initially there are
substantial differences in information diffusion effects (i.e., coefficients associated with the
composition of buys of neighboring households) across the two groups, once the variables that
capture preferences and the structure of the local economy are included in the regression, the
estimated coefficient β (i.e., the relation between a household’s purchases and its neighbors’
purchases) becomes fairly similar across the two types of investors. Specifically, the β for local
(non-local) buys across the two groups of investors are 46.2 and 29.4 (3.9 and 2.9), respectively,
and are no longer significantly different at the 1% level. This suggests that the two positionsrelated variables indeed are successful in capturing the effect of common preferences because,
once they are included in the specification, the remaining information diffusion effect, which we
attribute to word-of-mouth communication, is very comparable across investors who have stock
portfolios very similar to their neighbors and those whose portfolios are quite different from their
neighbors’.
3.3 Unifying the Two Approaches to Information Diffusion Effect Attribution
The previous two sections each approached the task of assessing the contribution of word-ofmouth effects to the overall correlation between individual and community stock purchases from
a different angle. Remarkably, the estimates of that contribution qualitatively are in close

27

agreement: across all specifications, word-of-mouth effects account for about one-quarter to onehalf of the overall diffusion effect.
In unreported results, we fit a specification that unites the two approaches: coefficients
from the full specification from the previous section (including the neighborhoods’ purchases,
neighborhoods’ positions, household positions, structure of local firms’ market value, and
structure of the local labor force) are interacted with the dummy variable capturing
neighborhoods’ sociability used in Section 3.1. For the subsample of all buys, for example, the
coefficient associated with buys of neighboring households from Table 5, 9.0, translates into 6.1
among households located in less sociable neighborhoods and 11.2 among households located in
more sociable neighborhoods.
There also is a stark contrast between the impact of area sociability on the coefficients
associated with the structure of local firm market value (as defined by the share of market
capitalization of local firms across the 14 industries) and those associated with the structure of
the local labor force (as defined by the share of employees across the 14 industries in the area).
Whereas high area sociability reduces the importance of the share of local firm market value in a
particular industry on household investment choice, it increases the influence of the fraction of
local employees in a particular industry. Among households in less sociable states, the fraction of
local firm market value in a particular industry is a more important predictor of the fraction of a
household’s stock purchases in that same industry than the local employee share is. However,
among households in more sociable states, the fraction of local firm market value in a particular
industry is uncorrelated with the fraction of a household’s stock purchases in that same industry,
whereas the industry-composition of local workers has increased importance over household

28

stock picks. These findings further suggest that the state-level measure of sociability we employ
is useful in isolating the word-of-mouth effect on investment decisions.
3.4 Do Lagged Purchases in One Neighborhood Predict Purchases in Another Neighborhood?
In our final analysis, we explore whether lagged purchases in one neighborhood predict the
purchases in another neighborhood. Up to this point, we focused primarily on relating household
investment decisions to those made by their immediate neighbors. Figure 1 shows that purchases
made by a household are related not only to those made in the immediate community, but also, to
some extent, to those made in more distant communities. However, as one might suspect, and as
is confirmed in Figure 1, a household’s purchases of non-local stocks are more sensitive to the
decisions made by members of more distant communities than its purchases of local stocks are.
That is, going beyond the 50-mile community leads to a substantially faster decline in
information diffusion effects in the domain of local stocks than in the domain of non-local
stocks. Simply put, households are relatively less likely to be influenced by non-locals when
making their local stock picks.
Thus, a natural place to look for dissemination of information across communities is in a
household’s purchase of non-local stocks. In particular, do the financial decisions of nearby
households have less of an effect over time, whereas the decisions made by more distant
households have increasing influence over time? To examine this issue, we use the same 150mile area surrounding a given household we employed to produce the results in Figure 1. We
relate the composition of a household’s quarterly purchases of non-local stocks across industries
to the contemporaneous purchases and prior purchases (with a one-quarter and two-quarter lag)
made by the households in the immediate 50-mile neighborhood as well as those located 50-150

29

miles away (for simplicity, we divide these more distant households into two rings of equal area
around the immediate 50-mile community).
Figure 2 illustrates information diffusion effects across distance from the household and
time since purchase. Whereas the effects of the immediate 50-mile community and the
households contained in the first ring surrounding the immediate community decline
monotonically over time, the influence of the purchases made by the households contained in the
second ring (the area farthest from the household) actually increase over time. In other words,
whereas the contemporaneous purchases made by a household’s closest neighbors have a larger
impact on one’s own purchases than the decisions made by those neighbors one or two quarters
ago, the reverse is true for the effect of more distant households’ investment choices on a given
household—the purchases made by the more distant households one and two quarters ago have a
larger effect on a given household’s purchases this quarter than those made by the households
from distant communities contemporaneously. Indeed, our unreported tests suggest that the
difference over time in the information diffusion effects of both the immediate 50-mile
community and the first ring are statistically different from those of the more distant second
ring. 14 To be clear, a household’s immediate neighbors always have a bigger influence on its
purchases than distant neighbors do (whether measured contemporaneously, with a one-quarter
lag, or with a two-quarter lag). However, the pattern of information diffusion effects across time
and space is broadly consistent with a gradual dissemination of information from one community
to another.

30

4. Conclusion
We focus on the relation between the investment choices made by an individual investor’s
neighborhood (households located within 50 miles from the investor) and the investor’s own
investment choices. Using a detailed set of common-stock investments that nearly 36,000
households made in the period from 1991 to 1996, we find strong evidence of information
diffusion: baseline estimates suggest that a ten percentage-point increase in purchases of stocks
from an industry made by a household’s neighbors is associated with a two percentage point
increase in the household’s own purchases of stocks from that industry, with the effect larger for
local stock purchases.
The findings are robust to controls for inside information effects, domination of a single
company (industry) in the neighborhood, and household fixed effects. In sum, there is strong
evidence that individuals’ stock purchase decisions are related to those made by their neighbors.
The strength of the information diffusion effect is considerable; for example, investors in more
populous areas, where, on average, there are many more local investment choices, still are very
concentrated in their purchases. To the extent that their investment choices are related to their
neighbors’, the information diffusion effect is likely at least partially responsible for individual
investors’ lack of diversification.
Putting our results in perspective and comparing them with the findings from Feng and
Seasholes (2004) delivers a new, richer understanding of the different mechanisms that govern
individuals’ investment decisions across various societies. Whereas Feng and Seasholes (2004)
report that individual investors’ correlated investment decisions are driven by common reaction
to locally-available news, with no evidence of word-of-mouth effects among Chinese investors,

31

our estimates suggest that word-of-mouth effects among U.S. individual investors are strong,
particularly in the more social areas. This discrepancy likely reflects differences in civil liberties
and in the extent of presence of open and free discussion across the two societies. Exploring the
role of societal characteristics in portfolio decisions appears to be a fruitful area for further
research.
Our results, in conjunction with those of Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005), suggest that
word-of-mouth effects are a broad phenomenon that affects financial decisions made by both
mutual fund managers and individual investors. Because word-of-mouth effects may create a
dynamic exchange of information that could lead to a ripple effect of further information
dissemination, which in turn may have an impact on stock prices, understanding the interplay
between individual and institutional trading across time and space might yield insights into price
dynamics in the stock market.

32

References
Banerjee, A., 1992, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107,
797-817.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2000, “Trading is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock
Investment Performance of Individual Investors,” Journal of Finance, 55, 773-806.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 2005, “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Working paper, UC Davis
and UC Berkeley.
Barber, B., T. Odean, and N. Zhu, 2006, “Systematic noise,” Working paper, UC Davis and UC
Berkeley.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1994, “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, 102,
841-77.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane, 1999, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107,
205-51.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance, 52,
57-82.
Coval, J. D., and T. J. Moskowitz, 1999, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1-39.

33

Coval, J. D., and T.J. Moskowitz, 2001, “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading and
Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 811-841.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez, 2002, “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement Plan: The
Influence of Colleagues’ Choices,” Journal of Public Economics, 85, 121-148.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez, 2003, “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement
Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of

Public Economics, 118, 815-842.
Ellison, G., and D. Fudenberg, 1993, “Rules of thumb for social learning,” Journal of Political

Economy, 101, 93-126.
Ellison, G., and D. Fudenberg, 1995, “Word of Mouth Communication and Social Learning,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 93-125.
Fama, E., and K. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Return on Bonds and Stocks,”

Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-53.
Fama, Eugene F., and J. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,”

Journal of Political Economy 71, 607-636.
Feng, F., and M. Seasholes, 2004, “Correlated Trading and Location,” Journal of Finance, 59,
2117-2144.
Freedom

House,

2004,

“Freedom

in

the

World

Country

Ratings,”

available

at

http://www.freedomhouse.org/ratings/allscore04.xls.

34

Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju, 2001, “How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
Stockholdings and Trades,” Journal of Finance, 56, 1053-1073.
Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein, 2004, “Social Interaction and Stock-Market
Participation,” Journal of Finance, 59, 137-163.
Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein, 2005, Thy Neighbor’s Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth Effects
in the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers,” Journal of Finance, 60, 2801-2824.
Ivković, Z., J. Poterba, and S. Weisbenner, 2005, “Tax-Motivated Trading by Individual
Investors,” American Economic Review, 95, 1605-1630.
Ivković, Z., and S. Weisbenner, 2005, “Local Does as Local is: Information Content of the
Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments,” Journal of Finance,
60, 267-306.
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1992, “The impact of Institutional Trading on
Stock Prices,” Journal of Financial Economics, 32, 23-43.
Massa, M., and A. Simonov, 2006, “Hedging, Familiarity and Portfolio Choice,” Review of

Financial Studies, 19, 633-685.
Odean, T., 1998, “Are Investors Reluctant to Realize their Losses?,” Journal of Finance, 53,
1775-1179.
Putnam, RR D., 2000, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community, New
York: Simon & Schuster.

35

Shore, S. H., and J. White, 2003, “External Habit Formation and the Home Bias Puzzle,”
Working Paper, Harvard University.
U.S. Census Bureau: Gazetteer Place and Zip Code Database.
Zhu, N., 2002, “The Local Bias of Individual Investors,” Working paper, Yale School of
Management.

36

Footnotes
1

Whereas this is a somewhat imprecise measure, to our knowledge the data that detail the geographic distribution of

employees for each company are not available. Moreover, most value-relevant, strategically important information
is likely concentrated at the company headquarters.
2

For example, according to the 1990 Census, 88% of the population lives within 25 miles of work (98% live within

50 miles). Moreover, if two co-workers each live only 25 miles from work, they may live as many as 50 miles apart.
3

Robert D. Putnam’s “Bowling Alone” (2000) features 14 state-level measures of social capital, such as time spent

visiting friends, number of organizations per capita, number of group memberships, and trust in people, along with
the specific measure we use in the paper, the Comprehensive Social Capital Index. Details are described in their
book (see Table 4 and pp. 290-291). The data are available from
http://www.bowlingalone.com/data.php3.
4

To date, researchers have employed a few different sociability measures. For example, in their study of the relation

between social interaction and stock market participation, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) use church attendance as a
proxy for sociability.
5

Note that, by construction, for every h and every t, Σi=1, …,14 fh,t,i = 100.

6

If regressions are estimated for each quarter separately, in which case each quarterly regression only has 14

dummy variables for the industry effects, the estimated coefficient β is highly statistically significant in all twentythree regressions. Quarterly regressions suggest that information diffusion effects are strong throughout the sample
period, with point estimates ranging from 13.6 to 28.3 across the 23 quarters.
7

In the regressions for local buys we discarded all the h,t,i observations for which there were no firms in industry i

within 50 miles from household h in quarter t because household h simply could not have invested into industry i
locally.
8

In unreported analyses, we have verified that conclusions drawn for the subsequent analyses in the paper regarding

households’ purchase decisions hold for sales and holdings as well (results available upon request).

37

9

Firms are divided into 14 industry groups. Thus, a community with equal representation across all industries would

have a local firm Herfindahl index of 0.07.
10

In some robustness checks we also consider key components of the overall social capital index such as measures

of the time spent visiting friends, number of organizations per capita, number of group memberships, and trust in
people. Results are highly consistent with those based on the specifications that employ the Comprehensive Social
Capital Index.
11

Our measure of the industry composition of the local labor force is based on the composition of employees at

publicly-traded companies, which we obtain from COMPUSTAT. For the purpose of this analysis we assume that
all the company’s employees are employed in the same county in which the company headquarters is located. This is
a somewhat imprecise measure, but, to our knowledge, more precise panel data regarding the geographic
distribution of the employees for each company are not available.
12

We attribute the small discrepancies between the point estimates (e.g., 19.9 in Table 5 vs. 20.7 in Table 2 for all

buys) to the differing numbers of observations, that is, to the different samples employed in the respective analyses.
13

This is a very robust estimate. Inspection of quarterly estimates (unreported for brevity) suggests that word-of-

mouth communication accounts for 40% to 50% of the overall information diffusion effect (i.e., correlation of
household stock purchases with that of their neighbors) in the vast majority of quarters, with a range of 21% to 56%.
14

The regression specification underlying the results displayed in Figure 2 is similar to Equation (2). However,

instead of focusing only on contemporaneous purchases made by other households within 50 miles, we now relate
the composition of a given household’s purchases not only to those made by other households within 50 miles, but
also to those located 50-150 miles away (for simplicity, divided into two rings of equal area around the immediate
50-mile community). The regression specification allows purchases made by surrounding communities to affect a
given household’s purchase of non-local stocks contemporaneously, with a one-quarter lag, and with a two-quarter
lag:
50
50
f h,t ,i = β50,Contemporaneous F−50
h,t ,i + β50, 1− quarter lag F− h,t −1,i + β50, 2 − quarter lag F− h,t − 2,i +

1st Ring

β1st Ring,Contemporaneous F− h,t ,i

1st Ring

1st Ring

+ β1st Ring,1− quarter lag F− h,t −1,i + β1st Ring,2− quarter lag F− h,t − 2,i +

38

2nd Ring

β2nd Ring,Contemporaneous F−h,t ,i

2nd Ring

+ β2nd Ring,1−quarter lag F−h,t −1,i

2nd Ring

+ β2nd Ring,2−quarter lag F−h,t −2,i +

23 14

∑ ∑ γt ,i Dt ,i + εh,t ,i .

t =1 i =1

39

Table 1
Quarterly Purchases of Stock by Households
# Purchases

# Distinct HHs

Mean Quarterly
purchase (in $)
[Median]

% Local

1991

36,250

20,366

23,242
[7,113]

16.4

1992

36,270

20,300

23,576
[7,500]

17.0

1993

34,377

18,894

25,150
[7,500]

16.4

1994

28,726

16,307

25,418
[7,388]

17.4

1995

30,299

16,134

38,540
[9,313]

17.8

1996
(Q1-Q3)

25,364

15,483

42,277
[9,725]

17.5

TOTAL

191,286

35,673

28,922
[7,949]

17.1

This table summarizes quarterly household stock purchases at the industry level. Summary statistics are
reported annually from 1991 to 1996, as well as for the entire sample period (bottom row of the table).
The first column presents the number of household, quarter, industry (h, t, i) combinations in a given year
such that household h made at least one purchase in quarter t in industry i. The second column tallies the
number of distinct households appearing in the sample in a given year. The third column lists average
dollar values of households’ quarterly purchases, where median values are reported in parentheses
directly underneath the mean values. The last column breaks down the purchases according to their
distance from the household (i.e., whether the firm headquarters is located within 50 miles of the
household).

40

Table 2
Information Diffusion for Purchases, Sales, and Positions

All Buys
Local Buys
(within 50 miles)
Non-Local Buys
(outside 50 miles)
All Sells
Local Sells
(within 50 miles)
Non-Local Sells
(outside 50 miles)
All Positions
Local Positions
(within 50 miles)
Non-Local Positions
(outside 50 miles)

Composition of
R2
HH Variable ≤ 50 miles
Panel A: Purchases
***
0.142
20.7
(0.3)
0.232
119.3 ***
(1.2)
0.129
8.4 ***
(0.3)
Panel B: Sales
***
0.123
30.0
(0.3)
0.248
122.4 ***
(1.2)
0.104
6.5 ***
(0.3)
Panel C: Positions
***
0.087
36.5
(0.3)
0.143
153.4 ***
(0.7)
0.072
17.7 ***
(0.3)

# obs.
2,678,004
568,247
2,337,314

2,448,838
526,273
2,115,722

8,359,442
2,429,728
7,449,582

This table presents the results of fitting the basic information diffusion regression from Equation (2) over
the 23 quarters from January of 1991 to October 1996:
23 14

f h,t ,i = β F−50
h ,t ,i + ∑

∑ γt ,i Dt ,i + εh,t ,i .

t =1 i =1

Panel A reports regression results relating the composition of households’ stock purchases across 14
broad industry groups to the composition of their communities’ purchases (the community is defined as
all other households within 50 miles). Analogously, Panels B and C present regression results for the
composition of sales and positions, respectively. Regressions in all three panels are estimated on
subsamples identified by the distance from households to company headquarters (All, Local, and NonLocal). Standard errors, shown in parentheses, allow for heteroskedasticity, as well as correlation of error
terms at the household-quarter level.
*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

41

Table 3
Information Diffusion for Purchases with Population Interactions

Composition of
HH Buys ≤ 50 miles
All Buys
Population in millions

0.147

2,678,004

64.2 ***
(4.9)
59.0 ***
(3.0)
102.7 ***
(2.3)
139.5 ***
(1.6)

0.245

568,247

4.5 ***
(0.4)
6.5 ***
(0.8)
9.3 ***
(1.1)
13.1 ***
(1.0)

0.129

2,337,314

1 – 2.5
2.5 – 5
5+

0–1

1 – 2.5
2.5 – 5
5+

# obs.

5.2 ***
(0.4)
10.7 ***
(0.8)
27.2 ***
(1.0)
53.5 ***
(0.9)

0–1

Local Buys
Population in millions

R2

Non-Local Buys
Population in millions
0–1

1 – 2.5
2.5 – 5
5+

This table presents the results of fitting a diffusion regression for purchases, a variant of Equation (2) that
distinguishes among households according to the size of the population that resides within 50 miles of
them into four categories and assesses information diffusion effects in neighborhoods of various sizes:

f h,t ,i = (β F−50h,t ,i ) * Population Interactions + (

23 14

∑ ∑ γ t,i Dt,i ) * Population Interactions + ε h,t,i .
t =1 i =1

The four categories are: 0-1 million, 1-2.5 million, 2.5-5 million, and more than 5 million residents.
Regressions are estimated on subsamples identified by the type of purchase (All Buys, Local Buys, and
Non-Local Buys). The coefficient estimates for a particular population group represents the overall
information diffusion effect for that group (i.e., the sum of the diffusion effect for the 0-1 million group
and the interaction term for that particular population group). Standard errors, shown in parentheses,
allow for heteroskedasticity, as well as correlation of error terms at the household-quarter level.
***

,

**

,

*

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

42

Table 4
Information Diffusion, Area Sociability, and Area Population
Population in millions

Full Sample

0–1

1 – 2.5

2.5 – 5

5+

R2

# obs.

Panel A: All Buys

Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles *
Sociability Above Median
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles

***

14.6
(0.4)
10.0***
(0.3)

0.147 2,634,338

5.3***
(0.6)
0.0
(0.6)

Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles *
Sociability Above Median

9.3***
(0.8)
3.1***
(0.7)

22.5***
(1.1)
7.4***
(0.6)

42.3***
(1.0)
9.0***
(0.4)

0.148 2,634,338

Panel B: Local Buys

Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles *
Sociability Above Median
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles

***

98.9
(1.4)
20.1***
(0.7)
63.1***
(5.6)
0.8
(4.6)

Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles *
Sociability Above Median

48.2***
(3.2)
20.7***
(2.3)

92.1***
(2.6)
13.8***
(1.4)

117.0***
(2.1)
16.8***
(0.8)

0.236

566,735

0.249

566,735

Panel C: Non-Local Buys

Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles *
Sociability Above Median
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles
Buys of HHs ≤ 50 miles *
Sociability Above Median

***

6.8
(0.4)
3.0***
(0.3)

0.129 2,295,090

4.6***
(0.6)
-0.1
(0.6)

6.2***
(0.9)
0.8
(0.7)

6.1***
(1.1)
4.8***
(0.7)

8.5***
(1.1)
3.7***
(0.5)

0.130 2,295,090

43

Table 4
Information Diffusion, Area Sociability, and Area Population (continued)
This table presents results of stratifying households according to the sociability of the state to which the household belongs and the size of the
population that resides within 50 miles of the household into eight categories and assessing information diffusion effects in neighborhoods of
various sociability and size by running the following regression (a variant of Equation (2)):
23

f h ,t ,i = ( β F−50h ,t ,i ) * Sociability and Population Interactions + (∑
t =1

14

∑γ
i =1

t ,i

Dt ,i ) * Population Interactions + ε h ,t ,i .

To capture sociability, we use state-level values of the Comprehensive Social Capital Index (available for all 50 states except Alaska and Hawaii),
as collected and presented in Putnam (2000). We classify households according to their state’s Comprehensive Social Capital Index and split the
sample of households into sociable and non-sociable ones, where the breakpoint is the sociability measure of the median household in the sample.
The four population categories are: 0-1 million, 1-2.5 million, 2.5-5 million, and more than 5 million residents. Regressions are estimated on
subsamples selected by the type of purchase and presented in three panels accordingly (All Buys, Local Buys, and Non-Local Buys). Panel A
presents results based on the sample of all buys, whereas Panels B and C focus only on local and non-local buys, respectively. Each panel presents
results of fitting two specifications. The first specification only features the sociability measure (without controls for the local population), whereas
the second one is the full specification as outlined above. As in Table 2, Panel B, the coefficient estimates presented for a particular population
group represents the overall information diffusion effect for that group (i.e., the sum of the diffusion effect for the 0-1 million group and the
interaction term for that particular population group). Standard errors, shown in parentheses, allow for heteroskedasticity, as well as correlation of
error terms at the household-quarter level.
*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

44

Table 5
Information Diffusion, Correlated Preferences for Industry Allocation, and Structure of
Local Economy

Composition of...
Buys

Buys of HHs Positions of HHs Positions of Firms
Workers
≤ 50 miles
this HH ≤ 50 miles ≤ 50 miles
≤ 50 miles

R2

# obs.

Panel A: All Households

All
All
All
All
All

(HH-industry
Fixed Effects)

Local
Local
Local
Local

***

19.9
(0.4)
***
9.8
(0.4)
***
17.4
(0.4)
***
9.0
(0.4)
3.6
(0.5)

Non-Local

(HH-industry
Fixed Effects)

2.4
(0.5)

***

0.204 1,786,666
***

14.5
(0.6)

***

32.4
(0.2)

***

4.8
(0.3)
***
1.9
(0.3)

***
0.135 1,786,666
4.0
(0.3)
***
0.204 1,786,666
2.7
(0.3)

0.249

265,509

0.417

265,509

***
0.276
14.2
(1.3)
***
0.421
5.6
(1.1)

265,509

***

0.577

265,509

***

0.121 1,510,390

7.4
(0.4)
***
3.7
(0.4)
***
7.0
(0.4)
***
3.6
(0.4)

Non-Local

32.5
(0.2)

***

128.9
(1.7)
***
43.6
(1.7)
***
85.1
(1.8)
***
36.8
(1.7)

Non-Local

Non-Local

***

0.323 1,786,666

17.7
(2.5)

Non-Local

16.5
(0.5)

***

Local

(HH-industry
Fixed Effects)

0.134 1,786,666

***

58.8
(2.3)

***

47.5
(0.5)

***

***

40.1
(2.4)

7.2
(0.6)

7.0
(0.6)

***

***

***

46.2
(0.5)

31.2
(0.2)

31.2
(0.2)

***

46.9
(1.4)
***
18.1
(1.2)

***

***

265,509

0.186 1,510,390

0.7
(0.3)
-0.1
(0.3)

***

***
0.121 1,510,390
1.0
(0.3)
***
0.186 1,510,390
0.8
(0.3)

0.305 1,510,390

45

Table 5
Information Diffusion, Correlated Preferences for Industry Allocation, and Structure of
Local Economy (Continued)

Composition of...
2
# obs.
Buys of HHs Positions of HHs Positions of Firms Workers R
≤ 50 miles
≤ 50 miles
this HH ≤ 50 miles ≤ 50 miles
Panel B: Similar HH Portfolios (Average Absolute Deviation in Industry Positions from HHs
within 50 miles is in Bottom Quartile)
***
All
30.0
0.205 446,670
(0.8)
0.245 446,670
All
10.3 ***
17.5 ***
35.9 ***
(0.8)
(1.3)
(0.5)
All
9.5 ***
15.5 ***
35.7 ***
2.1 ***
2.0 *** 0.245 446,670
(0.8)
(1.3)
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.6)
***
Local
148.6
0.543
66,390
(4.2)
0.586
66,390
53.7 ***
Local+
66.8 ***
40.1 ***
(4.8)
(6.4)
(1.7)
66,390
46.2 ***
Local+
53.3 ***
39.2 ***
1.6
16.6 *** 0.587
(4.8)
(6.9)
(1.7)
(3.3)
(2.8)
Non-Local
14.9 ***
0.173 377,608
(0.8)
0.207 377,608
3.9 ***
Non-Local+
9.2 ***
33.6 ***
(0.8)
(1.3)
(0.5)
0.207 377,608
Non-Local+
9.1 ***
33.6 ***
0.3
0.0
3.9 ***
(1.3)
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.6)
(0.8)
Panel C: Disparate HH Portfolios (Average Absolute Deviation in Industry Positions from HHs
within 50 miles is in Top Quartile)
***
All
4.5
0.067 446,670
(0.7)
0.143 446,670
All
6.4 ***
7.2 ***
27.8 ***
(0.7)
(0.9)
(0.3)
All
5.7 ***
5.7 ***
27.8 ***
2.2 ***
2.0 *** 0.143 446,670
(0.7)
(0.9)
(0.3)
(0.5)
(0.5)
***
Local
60.6
0.064
66,390
(3.2)
0.265
66,390
Local+
52.4 ***
45.7 ***
40.6 ***
(4.1)
(0.7)
(3.1)
0.275
66,390
Local+
29.1 ***
43.9 ***
30.0 ***
3.4
29.4 ***
(4.0)
(0.8)
(2.2)
(2.3)
(3.0)
Non-Local
0.1
0.063 377,608
(0.7)
0.135 377,608
Non-Local+
2.3 ***
27.1 ***
3.1 ***
(0.9)
(0.3)
(0.7)
0.135 377,608
Non-Local+
2.0 **
27.1 ***
0.1
0.8
2.9 ***
(0.9)
(0.3)
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.7)
Buys

46

Table 5
Information Diffusion, Correlated Preferences for Industry Allocation, and Structure of
Local Economy (Continued)
This table presents results of assessing the contribution of word-of-mouth effects to the overall
information diffusion effect (i.e., correlation of household stock purchases with that of their neighbors).
Accordingly, we regress households’ industry-level purchases on neighbors’ purchases, variables
capturing correlated preferences for industry allocation, variables capturing the structure of the local
economy, and 322 industry-time dummy variables (a variant of Equation (2)). Two variables for each (h,
t) observation are used to capture correlated preferences. First, we define the industry composition of
stock positions of neighboring households (excluding household h itself) at the end of quarter t–1.
Second, we define the industry composition of stock positions of the household itself at the end of quarter
t–1. To capture the impact of the structure of the local economy, for each (h, t, i) observation we define
two variables: the fraction of market value of companies local to household h in quarter t in industry i and
the fraction of the labor force local to household h in quarter t employed in industry i. In this framework,
estimates of β are conservative lower bounds on the contribution of word-of-mouth effects to the overall
information diffusion effect. Panel A has three sections, containing estimates for all buys, local buys, and
non-local buys, respectively. Within each section, we first show the baseline result (i.e., Equation (2)).
The following row in each section shows the results with the two additional independent variables that
seek to capture preferences for industry allocation. The third row in each section of Panel A includes the
variables that capture the structure of the local economy. The fourth row in each section features the
results of relating the industry composition of a household’s investments to both preferences (the
neighborhood’s and own) and the structure of the local economy. The final analysis, reported in the fifth
row in each section, seeks to capture differences among households along unobservable characteristics by
running the baseline regression from Equation (2) with the inclusion of household-industry-level fixed
effects. Panels B and C show results of replicating the key analyses from Panel A on two subsamples of
households. Specifically, we sort households into two types according to the extent to which their
household portfolio allocations at the industry level conform to those of their neighbors; the metric we use
is the average absolute deviation in industry portfolio shares between a household and its neighborhood.
Standard errors, shown in parentheses, allow for heteroskedasticity, as well as correlation of error terms at
the household-quarter level.
*** ** *

, , denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

+

denotes that the difference in coefficients across the similar and disparate samples is not significant at
the one percent level.

47

(%)

Panel A: All Buys

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0-50

50-71

71-87

87-100

100-112 112-122 122-132 132-141 141-150

radius [miles]

Panel B: Local Buys

(%)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0-50

50-71

71-87

87-100

100-112 112-122 122-132 132-141 141-150

radius [miles]

Panel C: Non-Local Buys

(%)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0-50

50-71

71-87

87-100

100-112 112-122 122-132 132-141 141-150

radius [miles]

Figure 1: Dissipation of Information Diffusion. The figure illustrates dissipation of information
diffusion effects with distance from the household. Regions surrounding the household at increasingly
larger distances have the same geographic area (502 π = 7,854 square miles). The regression specification
is similar to Equation (2), except, instead of having one information diffusion regressor, the specification
now has nine–one for each geographic area.

48

(%)

8.00

7.34

7.00

6.95
5.35

6.00
5.00
4.00

4.41
4.56

3.91

4.00
3.49

2.01

2.00
1.00

Contemporaneous

0.00

1-Quarter Lag
2-Quarter Lag
Second Ring
Around the
Community
50-Mile Community

3.00

First Ring Around the Community

First Ring
Around the
Community

50-Mile
Community

Second Ring Around the Community

Figure 2: Information Diffusion Effects Associated with Investments in Non-Local Stocks Across
Time and Space. The figure illustrates information diffusion effects by distance from the household and
time since purchase. The regression specification underlying the figure is similar to Equation (2).
However, instead of focusing only on contemporaneous purchases made by other households within 50
miles, we now relate the composition of a given household’s purchases not only to those made by other
households within 50 miles, but also to those located 50-150 miles away (for simplicity, divided into two
rings of equal area around the immediate 50-mile community). The regression specification allows
purchases made by surrounding communities to affect a given household’s purchase of non-local stocks
contemporaneously, with a one-quarter lag, and with a two-quarter lag.

49

