NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL INEQUALITY IN DEVELOPMENT:
THE CASE OF CUNDINAMARCA, COLOMBIA
Daron Acemoglu
María Angélica Bautista
Pablo Querubín
James A. Robinson
Working Paper 13208
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13208

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2007

We would particularly like to thank Malcolm Deas for introducing us to the Catastros de Cundinamarca
and for his extraordinary generosity with his time and knowledge of Colombian history. We also thank
Peter Evans for his discussions and conference participants and Brown, the Canadian Institute of Advanced
Research, the All-UC Economic History Conference at UC Davis, IMF, the Kennedy School, Maryland,
MIT, and the World Bank for useful suggestions, particularly Allan Drazen, Daniel Trefler and Michael
Walton. We are also grateful to Catalina Bautista, Leopoldo Fergusson, Maria Alejandra Palacio,
Diana Rodriguez and Olga Lucia Romero for help in putting the data together on which the research
is based. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Daron Acemoglu, María Angélica Bautista, Pablo Querubín, and James A. Robinson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia
Daron Acemoglu, María Angélica Bautista, Pablo Querubín, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 13208
June 2007
JEL No. H27,N01,N1,N16,O1,O11,O16,O54
ABSTRACT
Is inequality harmful for economic growth? Is the underdevelopment of Latin America related to its
unequal distribution of wealth? A recently emerging consensus claims not only that economic inequality
has detrimental effects on economic growth in general, but also that differences in economic inequality
across the American continent during the 19th century are responsible for the radically different economic
performances of the north and south of the continent. In this paper we investigate this hypothesis using
unique 19th century micro data on land ownership and political office holding in the state of Cundinamarca,
Colombia. Our results shed considerable doubt on this consensus. Even though Cundinamarca is indeed
more unequal than the Northern United States at the time, within Cundinamarca municipalities that
were more unequal in the 19th century (as measured by the land gini) are more developed today. Instead,
we argue that political rather than economic inequality might be more important in understanding
long-run development paths and document that municipalities with greater political inequality, as measured
by political concentration, are less developed today. We also show that during this critical period
the politically powerful were able to amass greater wealth, which is consistent with one of the channels
through which political inequality might affect economic allocations. Overall our findings shed doubt
on the conventional wisdom and suggest that research on long-run comparative development should
investigate the implications of political inequality as well as those of economic inequality.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
María Angélica Bautista
Brown University Department
of Political Science
36 Prospect Street
Providence, RI 02912
ma.bautista@yahoo.com

Pablo Querubín
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
querubin@mit.edu
James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

A large and growing academic literature argues that economic inequality has adverse eﬀects on
economic development, for example, because of the eﬀects of imperfect capital markets, through
demand externalities, or because of political economy reasons.1 A recently-emerging consensus,
exemplified by Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1997), maintains that the divergent economic paths of
North and South America are a consequence of their diﬀerent levels of economic inequality. This
consensus asserts that the main diﬀerence between the two parts of the American continent was
the diﬀerences in economic inequality that emerged during the colonial period and persisted to
the 19th century, and links the current economic diﬃculties of South American nations to their
greater inequality.
A major empirical challenge for this view, however, is that economic inequality is also correlated with many other potential determinants of long-run development. Most important for
the focus of this paper, economic inequality may be associated with political inequality, in the
sense that collective choices reflect the wishes and interests of a small subsection of the society.
Theoretically, we may expect economic inequality to lead to political inequality (as the economically powerful become politically more influential), but the reverse link is at least as important,
as those with political power will be able to amass greater economic wealth. To illustrate this
point, note that there is a negative relationship between land inequality and development not
only when we compare the United States to South America, but also across the US states. For
example, Figure 1 shows a plot of the land gini in each US state in 1860 against total school
enrollment in 1870 (see below for data details). There is a clear negative relationship, with the
more unequal Southern states having lower enrollments. Figure 2 plots the relationship between
the land gini in 1860 against the enrollment rate in 1950 and shows that this relationship persists
to the 20th century.2 Do these correlations establish that there is an adverse eﬀect of economic
1
On the eﬀect of inequality because of its interactions with imperfect capital markets see, for example, Banerjee
and Newman (1993) or Galor and Zeira (1993). For the impact of inequality through the composition of aggregate
demand, see, for example, Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989). More important for the application of these theories
to Latin America and for the focus of the present paper are the political economy mechanisms linking inequality
to economic development (see, among others, Meltzer and Richard, 1981, Alesina and Rodrik, 1994, Persson and
Tabellini, 1994, Benabou, 2000). In addition, some authors emphasize the link between inequality and political
instability (Alesina and Perotti, 1996) and on incentives to invest in education (Bourguignon and Verdier, 2000,
Galor, Moav and Vollrath, 2006). See Benabou (1996) and Aghion, Caroli and Garcı́a-Peñalosa (1999) for surveys
of this literature.
2
A similar relationship between land inequality and education across US states is documented in Galor, Moav
and Vollrath (2006) and Ramcharan (2006).

1

inequality on schooling? While this is a possibility, one also has to bear in mind that the US
states with greater economic inequality are also those with greater political inequality. For example, the Southern states were not only more unequal economically, but exhibited a very high
degree of political inequality, with a large fraction of the population disenfranchised and large
planters controlling politics directly or indirectly. Therefore, one can imagine that it might be
the relationship between political inequality and economic outcomes that underlies the patterns
shown in Figures 1 and 2. Political inequality may retard development because elites who control
politics may create rents for themselves, impede entry (Acemoglu, 2007a), and have little interest
in the provision of public goods, including schooling (Bates, 1981). Political inequality will also
tend to be associated with the absence of political competition and accountability, two factors
which help to guarantee that political systems generate desirable outcomes.3
Is it economic or political inequality that matters for long-run development? And how does inequality in general interact with the institutional structure of a society in shaping its development
path? These questions are made interesting in part because even though it is typically asserted
that economic and political inequality go hand in hand, particularly in Latin America and across
US states, this is not necessarily so everywhere else in the world, or even, as we show, in Colombia.
For example, in much of Sub-Saharan Africa since independence measured economic inequality
has been quite low, but political inequality has been severe with rule by long-running autocrats
or small cliques, most clearly in the Sudan, Angola, the Congo, Malawi, Côte d’Ivoire, Togo and
the Cameroon. This combination led to disastrous development outcomes. In contrast to the
African cases, development in South Korea and Taiwan seems to have taken place precisely in the
context of economic equality, but under dictatorial regimes, with political power concentrated in
the hands of a small elite. Finally, there are examples of rapid development with high economic
inequality but relative political equality, such as Mauritius in the 1970s and 1980s. It is therefore
important to attempt to “unbundle” the separate eﬀects of economic and political inequality on
long-run development both to gain a better understanding of the causes of the process of economic development and to evaluate the newly emerging conventional wisdom about the sources
of underdevelopment in Latin America.
Despite the importance of the aforementioned questions, they have not been tackled by the
existing literature. The early cross-country work finds a negative correlation between economic
inequality and growth (for example Alesina and Rodrik, 1994, Persson and Tabellini, 1994, Per3

Acemoglu and Robinson (2000a, 2006a) also suggest that in societies with significant political inequalities, those
with political power may block the introduction of new technologies or underinvest in public goods because of the
fear that this will erode their political power.

2

otti, 1996), but as noted above, this work does not distinguish between political and economic
inequality, which are often highly correlated. Moreover, even the negative correlation between
economic inequality and subsequent growth appears to be non-robust (Barro, 2000, Forbes, 2000,
Banerjee and Duflo, 2003).4 There is also micro evidence on the relationship between economic
inequality and development, for example Benjamin, Brandt and Giles (2006). The issue of the
eﬀects of political inequality has not been systematically addressed, however, except to the extent
that it can be associated with the absence of democracy. While some theoretical papers suggest
that democracy ought to be good for development (Acemoglu, and Robinson, 2000b, Lizzeri and
Persico, 2005), others argue the relationship is ambiguous (Acemoglu, 2007a) and the empirical
literature mostly finds no eﬀects (Barro, 1997), though Bond, Barndt, Gerring and Moreno (2005)
and Persson and Tabellini (2006) find a positive eﬀect of the cumulative democratic history of a
country on economic growth.
In this paper we investigate the influence of economic and political inequality on long-run
development using microdata from the state of Cundinamarca in Colombia. Our focus is the
critical period of development in the late 19th century when Latin American economies began
to grow and integrate with the world market. Cundinamarca provides a natural setting for such
an investigation since it was the center of the largest pre-Columbian civilization in Colombia,
the Muiscas. It also contains Bogotá the capital both of colonial and independent Colombia. In
many ways, Cundinamarca was at the heart of the Spanish colonial system. Our investigation
is made possible by unique data on 19th-century land ownership. In 1879 and 1890 the state of
Cundinamarca undertook comprehensive land censuses (catastros) which recorded the identity of
each landowner in the state, the name of their farm and the value of their land. We use these data
to construct gini coeﬃcients for the distribution of landed wealth. The land gini is both a natural
and easy to interpret measure of economic inequality, and it is used commonly in the literature.
Moreover, by focusing on land inequality, we can capture the major source of economic inequality
in South America emphasized by Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1997).5
To measure political inequality we collected data on the identity of all of the mayors of the
municipalities of Cundinamarca for the period 1875 to 1895. Specifically, we construct an index of
4
To deal with the ubiquitous omitted variable biases in such regressions, Easterly (2007) instruments inequality
with the extent of land suitable for growing sugarcane and finds a negative eﬀect on growth. Since the presence
of sugar plantations may create negative eﬀects through a variety of channels, including political inequality, this
evidence does not establish that it is economic inequality that matters or that there is a causal eﬀect from overall
economic inequality to growth.
5
Though some of these data has been discussed by historians, for example Jiménez (1985), and Palacios (1981)
provided an analysis of the 1879 data for the entire department, we are the first to study these data more systematically and examine the long-run consequences of land inequality in Cundinamarca.

3

political concentration, which measures the extent to which political oﬃceholding was monopolized
by individuals. Throughout this period, the right to vote in Cundinamarca was restricted by
property and literacy requirements. Nevertheless, the distribution of political power varied a lot
across diﬀerent municipalities of Cundinamarca, with some having frequent turnover of mayors,
while in others the same family or small group of families kept power for extended periods.6
Finally, our data also enable us to investigate another interesting related question, the developmental implications of the overlap between economic and political power. In particular, having
both political and economic power concentrated in the hands of a small group of individuals creates both benefits (since the politicians are willing to choose policies that encourage investment
as this increases the value of their own assets) as well as costs (since a greater degree of elite
control of politics and the economy can lead to the existence of a landed oligarchy, which may
be costly for development).7 We investigate these questions by constructing an index of overlap,
which measures the extent to which large landowners and politicians were the same people.8
The main results of the paper are as follows. First, by way of comparison, using micro data
from the 1860 US census, we show that while the distribution of landed wealth in Cundinamarca
was considerably more unequal than Northern US states, it was less unequal than in the US
South.9 More important and somewhat surprising, we find a negative association between land
inequality (land gini) and political concentration across municipalities in Cundinamarca. Though
this is inconsistent with the stylized picture that, at least in Latin America, political and economic
inequality often covary, it is actually consistent with the historical literature on Colombia which
6

We calculated political concentration both at the level of individuals and aggregating last names to the level
of families. However, the results with families were very similar and in the paper we report results only with
individuals.
7
Classic works that emphasize the cost of landed oligarchy in Latin America include Stein and Stein (1970),
Gilbert (1977), Stone (1990), and Paige (1997). See Schwartz (1996) for a review of the facts and issues. Acemoglu (2007a) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2006b) present models in which such concentration of power can lead
to adverse eﬀects. On the other hand, many simple political economy models suggest that congruence of interests between the politically and economically powerful may be good for economic development (see, for example,
Acemoglu, 2007b).
8
There is an interesting literature that indirectly speaks to this issue. This literature finds that connections
between politicians and firms tend to raise the asset prices of firms (Fisman, 2001, Johnson and Mitton, 2003,
Faccio, 2006), get them preferential access to loans from government banks (Khwaja and Mian, 2005) or policy favors
(Bertrand, Kramarz, Schoar and Thesmar, 2006). Bertrand et al. (2006) also find that politically connected firms
alter their decisions in response to political incentives. However, this literature has not looked at the implications
of these linkages for development outcomes.
9
This in itself is important. We know little about the basic historical facts on comparative wealth inequality in
Latin America and what we do know is not always consistent with the view espoused by Engerman and Sokolof (1997)
that Latin America always had greater economic inequality than the United States (see Jones, 1980, Johnson, 1994).
Most notably, Coatsworth (1998) argues that greater inequality in Latin America is a relatively recent phenomenon
associated with the economic developments of the late 19th century, leading to some group of politically-powerful
individuals monopolizing large productive stretches of land. Our result that land inequality in the US South was
greater than in Cundinamarca provides support to this viewpoint.

4

stresses that politics was a career open to people of many backgrounds (see Saﬀord, 1972, 1974,
Deas 1993, and Uribe-Uran, 2000).
Our second set of results are rather surprising. When we look at current outcomes, we find
that land gini (economic inequality) is positively associated with good outcomes. For example,
areas that were more unequal in the late 19th century have higher levels of secondary and primary
school enrollment, lower poverty and higher urbanization. Figure 3 shows the relationship between
the land gini at the end of the 19th century and contemporary secondary school enrollment in
Cundinamarca. In contrast to Figures 1 and 2 for the United States, there is now a positive
relationship. A natural concern is that this positive relationship may reflect the eﬀect of some
omitted factors, such as higher land quality in places with higher inequality. We attempt to
deal with potential sources of omitted variable bias by controlling for a rich set of geographic
characteristics and current land inequality. Overall, our results suggest that the relationship
shown in Figure 3 is relatively robust. We also find similar results when we look at outcomes
at intermediate dates, such as data from the 1937 census. The estimated eﬀects are also large
economically. For instance, the historical land gini on its own accounts for about 30% of the
variation in the contemporary outcome variables.
Even though this correlation does not establish a causal eﬀect, it is diﬃcult to rationalize
with theories that argue for a direct causal link from economic inequality to long-run economic
development, such as that in Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1997). This is particularly challenging
to the view that greater land inequality will have negative eﬀects on economic development by
depressing education, for example as articulated by Galor and Zeira (1993), Benabou (2000),
Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1997), Galor, Moav and Vollrath (2006) and Ramcharan (2006). Our
evidence shows that land inequality is uncorrelated with literacy in 1937 and has a positive eﬀect
on primary and secondary school enrollment in 1993.
When we turn to political variables, however, we find a fairly robust negative relationship
between political concentration (our measure of political inequality) and good economic outcomes.
Figure 4, for example, shows a significant negative relationship between our index of political
concentration at the end of the 19th century and secondary school enrollment today. In contrast,
we find no robust eﬀect of the overlap measure discussed above on either long-term or mediumterm outcomes.
Though diﬃcult to reconcile with the conventional wisdom, our findings are consistent with
other strands of research, including both the historical literature on Colombia and Latin America
and work by Bates (1981) on the political economy of Africa. Bates (1981) documented that eco5

nomic policy in post independence Kenya was more conducive to better economic outcomes than
in Ghana because of the balance of power between politicians and economic elites in the former
country. In Ghana, smallholders growing cocoa could not solve the collective action problem and
were unable to restrain politicians from engaging in costly clientelism and choosing highly distortionary economic policies. In Kenya, mostly as a legacy of white settlement in the highlands,
farm sizes were larger and an agricultural elite was able to organize and check the power of the
politicians in Nairobi. In consequence, better policies and economic outcomes resulted. Therefore,
Bates’s comparison of Ghana versus Kenya provides an example in which greater (land) inequality
led to better economic outcomes.10
In this light, a possible interpretation for our results is that powerful and rich landowners
may be creating checks against the most rapacious tendencies of politicians. Consequently, in the
municipalities with major landowners, distortionary policies that could be pursued by politicians
were limited, and this led to better economic outcomes. This interpretation is also consistent with
the negative association between political inequality and economic outcomes (as well as the negative relationship between economic and political inequality we find in Cundinamarca). Though
plausible, this explanation is in stark contrast to both the conventional wisdom about the source
of underdevelopment in Latin America and to the insights of many economic models emphasizing the negative eﬀects of inequality by restricting access to credit or through political economy
mechanisms. As a check on the plausibility of our interpretation, we use the microdata from
the Cundinamarca land censuses to construct a separate overall land gini. While the standard
measure of the land gini captures inequality among landowners, the overall land gini measures
inequality in the entire population, assigning zero land holdings to families without any land. According to Bates’s hypothesis, it should be land inequality among landowners–i.e., the standard
land gini–that should have a positive eﬀect, while overall land gini should have no impact on
economic outcomes. According to the Engerman-Sokoloﬀ type hypotheses and to economic models emphasizing the adverse eﬀects of inequality, both of these measures should have a negative
eﬀect on economic development. We find that when both measures are included together, it is
inequality among landowners–the standard land gini–that has a positive eﬀect on subsequent
10
Our findings and this interpretation are also consistent with Coatsworth (1998, 2005) and Nugent and Robinson
(2002), who have emphasized that economic inequality in Latin America is better thought of as an outcome of the
unequal distribution of political influence. In turn these more general arguments echo a large literature by historians,
for instance Solberg (1969) or McCreery (1994).
Our results are also consistent with Banerjee and Somanathan’s (2006) finding that higher land inequality is
associated with greater public good provision in India. They suggest that this may be because higher land inequality
allows landowners to solve their collective action problems.

6

economic outcomes, while the overall land gini has a small negative and insignificant impact.
One question raised by our interpretation is the source of the diﬀerence between the results we
find in Cundinamarca and the patterns across US states in the 19th century, where land inequality
appears to be strongly negatively correlated with economic outcomes. We believe that the answer
to this question may lie in the diﬀerences in the level of political development between the United
States and Colombia. Like 20th century Africa, Colombia in both the 19th and 20th centuries
can be characterized, in the terminology of Acemoglu, Robinson and Verdier (2004), as “weakly
institutionalized” in the sense that political institutions placed few constraints on what actions
politicians could take. Bates’ insight was that in such circumstances land inequality may be
associated with better outcomes because, at least when landed elites are distinct from politicians,
such elites can check the power of politicians. In the central areas of Cundinamarca, where landed
elites were more consolidated and land inequality higher, they were able to constrain politicians.
In consequence political concentration was lower. In more peripheral areas of the department, it
was easier for politicians to consolidate their hold on power since there was no strong economic
elite to counterbalance their power. When unchecked, politicians were less accountable and, as we
show, were able to accumulate large amounts of land and wealth. The resulting political economy
also appears to have involved a severe lack of public good provision. In contrast, the relationship
between inequality and economic outcomes appears to be diﬀerent in strongly institutionalized
environments such as the United States. Here, political institutions place certain constrains on
politicians so that having a strong landed elite is not necessary as a check against politicians and
does not necessarily create a tendency for better outcomes. Rather, and possibly consistent with
the US evidence, in such environments greater inequality may have negative economic or political
consequences (for example, in the extreme via “political capture,” as in Acemoglu and Robinson,
2006b, or Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni, 2006). This description is broadly consistent with the
situation in the US South. Landed elites in the Southern US, both in the pre and post-bellum
periods, tended to have more say in politics and were able to use their power strategically to
generate rents for themselves, by creating a low-wage, low-skill labor market and by underinvesting
in education so as to make the plantation labor force easier to control and less mobile (Wright,
1986, Margo, 1990).
Therefore, the overall pattern that emerges from this interpretation is one that can be summarized schematically as follows:11
11

Our discussion and the schematic summary above represent the US South as “strongly institutionalized”. An
alternative is to view the US South, just as the 19th-century Colombia, as weakly institutionalized. In this case, the
outcomes in the US South are the intermediate outcomes generated by highly unequal weakly-institutionalized poli-

7

weakly
institutionalized
polities
strongly
institutionalized
polities

high economic
inequality
better property
rights

captured
politics

Examples
Kenya
Central
Cundinamarca
Southern US

low economic
inequality
worse property
rights

competitive
politics

Examples
Ghana
Peripheral
Cundinamarca
Northern US

Our final set of results also provide support for the interpretation presented above. We exploit
the micro data on land holdings and the identity of politicians to investigate the mechanism via
which political inequality might be aﬀecting economic outcomes. In particular, we use linear and
quantile regressions to document that those with political power are able to increase the value of
their land holdings much more rapidly than others. In particular, an individual who remains a
politician for four years triples the value of his landholdings relative to other landowners. This is a
very large eﬀect, suggesting that politicians are able to use their position in order to increase their
wealth substantially. These results illustrate a direct mechanism through which political power
played an important role in the allocation of economic resources in 19th-century Cundinamarca.12
Finally, consistent with these results, we also find that those with political power seem to be
significantly more likely to acquire additional land than the likelihood of those with land to
become politicians.
Overall, even though what we present in this paper are historical correlations (not necessarily
estimates of causal eﬀects or structural parameters), they are both challenging to the conventional
wisdom and paint a picture very diﬀerent from those obtained from cross-country studies and
from the within-US variation shown in Figures 1 and 2. At least for Cundinamarca (and as we
will show below, for Colombia as a whole), there is no evidence that greater land inequality is
associated with bad economic outcomes. On the contrary, greater land inequality more than 120
years ago has a positive predictive power for economic outcomes today, even after controlling for
current land inequality and a variety of geographic controls. In contrast, greater monopolization
of political power in the hands of particular families or individuals during the 19th century seems
to be robustly associated with worse outcomes today.
ties, which are inferior to those arising in strongly-institutionalized polities such as the US North. This alternative
perspective is consistent with all the results we present in this paper and with our general interpretation, though
we believe that the power of the Federal State in the United States in the 19th century put certain real restrictions
on politics in the South and justifies our schematic representation of the South as strongly institutionalized.
12
A number of caveats are once again important to note. First, unobserved heterogeneity in the talents of
diﬀerent individuals might be responsible for some of these results. Second, our regressions are not informative
about whether this process of political power leading to economic wealth is eﬃcient or ineﬃcient.

8

The paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2 we describe the historical and institutional setting of Cundinamarca and some of the relevant literature. Section 3 describes the historical and
contemporary data we use in this paper and introduces the measures of land gini, political concentration and overlap. Section 4 compares land inequality in Cundinamarca to inequality in US
states around the same time. In Section 5 we examine the correlations between these variables
and long-run outcomes in 1993 and 1937. Sections 6 and 7 examine the dynamics of wealth
accumulation and political oﬃce holding. Section 8 concludes.

2

The Setting

In this section, we provide some relevant background information about the history and institutions of Cundinamarca and Colombia and discuss in more detail the relationship between our
work and the relevant historical and social scientific literatures. The modern department of
Cundinamarca13 was the heart of the Muisca civilization at the time of the conquest of Colombia and the capital of Colombia, Bogotá, is located in the middle of the department. Since the
greatest density of indigenous peoples were in Cundinamarca and the neighboring department of
Boyacá, Spanish colonial institutions originated here and the first grants of encomienda, the institution which allocated the labor and tribute of indigenous peoples to conquistadors, were given by
the conquistador Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada in this region beginning in 1538.14 Subsequently
large haciendas emerged in Cundinamarca and throughout the colonial period the department
remained at the heart of state and society in the Spanish province of New Grenada.15 This situation persisted after independence with Bogotá remaining the capital and in the period we study
Cundinamarca was clearly at the heart of national politics and the home of a great deal of the
most important sections of the political elite.16
From at least the 1850 presidential election onwards political conflict in Colombia coalesced
around two parties, the Conservatives and Liberals. In 1850 the Liberals won the presidency
for the first time and José Hilario López became president. From then until 1885 the Liberals
controlled the central state except for a brief period after 1856 when they lost a presidential
election to the Conservatives held under universal male suﬀrage (Bushnell, 1971). The Liberals
13

The name for the department stems from an Indian phrase Kundur marqa which means the “Condor’s nest.”
The best overview of the colonial period are Colmenares (1973), Melo (1996) and the early chapters of Saﬀord
and Palacios (2001).
15
Some narrative information on the emergence of haciendas in central Cundinamarca is in Pardo Umaña (1946)
and Villamarin (1975).
16
Key Conservative Presidents such as Miguel Antonio Caro (President between 1894-1898) and José Manuel
Marroquı́n (President 1900-1904), both of whom appear in the 1890 catastro, lived their entire life on the Sabana
de Bogotá, the intermontane plane on which Bogotá sits.
14

9

shortly afterwards reclaimed control through a brief civil war and wrote a new liberal constitution
at Rionegro in 1863.17 The Rionegro constitution was highly federal and the right to determine
who could vote was delegated to the states.
In 1885 there was another civil war between the parties and power switched to the Conservatives until 1930. This period, known as the Regeneración (Regeneration) led to the re-writing
of the constitution and an undoing of many of the policies promoted by the Liberals. In particular, federalism was abolished and power was centralized to the national state. There were also
important changes in economic policies, for example a significant increase in tariﬀs and a general
movement away from free trade.18 The Liberal election victory of 1930 led to the introduction of
universal male suﬀrage in 1936 and the introduction of more progressive social and labor market
policies but led to increasing political polarization between the parties which culminated in the
victory of Conservative Mariano Ospina in 1946 followed by a partisan civil war (the so-called La
Violencia) which led to a military coup in 1953. The parties negotiated a return to democracy in
1958.
There are many interpretations of long-run development in Colombia from various perspectives. The 19th century Liberal politicians and intellectuals, such as Manuel Murillo Toro, Salvador Camacho Roldán, José Maria Samper and Miguel Samper, wrote extensively on economic
matters and promoted a version of classic 19th-century liberalism as the way to modernize and
develop the country. Vestiges of the colonial system were one of the main things they criticized.
During the Liberal period between 1850 and 1885 tariﬀs were cut, monopolies abolished, the
remnants of colonial institutions such as slavery finally destroyed, and Church lands were expropriated. However, the Liberal period also generated significant economic and political instability,
and McGreevey (1970) argues that there was a notable increase in inequality during this era.
Despite transitory booms it was only with the sustained expansion of the coﬀee economy from
the 1880s onwards that economic growth began in Colombia. Growth has been sustained but
slow ever since, and after 1900 Colombia has remained at about 18% of US GDP per-capita
(Robinson and Urrutia, 2007). The development of the coﬀee industry was linked most famously
to a frontier expansion into the current states of Caldas, Risaralda and Quindı́o which is typically
characterized as rather egalitarian by Latin American standards (the classic work is by Parsons,
1949).
For our focus, the institutions governing the selection of mayors and their powers are essential.
17

The best overviews of politics in this period are Delpar (1981), Park (1985).
For overviews of the politics of this period see McGreevey (1970), Bergquist (1978), Posada-Carbó (1997) or
Mazzuca and Robinson (2006).
18

10

During the Liberal period mayors were appointed by the departmental governors who were themselves elected. After 1885 and the centralization of power, governors still appointed mayors but
were themselves appointed by the president of the Republic. Municipal councilors were elected
throughout the entire period. The centralized appointment of mayors was only abandoned in
1986. Before 1885 the governor of Cundinamarca was a Liberal19 except for a brief period in 1867
when a Conservative, Ignacio Gutiérrez was elected, only to be replaced with a Liberal by the
federal government in 1868 (Delpar, 1981, p. 96). After 1880 the governor was a more moderate Liberal from the camp of President Rafael Núñez (called Independents) and by the time of
Núñez’s second presidency after 1884 Independents were cooperating with Conservatives in the
department (Park, 1985, p. 250). Under the Political and Municipal Code of 1858 (Estado de
Cundinamarca, 1859) mayors were appointed each year along with a substitute and the term of
the mayor was six months after which he was replaced by the substitute for six months. Article
130 of the code says “At the end of each term, the substitute becomes the mayor and executes
the functions in the next period; only in extraordinary cases there will be a new appointment of
the mayor, since in ordinary cases the only appointment that can take place is the one for the
substitute each semester.” In practice, however, repeated terms for the same mayor were common.
For example, in Suesca, Rafael Olaya was mayor continually from 1871 to 1883 (Olaya was also
the fifth largest landowner in the municipality with land worth 24,000 pesos in 1879 when then
mean value of land in the municipality was 1,429 pesos). After 1885, the law was changed so
that the term of a mayor became one year and mayors could be oﬃcially reappointed (Estado de
Cundinamarca, 1889, Article 227).
In terms of the power and responsibilities of the mayor, Article 127 of the 1858 code says
that “The mayor is the highest figure of the public administration in the District, and as the
representative of the Executive Power he is in charge of the execution of the laws in the District.”
Mayors were in charge of raising property taxes (‘rents’) to fund schools and Article 298 of the
1858 code states that there “Is an obligation for every city, village or parish to maintain a public
primary school for boys and another one for girls.” Taxes were also supposed to pay for the police
and public works such as the maintenance of roads and bridges. Mayors therefore had a large
number of tasks with respect to the enforcement of laws and the provision of public goods and
Cruz Santos (1965, Volume I, p. 519) estimates that in 1869-1870 about 23% of total government
expenditures were decided at the municipal level.
19

Even though the period before 1885 was dominated at the national level by Liberals, Conservatives controlled
the states of Antioquia and Tolima.

11

One of the most important parts of the mayors’ responsibilities from the point of view of
this paper was his role in adjudicating land disputes. During the 19th century large areas of
government owned land, or baldı́os, were distributed to individuals in Colombia and there were
constant disputes over the title to lands. Although the right to “regulate the distribution or
destiny of uncultivated lands” was delegated to the municipal councils, the secondary literature
on this makes it very clear that mayors played a pivotal role in determining the outcome of these
conflicts, probably because they were in charge of the police. Palacios’ (1980) seminal work on
the evolution of the coﬀee economy in Colombia has an extensive discussion of the allocation
of land and property rights noting that “local control of power was the sine qua non in this
process of distribution” (p. 186). Although national laws gave “squatters” the chance to file
for title in government lands if no other previous title existed, the reality was that many were
expropriated by those who controlled the instruments of local political power. LeGrand (1986,
p. 73) notes “By their compliance with or disregard of legal prescriptions, municipal authorities
shaped the expression and resolution of the public land conflicts. Given their strategic position in
the bureaucratic hierarchy, they also played a significant role in interpreting the issues involved
in any given dispute to authorities at higher levels.” Mayors and local police were the people
who evicted squatters and supported or denied claims to land ownership. Both Palacios (1980,
pp. 185-195) and LeGrand illustrate this with many stories. For instance, LeGrand describes the
typical way in which squatters would be forced to recognize the title of the politically powerful:
“Once entrepreneurs had established property rights over the land, whether through grants or
by illegal means, they then took action to deprive the settlers living there of their independence.
Accompanied by the local mayor or a police patrol, they informed the settlers who had opened
the land that they had mistakenly occupied private property” (p. 58).
Who were these mayors? Christie (1979, p. 50) in his study of local political bosses–
gamonales (also known as caciques)–argues “Only sometimes were they the largest landowners,”
and LeGrand (1986, p. 73) asserts “Large landowners, for the most part, declined to occupy local
political posts.” One interesting source on these matters is Rufino Gutiérrez who in his capacity
as Prefect visited many municipalities of Cundinamarca in 1886 and 1887 and subsequently wrote
a memoir (Gutiérrez, 1920).20 Gutiérrez (pp. 90-91) points out that few mayors were important
landowners, but instead tended to be from small landowners. He argues that the major landowners
20

Article 115 of the 1858 Municipal Code states that “The Prefect, as political representative of the Executive
Power, is in charge of the Political administration of the Department and the Corregidores and Alcaldes are subject
to him,” Article 116 continues that the Prefect will “visit all the Districts of the Department once in a year and
find out if the laws have been implemented and enforce them for a better execution.”

12

used their influence to get mayors appointed who would favor their interests (see also Deas, 1971,
on local politics). These conclusions are consistent with the general historiography on Colombia
which, following Saﬀord (1972, 1974), has played down the political role of large landowners.
Though Colombia did have land-owning caudillos like José Maria Obando and Tomás Mosquera,
this literature claims that, by and large, politics was a career in 19th-century Colombia and
attracted people from all backgrounds (see also Uribe-Uran, 2000). Our empirical findings are
partially consistent with this view. We find that there were many non-land-owning mayors (often
using their powers to enrich themselves), though there was also some overlap between landowners
and politicians. Indeed in a number of municipalities, there were close links between the largest
landowners and local politics. In addition to the case of Suesca discussed above, in Fomeque the
largest landowner, Manuel Pardo Rojas (land valued at 20,020 pesos in 1879 when the mean land
value of landholdings in the municipality was 989 pesos) was mayor six times. In Une, Simon
Rojas (land holding of 3,500 pesos when the mean was 883 pesos) was mayor ten times between
1873 and 1883. There are many other examples of mayors belonging to the top quintile of the
land distribution.
Moreover, as Christie (1979, 1986) himself showed, elite families were heavily involved in local
politics. Christie, in his re-examination of the nature of frontier expansion in 19th century Colombia, compiled a list of the mayors and members of the local councils of all the municipalities of
Viejo Caldas up until 1905. Using documents on the history of Manizales and other municipalities, Christie was able to determine the 27 most prestigious families who were also owners of great
land concessions in the region. Matching the oﬃcial posts with the last names of these families,
he estimated that during the period between 1827 and 1905 more than 2,500 out of the 3,500
positions available were occupied by members of these families. When doing the same exercise but
for the year 1920 this time, Christie found that 75% of the mayors came from the same families.
What do we know about the process by which mayors were appointed? Though we do not have
direct evidence on this, the most likely process that drove the appointments is that governors had
to respect local power structures and local gamonales and caciques. Neither the central state nor
the department of Cundinamarca had military forces that were suﬃcient to intervene eﬀectively
in local politics and in practice it was probably impossible to overturn local power structures, even
had there been an incentive. Evidence supporting this interpretation comes from the dramatic
shift in power with the Regeneración in 1885 in which the Conservatives replaced the Liberals
at the national level (see Mazzuca and Robinson, 2006). Even though at the national level the
Conservatives drove the Liberals out of the legislature to such an extent that in the 1890s there
13

was only one Liberal, Rafael Uribe Uribe, in the legislature, in most municipalities the same
mayors were appointed before and after the Regeneración. Additional evidence consistent with
this pattern comes from the Memorias of Gutiérrez. Gutiérrez records that he was called urgently
to visit Choachi and found that the public administration was in a terrible shape. He notes
that “the person that by that time was the Mayor, Mr. Patrocinio Pardo, did not satisfy the
position, for several justified reasons, we demanded his resignation and appointed his substitute
Mr. Pedro Angel Garcia” (p. 51). Though Gutiérrez may have removed Patrocinio Pardo, he
was back as mayor in 1890, 1891 and 1893, and had previously been mayor in 1878 and 1881.
Pedro Angel Garcı́a (who was in the top quintile of the land distribution with land of 2,180 pesos
when the municipal average was 874 pesos) served as mayor nine times between 1871 and 1891
and several other members of the Pardo and Garcı́a families did as well. The fact that Patrocinio
Pardo could be removed for incompetence but was quickly re-appointed is consistent with the
interpretation that the governor, who made the appointments, had to recognize the power of local
elites. The situation appears to have been similar in Suesca. Rafael Olaya was removed from the
oﬃce of mayor in 1873 for manipulating adhesiones–endorsements or declarations of support for
diﬀerent political candidates (Delpar, 1981, p. 102). But our data show that he was immediately
re-appointed. Another interesting example comes from Deas’ (1977) study of the Hacienda Santa
Bárbara in Sasaima. Though he points out that Sasaima was and is a Conservative municipality
(p. 286), the first person appointed mayor after the Regeneración was Felipe Castellanos with
Esteban Garcı́a as his alternate. Yet both of these people had been appointed in the Liberal
period, Castellanos as mayor in 1879 and 1883 and Garcı́a in 1880. The probable interpretation
of this is that even Liberals had to appoint Conservative mayors in Sasaima.
Finally, the degree of political concentration in Cundinamarca, which we will exploit and
document further below, is illustrated by a few prominent examples. For instance, in Viani, out
of 44 mayors who held oﬃce, half of them corresponded to only 4 individuals and 25 out of the 44
came from either the Bonilla or Hernandez family. In Arbelaez, the Rodriguez family was in power
in every single year for which we have data on. With the exception of 1888, Ramon Rodriguez
was the mayor in every year between 1887 and 1895. In Quipile, only 3 individuals account for
20 of the 44 mayor appointments that were recorded. Francisco Escobar was the mayor during
1880-1884 and Genaro Mendieta from 1888-1895. In La Calera, a municipality founded by Don
Pedro de Tovar in 1765, half of the mayor appointments came from the Tovar family which was
in power every year during the 1875-1895 period (except in 1889). In Guasca, almost 70% of
the 51 mayor appointments came from only 3 families and the Acosta and Rodriguez controlled
14

power during most of the period. Similarly, most of Cucunubá’s mayors came from the Gómez
family, which was in power during 1875-1881 and 1887-1895. Today, much of Cucunubá is owned
by Pedro Gómez. These are only a few examples that illustrate the way in which power was
concentrated in the hands of a few families and individuals in many municipalities.

3

The Data

3.1

Cadastral Data and the Land Gini

Our basic source of data on economic inequality in 19th century Cundinamarca are the cadastral
(land census) data collected by the state of Cundinamarca in 1879 and 1890.21 The cadastral
information was collected by State oﬃcials for tax purposes and provides information on the
location, owners and value of every plot with value above $25 Colombian pesos in 1879 and above
$100 in 1890. The censoring values for each land census are low, so that we have information for
most plots. In 1879, there are 15,478 landowners in Cundinamarca and this number increases to
18,598 in 1890. We have no real information about the reliability of this data though Camacho
Roldán (1892) praises the 1868 data as being accurate. Gutiérrez (1920) noted in his visit to
Usme in 1886 that the value of lands for that municipality in the catastro was low relative to his
own expectations, but he does not systematically record views on this for all the places he visited.
We will construct two measures of land inequality. The first is the standard measure of the
land gini coeﬃcient, which measures land inequality among landowners. For each municipality at
each date, we construct the gini coeﬃcient using the standard formula
gmt =

nt X
nt
1 X
|yi,t − yj,t |
n2t ȳt i=1 j=1

(1)

where i = 1, ..., nt denotes the total number of land owners at time t, yi,t is the value of land
owned by individual i at time t, and and ȳt =

1
nt

nt
X

yi,t is the average value of land at time t.

i=1

Throughout most of our analysis, we average the gini coeﬃcients across the two dates for each
municipality to arrive to our main measure of (average) land gini. The average gini over this
entire period was 0.65 (see Table 1 below). If we look at the two land censuses separately, we find
that the land gini was 0.64 in 1879 and increased slightly to 0.66 in 1890.22
21
Cundinamarca also undertook such catastros in 1868 and in 1915. Unfortunately we have been unable to locate
these data, possibly because the State archive of Cundinamarca was burned down in April 1948 in the rioting which
followed the assassination of the Liberal politician Jorge Eliécer Gaitan, though see Camacho Roldán (1892) for a
discussion of the 1868 data. The departments of Tolima and Santander also conducted several catastros in the 19th
century but we have also been unable to find these data.
22
There were however, striking cases of land inequality such as those of Fontibón, formerly the site of the

15

Despite its widespread use, the land gini suﬀers from an obvious problem. An area in which
all land is held by two very large landowners will have a low value of the land gini, because land is
equally distributed among landowners. But if we looked at the population as a whole, there would
be tremendous amount of land inequality. To alleviate this problem, we construct an alternative
measure, overall land gini, which again computes equation (1), but uses the total number of
families and assigns zero land holdings to the families who do not appear in the catastro.23 We
start our analysis with the land gini and then show how controlling for both the land gini (among
landowners) and overall land gini aﬀects the results.24
In Figure 5, we superimpose the distribution of the land gini on a map of Cundinamarca.
This figure is useful both to show the geographic structure of Cundinamarca and the distribution
of municipalities, and also depicts the variation in land inequality. Darker colors in the figure
correspond to higher values of the land gini (as indicated in the legend to the figure). The picture
reveals that land inequality tends to be higher in the series of intermontane basins to the west
and north of Bogotá, but it is also high in the far western municipalities which are down in the
valley of the Magdalena river.

3.2

Political Concentration

To measure political inequality, we collected data on politician (mayor) names from the Registro del
Estado and Gaceta de Cundinamarca, oﬃcial newspapers which published the names of principal
and substitute mayors appointed in each municipality. We were able to find a total of 4763
mayor appointments between 1875 and 1895.25 Each appointment however, does not correspond
necessarily to a diﬀerent individual, for the same individuals were sometimes re-appointed in
many years. Hence, the 4763 diﬀerent appointments we collected correspond to 2300 diﬀerent
individuals during this period. A striking fact is the large number of mayors. While in principle,
two mayors (principal and substitute) should be appointed per year in each municipality, an
average of 2.9 appointments per municipality was observed. This is because there are resignations
encomienda of Jiménez de Quesada, which had a gini coeﬃcient of 0.857 in 1879 and Ricaurte with a gini coeﬃcient
of 0.891 in 1890.
23
Since the 19th century censuses do not provide information on the number of families or households, but only
on the number of individuals, we used the estimate of 10 members per family provided by Gomez (1969) to convert
the number of individuals in a municipality into the number of families. We then calculated the number of landless
families by subtracting the total number of landowners from the total number of families.
24
We are only able to compute the overall land gini for Cundinamarca at the end of the 19th century. We do not
have micro data for Cundinamarca or the rest of Colombia today, thus the contemporary land gini numbers we use
below are for inequality among landowners.
25
Information was not reported for every single municipality in every year, but there does not appear to be any
systematic bias in this.

16

and replacements in some years.
We used these data to construct a measure of the concentration of political power. Our
measure of political concentration for municipality m at time t is computed as:
pmt = −

Number of Diﬀerent Individuals in Powermt
.
Number of mayor appointmentsmt

The negative sign in front is introduced so that higher values of the index correspond to higher
political concentration (thus making the interpretation of the coeﬃcients easier). Consequently,
our political concentration index takes a value of -1 when there is very low political concentration,
and values close to 0 for high levels of concentration. We computed this index for the whole period
1875-1895. Table 1 shows that the mean of this variable is -0.56.
Figure 6 is similar to Figure 5 and maps political concentration across the municipalities of
Cundinamarca. Now darker colors correspond to higher levels of political concentration. This
figure shows that places with higher levels of political concentration are spread out all over the
state. They range from municipalities like Beltran in the Magdalena river valley in the west, to
Ubala which is on the eastern slopes of the cordillera. Also highly concentrated are the southern
coﬀee growing municipality of Arbelaez, founded in the mid 19th century, and the northern
municipality of Sutatausa, an area of dense Muisca settlement and one of the first municipalities
to be founded in Cundinamarca.

3.3

Measuring the Overlap of Wealth and Political Power

In addition to our basic measures of economic and political inequality, we constructed a measure
of the overlap between political oﬃceholding and landed wealth. To do this we classified the
individuals in our sample according to whether they were politicians, rich, or both. We define
an individual as being both rich and a politician if we can find an exact match of the first and
last name in the catastro and in the list of mayors within each municipality. Naturally, this
procedure may lead to an overstatement of overlap if we match two diﬀerent persons with the
same first and last name, though this appears to be unlikely within a municipality. On the other
hand, there are various reasons for understating overlap, since rich landowners may be politicians
in neighboring municipalities or they may have substantial political influence without becoming
mayor’s themselves.
To construct our measure of overlap, let us introduce some notation. Let Nmt be the set of
adult males living in municipality m at time t, Lmt be the set of adult males without any substantial landholdings or political power, Rmt be the rich, i.e. those with substantial landholdings
17

and finally let Pmt be those with political power (mayors). It is clear that:
Nmt = Lmt ∪ Rmt ∪ Pmt .
Let #Rmt be the number of individuals in the set Rmt , and define #Nmt , #Pmt , # (Rmt ∪ Pmt )
and #Lmt similarly. Since we can directly compute #Pmt and #Rmt , and observe #Nmt , the
number of individuals who are neither rich nor politicians can be computed as
#Lmt = #Nmt − # (Rmt ∪ Pmt ) .
For the purposes of our analysis, we define individuals whose land plots are in the top 25%
most valuable plots as “rich landowners”. In these calculations, we compute the thresholds for
the entire region (and not for each municipality separately) so as to exploit the variation in
the presence of big landowners driven by inequality across regions which we want to take into
account.26 In calculating the number of rich landowners in each municipality, we use the catastros
for 1879 and 1890. For politicians, we use neighboring dates to these, so that for 1879, any
individual who is a mayor between 1877 and 1882 is considered a politician, and for 1890, we look
at the window from 1888 to 1892.
Our measure of overlap in municipality m at time t is computed as
omt =

# (Rmt ∩ Pmt )
.
# (Rmt ∪ Pmt )

Our main measure of overlap is the average of this index for the two dates 1879 and 1890. Table
1 shows that the mean of this variable is 0.07, so that 7% of rich landowners and politicians were
both rich and in power.

3.4

Data on Outcomes

We have two sets of outcome variables. The contemporary data are from the 1993 population
census and the Colombian statistical agency DANE (Departamento Administrativo Nacional de
Estadı́stica).
We constructed two basic education variables from the 1993 census; primary school enrollment
which was calculated as the number of children attending school that are between 7 and 11
years old divided by the total number of children that are between 7 and 11 years old in the
municipality; and secondary school enrollment defined as the number of children attending school
26
We have also computed an alternative measure where individuals whose land plots are in the top 50% most
valuable plots are counted as “rich landowners,” with very similar results. We do not report these results to save
space.

18

that are between 12 and 17 years old divided by the total number of children that are between
12 and 17 years old in the municipality. The descriptive statistics in Table 1 show that there is
much more variation across municipalities in secondary school enrollment, motivating our focus
on this measure (though we will also show results using primary school enrollment).
Figure 7 is similar to Figures 5 and 6 and maps the secondary enrollment data across the
Cundinamarca municipalities. Darker colors now indicate higher enrollment. It is evident from
this figure that enrollment is higher closer to Bogotá and particularly on the Sabana de Bogotá.
We also used the 1993 census to construct a measure of urbanization, defined as the proportion
of the population in urban areas. The census reports urban population for each municipality so we
simply divided this by the total population of the municipality. Each municipality has one urban
area, the cabecera where the municipal government buildings are located (other sub-districts of
the municipality are called veredas) so urban population is the population of the cabecera.
Finally, the 1993 census also provides an index of poverty, referred to as unsatisfied basic needs
(which has the Spanish acronym NBI–Necesidades Básicas Insatisfechas) and used commonly in
Colombia and in other Latin American countries. In this index, a household is counted as having
unsatisfied basic needs if it meets any one of five diﬀerent criteria. These are (1) inadequate
dwelling, such as the floor is composed of soil or the house is made of precarious building materials.
(2) The household’s dwelling lacks basic services, such as piped water, sewers or toilets. (3) The
household is overcrowded which is defined to be one where the number of people per bedroom
is greater than 3. (4) The household is characterized by inadequate school attendance which is
indicated by a child between 7 and 11 years old who does not attend school. (5) The household
has high economic dependence, meaning that the head of the household has less than fourth
grade education and has more than three dependents. The indicator we use is the proportion of
households in a municipality with unsatisfied basic needs.
For the medium-term outcomes, we used data from the 1937 population census. While there
are no data on educational enrollment in this census, we can measure the proportion of adults
who were literate. We also calculated urbanization in 1937 in exactly the same way as we did in
1993. Finally, the 1937 census also records for each municipality the total number of buildings
and also the number of buildings which lack access to electricity, water and sewage. We therefore
constructed the fraction of buildings without access to all public services by combining these two
pieces of information, which provides us with a measure of non-educational public good provision.
We use a variety of exogenous control variables in the regressions in order to ensure that our
results are not driven by omitted diﬀerences in the quality or productivity of land. Our controls
19

include altitude of the municipality (in meters above sea level), the distance of the municipality to
Bogotá (in kilometers), area (in squared kilometers), average rainfall (in millimeters). All of these
data were obtained from Instituto Geográfico Agustin Codazzi in Bogotá. Distance to Bogotá
may be particularly important, since Figure 5 suggests that there are a number of municipalities
near Bogotá that have relatively high land inequality. We check the robustness of our results to
including high degree polynomials in distance to Bogotá that would capture any non-linear eﬀect
of this variable.
Finally, we also control for the year of foundation of a municipality (from Bernard and Zambrano, 1993). While the highlands of Cundinamarca were settled in the 16th century, much of
the lower Western and Eastern slopes were only settled in the mid 19th century in a process of
frontier expansion. This frontier expansion was associated with the spread of the coﬀee economy
(see Rivas, 1946, or Palacios, 1980, for discussion) and the determination of property rights in
land and the nature of the societies that formed in the 19th century may be quite diﬀerent from
those founded during the colonial period (see Jiménez, 1985, for a detailed treatment of one such
municipality, Viotá). We include the foundation date in some of our regressions to control for this
source of omitted variable bias.

3.5

Descriptive Statistics and Correlations

Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for our entire sample and also for subsamples created according
to land gini and political concentration (both average values over the two dates and the subsamples
were created by dividing the sample according to median values). A number of features are notable
in this table. First, the land gini at the end of the 19th century was quite high, 0.65. Moreover, it
still continues to be very high today (third row). The standard deviation of this variable indicates
that there is considerable variation in the extent of land inequality within Cundinamarca. The
same applies to the extent of political inequality. Also, as noted above, the outcome variables
also show considerable variation, except primary school enrollment, which is very high in most
municipalities, thus exhibits less variation than the other outcome variables.
Table 1 also shows descriptive statistics by dividing the sample into low and high land inequality areas (columns 2 and 3) and into low and high political concentration areas (columns 4
and 5). The comparison of columns 2 and 3 shows that all economic outcomes are better in high
land inequality areas. For example, secondary school enrollment is 65% in high land inequality
areas, whereas low land inequality areas have only 52% secondary school enrollment. In contrast,
when we turn to political concentration, low political concentration areas have better economic

20

outcomes. For example, secondary school enrollment is 60% in low political concentration areas
and 56% in high political concentration areas. These diﬀerences are consistent with the patterns
shown in Figures 3 and 4, and the regression analysis will show that these diﬀerences are relatively
robust to controlling for a variety of geographic and other controls.
Table 2 describes our data further by showing the correlation matrix among our main historical
explanatory variables, the land gini at the end of the 19th century, the overall land gini at the
end of the 19th century, the contemporary land gini, the political concentration index and the
overlap variable, as well as our main outcome variables. This table shows that there is a negative
correlation between political and economic inequality, which is the opposite of the pattern that
appears in the 19th-century US (where political inequality also appears to be higher in the more
unequal South). This contrast between the US and Cundinamarca confirms the discussion in the
Introduction. In any case, the correlation between the two variables is not very large (correlation
coeﬃcient -0.25), giving us an opportunity to determine the separate correlation between political
and economic inequality and economic outcomes. Overlap is even less correlated with these two
variables.
The outcome variables are also correlated with each other, though not very highly so. For
example, the correlation between urbanization and primary school enrollment is only 0.23. This
implies that there is independent information in all of these outcome variables, and considerable
independent variation in our basic inequality variables.

4

The Inequality of Wealth: Cundinamarca and the United States

As discussed in the Introduction, a recently-emerging consensus relates the current diﬀerences in
economic outcomes between the United States and South America to 19th-century diﬀerences in
inequality (especially land inequality). Was land more unequally distributed in Cundinamarca
than in the United States in the 19th century? In this section, we will see that the answer to this
question is more nuanced than typically presumed. Cundinamarca appears to be substantially
more unequal than the Northern United States, but more equal than the US South.
To provide a comparison of land inequality between Cundinamarca and the United States
in the 19th century, we compare our land inequality data (described above) with US microdata
from the 1860 land census provided in the Gallman-Parker and Bateman-Foust samples. These
data, which are downloadable from the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) website, comprise two famous random samples taken from the 1860 census. The
Gallman-Parker sample contains variables recorded for 5,228 farms located in the major cotton21

producing counties of the South (see, e.g., Schaefer and Schmitz, 1985, Schmitz and Schaefer,
1986). The farms were selected from the 1860 manuscript census schedules by a sample of all
farms in 405 Southern counties which each produced over 1,000 bales of cotton in 1860. This
resulted in a 1.67 percent sample of all farms in the major cotton-growing counties of the eleven
states of the Confederacy. We use the data on the value of the farms in dollars. The BatemanFoust sample (see Bateman and Foust, 1974) contains demographic, occupational, and economic
information for over 21,000 rural households in the northern US. The data were obtained from
the agricultural and population schedules of the 1860 census and cover all households in a single
township from each of 102 randomly-selected counties in sixteen northern states. We again use
the data on the dollar value of farms. Together these datasets give us a picture of land distribution
in both the northern and southern US in 1860.
Our calculations using these samples are reported in Table 3. In particular, we compute the
land gini for individual states and for the North, the South and the entire United States. The picture that emerges from the comparison of the numbers in Table 3 to those in Table 1 is interesting.
As expected, Northern US states are considerably more equal than Cundinamarca. For example,
Connecticut has the lowest land gini of 0.34, compared to the land gini of 0.65 in Cundinamarca.
However, contrary to the widespread notion that Latin America is substantially more unequal
than the United States, all Southern states, except Florida, Georgia and the Carolinas, are more
unequal than Cundinamarca. For example, the land gini in Louisiana is 0.83, considerably higher
than that of Cundinamarca. The average land gini in the South is 0.72, which is also greater than
the gini for Cundinamarca, 0.65.

5

Inequality and Long-Run Development in Cundinamarca

We now examine the consequences of wealth inequality, political concentration and overlap for
long-run development outcomes. To do this we exploit the cross-sectional variation within the
municipalities in Cundinamarca. Throughout the section, we estimate cross-sectional ordinary
least squares (OLS) regressions of the following form
ym = αgm + βpm + γom + x0m δ + um ,

(2)

where ym is some measure of development in municipality m, xm is a vector of covariates and
um is an error term, capturing all other omitted factors, with E (um ) = 0 for all m. In (2) the
main objects of interest are the coeﬃcients on the land gini, denoted by gm , the extent of political
concentration, denoted by pm , and the degree of overlap, denoted by om , in municipality m. We
22

report regressions in which each of these variables features separately and then together. We start
by looking at the eﬀect of these variables on contemporary outcomes and then turn to their eﬀect
on 1937 outcomes. A key concern in all of these regressions is omitted variable bias. For this
reason, the vector xm will control for a rich set of covariates, especially for measures of diﬀerences
in land quality across municipalities.

5.1

Contemporary Outcomes

Tables 4 and 5 examine the relationship between our four contemporary outcome variables and
historical land inequality, political concentration and overlap. Panel A of Table 4 is for secondary
school enrollment, while Panel B is for primary enrollment. Column 1 shows the bivariate relationship between land gini and secondary school enrollment without any other controls. There
is a strong positive association, indicating that municipalities that were more unequal at the end
of the 19th century have higher levels of secondary school enrollment today. This relationship
in column 1 is the same as that shown in Figure 3 in the Introduction. The coeﬃcient estimate is equal to 0.61, and is highly significant with a standard error of 0.09. The R2 of this
bivariate regression is 30%, indicating a large and significant correlation between historical land
inequality and secondary schooling. As a diﬀerent way of gauging the quantitative significance of
this correlation, recall from Table 1 that the standard deviation of land gini is 0.10 in the entire
Cundinamarca. The coeﬃcient estimate implies that we expect a municipality with one standard
deviation greater land gini than the mean to have approximately 0 .06 percentage points higher
secondary school enrollment. Relative to the mean of this variable in Cundinamarca, 0.58, this
translates into a 10% increase, which is substantial.
The main threat to the interpretation of the relationship between land inequality and contemporary economic outcomes is that municipalities with greater inequality may have higher quality
lands or other sources of higher incomes. While we cannot control for all possible sources of omitted variable bias, we can check the robustness of this correlation to a range of geographic controls
that should capture diﬀerences in land quality. Column 2 attempts to do this by adding altitude,
distance to Bogotá, amount of rainfall, and also the historical variable, the year of foundation of
the municipality. After including these controls, there is still a positive association between the
land gini and secondary schooling, though the coeﬃcient is slightly smaller now, 0.48 (standard
error = 0.10).
Column 3 looks at relationship between the political concentration index and secondary school
enrollment. Here we see a statistically significant (though somewhat weaker) negative relationship,

23

corresponding to the pattern shown in Figure 4 in the Introduction. The coeﬃcient estimate,
−0.36, is highly significant with a standard error of 0.11. The quantitative magnitude of this
eﬀect is also somewhat smaller than the magnitude associated with the land gini; the coeﬃcient
estimate implies that a municipality with a one standard deviation above the mean political
concentration index tends to have 3.6% lower secondary school enrollment in 1993. Column 4
demonstrates that this relationship is robust to including geographic controls and the magnitude
of the eﬀect is only slightly smaller, -0.35 (standard error = 0.10), than in column 3.
Columns 5 and 6 show that there is a negative but not always significant relationship between
overlap and school enrollment. For example, without covariates, the relationship is insignificant,
and it becomes marginally significant at 5% when the geographic controls are included.
Columns 7 and 8 look at the eﬀect of land gini and the political concentration index when they
are included together. Both variables continue to be significant, and together with the geographic
controls they explain about 50% of the variation in secondary schooling across Cundinamarca
municipalities.
Finally, in columns 9 and 10, we add further controls in order to deal with potential omitted
variable concerns. Column 9 adds the contemporary land gini. Interestingly, this is also significant
and positive, but the historical land gini continues to be positive and significant (coeﬃcient =
0.28, standard error = 0 .11), while the political concentration index continues to be negative and
significant (coeﬃcient= -0.22, standard error = 0.11).
Column 10 is the most demanding specification and adds a quartic in distance to Bogotá in
order to flexibly control for diﬀerences in the quality of land plots that may be near Bogotá. In
this column we also control for the best proxy for diﬀerences in land quality across municipalities,
the average land value per square kilometer from the land censuses. The quartic in the distance to
Bogotá is useful since Figure 5 showed that land inequality is higher in many of the municipalities
that are near Bogotá. Average land value is the market’s perception of diﬀerences in land quality
at the end of the 19th century and should be a “suﬃcient statistic” for these diﬀerences. Moreover,
diﬀerences in average land value will also indirectly control for diﬀerences in tax revenues across
municipalities, a major source of revenue and thus of fiscal capacity of municipalities.27 The
addition of these variables reduces the eﬀect of the land gini to 0.16 (standard error = 0.10), which
is no longer significant at 5%, but the eﬀect of political concentration index remains unchanged
27

We do not have data on current land values or average income diﬀerences across municipalities. Even if we
had such data, it would not be appropriate to include these as controls in our regressions, since average income in
a municipality is partly an outcome of education and public good provision, which we are attempting to explain
with historical measures of economic and political inequality.

24

and still significant at 5%.
One concern may be that Cundinamarca is atypical and some unobserved heterogeneity is
responsible for the positive relationship between land inequality and secondary school enrollment.
In fact, the results in Panel A of Table 4 show not only a positive relationship between the
historical land gini and secondary enrollments today, but also a positive association between contemporary land inequality and schooling. As a check for whether Cundinamarca is atypical in
terms of the relationship between land inequality and schooling, we looked at the contemporaneous relationship between these two variables for all Colombian municipalities.28 Figure 8 shows
the relationship between land gini today (2002) and secondary school enrollment in the whole
Colombia.29 Consistent with the patterns for Cundinamarca, there is a positive relationship, and
in fact the magnitude of this relationship is very similar to that we find in Cundinamarca. This
gives us some confidence that the relationship within Cundinamarca is not an aberration, and
whatever factors are responsible for the positive association between land inequality and education
within Cundinamarca seem to be present when we look at the whole of Colombia.
Panel B repeats the same regressions as in Panel A with primary school enrollment. The
overall pattern is the same, except that all of the variables are less significant than in Panel A,
and both land gini and the political concentration index are no longer significant in column 10
when all of the controls, including the contemporary land gini and the quartic in distance to
Bogotá are included. These weaker results probably reflect the fact that, as noted above, primary
enrollment is already high in most municipalities.
Panel A of Table 5 looks at urbanization, which is a crude but useful proxy for overall development in a municipality and to an index of poverty constructed from the national census
based on unsatisfied basic needs of a family as described in the data section. The results in this
table are broadly similar. There is a positive eﬀect of the land gini on urbanization, though this
eﬀect becomes insignificant in columns 9 and 10. The relationship between political concentration
and urbanization is also negative and significant when we do not include additional controls, but
28

We cannot look at the relationship between historical land gini and schooling for the whole of Colombia, since
the historical data on land distribution are only available for Cundinamarca.
29
In particular, Figure 8 shows the relationship excluding “outliers,” that is municipalities with the highest 2.5%
and lowest 2.5% values for the land gini. The relationship is very similar without excluding these extreme values,
though the basic pattern in the figure is harder to see. The same results can be seen from simple regression
analysis. Within Cundinamarca, a regression of secondary school enrollments on contemporary land gini gives a
coeﬃcient of 0.67 (standard error = 0.09). For the entire Colombia, the same regression leads to a coeﬃcient of
0.57 (standard error = 0.04) without excluding municipalities with extreme values of the gini, and to a coeﬃcient
of 0.63 (standard error =0.05) when these extreme values are dropped. The coeﬃcients are very similar when we
include the standard geographic controls. In addition, including a full set of department (region) fixed eﬀects leaves
the relationship between the land gini and secondary school enrollment essentially unchanged (coeﬃcient = 0.53,
standard error = 0.04).

25

becomes insignificant in columns 9 and 10.
When we turn to our index of poverty in Panel B of Table 5, the results are more robust. In
all columns, there is a negative and significant relationship between the land gini and poverty and
a positive and significant relationship between the political concentration index and poverty. In
particular, even in column 10, where we control for a quartic in distance to Bogotá and for average
land values, a higher land gini is associated with lower poverty and higher political concentration
is associated with significantly higher poverty.
Overall, we conclude that, contrary to the conventional wisdom about the nature of longrun development in Latin America, there is no evidence that higher land inequality is related
to bad economic outcomes. On the contrary, in most of our specifications there is a positive
and significant relationship between land inequality and good economic outcomes. Instead, there
seems to be a fairly robust negative relationship between political inequality on the one hand
and education and poverty on the other. The results in Tables 4 and 5 also indicate that the
comparatively worse development in municipalities with lower land inequality and higher political
concentration might be working partly through lower provision of public goods, such as schooling,
in these areas.30

5.2

Medium-term Outcomes from the 1937 Census

We next turn to the eﬀect of the land gini, political concentration and overlap from the late 19th
century on medium-term (1937) outcomes. This exercise is interesting for a number of reasons.
First, looking at the 1937 outcomes is a useful robustness check on the results presented in Tables
4 and 5. Second, the eﬀect on medium-term outcomes might be informative about the mechanisms
through which economic and political inequality might be aﬀecting economic development.
The results with the 1937 outcomes are presented in Tables 6 and 7. In all cases, we report
regressions of the form (2) again, with the only diﬀerence that the diﬀerent dependent variables
are now those that are available in the 1937 census.
Panel A of Table 7 examines the impact of the land gini, political concentration and overlap
30

We tried a number of diﬀerent identification strategies to estimate the causal eﬀect of political concentration on
development outcomes using instrumental variables. All of these tried to exploit the idea that political concentration
represented the legacy of the political monopoly of colonial elites. We first looked directly at the colonial elite, that
is, all of the Spaniards granted encomiendas in the 16th century and those working for the colonial state in 1794,
and matched their last names to the names of mayors at the end of the 19th century. Even though there were a
number of matches, this variable turned out not to have much predictive power for political concentration. We then
looked directly at where the grants of encomiendas were and at the density of tributary Indian population in the
16th century, but we found these to be uncorrelated with political concentration. We finally looked more generally
at other measures of the colonial legacy such as the presence of the colonial state, measured by the location of tax
collectors or state monopolies. Again this turned out to be uncorrelated with political concentration.

26

on adult literacy. A greater land gini is associated with higher literacy in column 1, but this
relationship disappears once we control for the standard geographic covariates in column 2. In
contrast, there is a robust negative relationship between political concentration and literacy with
or without the covariates (shown in columns 3 and 4).
Columns 5 and 6 show that although the estimated coeﬃcient on overlap is negative, it is not
statistically significant. Columns 7, 8 and 9 include the land gini and the political concentration
index together, and column 9 also includes the quartic in the distance to Bogotá and our proxy
for diﬀerences in land quality, average land value. In all cases, there is no relationship between
literacy and the land gini, but there is a robust and statistically significant negative eﬀect of
political concentration on literacy. Consequently, we conclude that the negative eﬀect of higher
political inequality on medium-term educational outcomes is relatively robust.
Panel B of Table 6 examines urbanization in 1937. The results here are similar to those for
urbanization in 1993. The land gini has a significant positive coeﬃcient. Political concentration
and overlap are also significant and have the same sign as in the other tables, though they become
less significant when entered together with the land gini. When all of these variables, as well as
the quartic in distance to Bogotá and average land values, are included together in columns 7, 8,
and 9, the results become insignificant, though the quantitative eﬀect of political concentration
index is similar to earlier columns.
Finally Table 7 looks at a direct measure of public good provision for 1937, the fraction
of buildings without access to public services. This variable is informative about whether the
eﬀects of land inequality and political concentration might be working by aﬀecting the extent of
public good provision in diﬀerent municipalities. Column 1 shows that greater land inequality is
associated with better outcomes (greater access to public services). This eﬀect remains statistically
significant when covariates are added in column 2, though the size of the coeﬃcient falls by one
half.
Columns 3 and 4 show that there is a negative relationship between political concentration
and public good provision in 1937 with or without covariates. In this case, the magnitude of the
coeﬃcient is also relatively insensitive to whether or not covariates are included. Columns 5 and
6 then show that higher overlap is also significantly correlated with worse outcomes. However,
this eﬀect is not robust to the inclusion of economic and political inequality. The eﬀect of the
land gini continues to be negative and significant in columns 7 and 8, but not in column 9. The
coeﬃcient on political concentration index remains similar even with the extended set of controls,
though because of the larger standard errors, it is only significant at 10%.
27

Overall, the results from the 1937 census are broadly consistent with the patterns for contemporary outcomes and indicate that municipalities with greater economic inequality fare better in
terms of economic outcomes and public good provision, while those with greater political inequality do worse.

5.3

Corroborating the Mechanism

The results presented so far are the opposite of much of the recent literature on underdevelopment
in Latin America and also inconsistent with the literature in economics emphasizing the negative
eﬀects of inequality on economic growth working through either credit market mechanisms or
political economy. In the Introduction, we suggested a potential interpretation for these patterns
based on Bates’s (1981) seminal work on Africa. Bates showed how greater land inequality in
Kenya relative to Ghana led to better policies and outcomes, because it prevented politicians
from pursuing highly distortionary policies, leading to the collapse of agricultural markets in
many African countries. We argued that in weakly institutionalized polities such as post-colonial
Africa or 19th-century Colombia, economic inequality may be a useful counterbalance against the
unchecked power of political elites.
Is there any way to corroborating this story? In the next section, we will document that
politicians in Cundinamarca indeed appear to have used their political power to amass very
significant wealth. Another way of checking our story is to distinguish between the land gini
(land inequality among landowners) and the overall land gini (inequality among all families)
as described in Section 3. In Table 8 we repeat our main regressions including the land gini
together with the overall land gini. We only show the specifications with the standard geographic
controls and the specification with the extended set of controls (quartic in distance to Bogotá
and average land value). In all of the regressions, we drop the overlap measure, since it is almost
always insignificant and not central to this discussion. Panel A of the table shows the long-term
outcomes, while Panel B is for medium-term outcomes.
The overall picture that emerges is very interesting. In all cases, a higher land gini is associated with better outcomes both in the long run and in the medium run. In contrast, overall
land inequality has the opposite sign, though it is typically insignificant. Political concentration
maintains its negative eﬀect on long-run and medium-run outcomes and is typically significant.
Therefore, the results in this table suggest that what matters is not overall inequality or poverty
(as would be the case in models with credit market constraints), but the extent of inequality
among landowners. This is consistent with the interpretation that better economic outcomes

28

emerge when there exists a group of significant landowners that can counterbalance the eﬀect of
politicians.

6

Political Power and Land Accumulation

The evidence presented so far established a range of interesting correlations between historical
variables and the economic development of diﬀerent municipalities in Cundinamarca. While we
are unable to conclude that these correlations correspond to the causal eﬀects of economic and
political inequality on economic development, they suggest some interesting patterns that need to
be investigated further. One possible area of study is to see whether various first-order mechanisms
via which political power might aﬀect economic outcomes are present. In particular, is it the case
that individuals with greater political power are able to use this for their own economic benefit?
The data suggests that both for 1879 and 1890 landowners with political power have on
average more valuable land plots than non-politician landowners. For 1879, landholdings of a nonpolitician landowner were worth $1770 on average while the average was $3022 for landowning
politicians. The corresponding figures for 1890 are $2915 and $5726 respectively. The same
pattern applies when we look at the percentage change in land value between the two catastros.
While the value of land for non-politician landowners increased on average 99% between 1879 and
1890, plots for politicians increased, on average, 209%.31
More interesting than this cross-sectional comparison would be to investigate whether politicians increased their land holdings (or the value of their land) more than other landowners and by
how much. We are able to do this by using our micro data. In particular, we restrict the sample
to landowners that were present in both censuses and investigate whether those that have held
political power saw the value of their lands increase. We measure the extent of political power
by the number of years that an individual was in power between 1879 and 1890 (thus creating
a continuous measure of political power). We denote this measure by nmi , the number of years
that individual i was in power in municipality m. We start with the simple OLS regression of the
form
∆vmi = λnmi + x0m μ + εmi ,

(3)

where the dependent variable ∆vmi is the percentage change in the value of land held by landowner
i in municipality m. The coeﬃcient of interest is λ, which measures the relationship between the
number of years the politician has been in power, nmi , and the change in land value. Once again
31

Since we do not have a price index for this period, all of these changes are nominal.

29

xm refers to a vector of control variables, all of them defined at the municipality level (since we do
not observe any individual characteristics). Also εmi is an error term with the usual properties.
The results of this exercise are reported in the first three columns of Table 9. The first
column does not include any geographic controls. The second column includes the standard
geographic controls, while the third column also adds a full set of municipality fixed eﬀects (so
that identification comes only by comparing politicians and landowners within each municipality).
Panel A of this table reports the results of this regression on a balanced panel consisting of 6391
individuals that were landowners both in 1879 and in 1890. When we include geographic controls,
the sample is down to 6156 landowners. Columns 1-3 show that one more year in power is
associated with approximately 50% higher land values, which is a very large eﬀect. The estimates
in all three columns are highly statistically significant. This estimate suggests that an individual
that remains in power for four years increases the value of his land holdings by 200% relative to
other landowners. This is truly a large eﬀect and shows how important political power appears
to have been in 19th century Cundinamarca.
Panel B of Table 9, on the other hand, focuses on within-politician variation, and restricts the
sample to a balanced panel of individuals that were landowners in both states and a politician at
some date in-between. This leaves us with a sample of 560 individuals, out of which 32 are lost
when we restrict the sample to municipalities for which we have all the geographic controls. In
this case again, there is a positive association between number of years in power and the change
in land value in both columns, though this relationship is now only significant at 10%. While the
relationship is slightly imprecise, the magnitude of the eﬀect continues to be large. An additional
year in power is associated with an additional increase in land value of 29 percentage points.32
The eﬀect of political power on land values may be diﬀerent for diﬀerent politicians. For
example, some politicians may be more corrupt than others, or some politicians may focus their
energy in self-enrichment in other spheres of economic life. To investigate this issue we estimate
standard quantile regressions (Koenker and Bassett, 1978). In particular, we report regressions
from the quantile regressions of the form:
∆vmi = λ(τ )nmi + x0m μ(τ ) + εmi (τ ) ,

(4)

where τ refers to the quantile in question. This regression estimates a separate vector of coeﬃcients, λ(τ ) and μ(τ ), for each quantile, indicating how political power has diﬀerent eﬀects
32

In some sense, the diﬀerence in the magnitudes between the two Panels corresponds to the diﬀerence in “intensive” and “extensive” margins. Panel B only exploits the intensive margin, the within-politician variation, and thus
has a lower eﬀect of an additional year in power on land values, whereas Panel A includes the sum of the intensive
and extensive margins.

30

depending on the (residual) distribution of changes in land value of the politician. Given the
moderate number of observations we have (approximately 6000 in Panel A and only 528 in Panel
B), we look at non-extreme quantiles, 0.15, 0.25, ..., 0.85.
Consistent with our expectations, we find much larger eﬀects of political power on land value
changes at higher quantiles. For example, in Panel A, while the eﬀect at the median is 0.27
(standard error= 0 .02), the eﬀect at the 75th percentile is 0.65 (standard error =0.04) and at
the 85th percentile it is even significantly larger, 1.02 (standard error = 0.0.7). These results are
also plotted in Figure 9, which shows the monotonically increasing eﬀect as we look at higher
quantiles. The results in Panel B confirm the same pattern.
Our interpretation of these is that those with political power are able to amass greater economic
wealth, either by acquiring more land or by increasing the value of their land, and this eﬀect is
especially pronounced when we look at heterogeneity among landowners. Naturally, these microdata regressions do not establish causality either, and part of the eﬀect may reflect unobserved
heterogeneity (for example, those with greater ability being selected into politics and also able to
increase the value of their lands). Nevertheless, we find these results encouraging for hypotheses
emphasizing the importance of political power and political inequality. In addition, we believe
these results are very consistent with the idea that in places where their power was not checked
by landed elites, politicians were able to use their power in socially ineﬃcient ways, possibly by
expropriating land and or by targeting public services, such as roads, to increase the value of the
land they held.

7

The Dynamics of Wealth and Political Power

As a final check on the relationship between political power and economic wealth, we also investigate whether politicians are likely to become landowners and how this compares to the likelihood
of economically wealthy individuals becoming politicians. In particular, let rit ∈ {0, 1} be an
indicator for whether individual i is a rich landowner at time t, while pit ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator
for whether individual is a politician at time t. We also use poit = 1 to denote an individual who

o = 1 to denote a rich landowner at time
is a politician but not a rich landowner at time t, and rit

t who is not a politician. Finally, lit = 1 denotes an individual who is neither a rich landowner
nor a politician.
We are interested in the likelihood that a politician who was not a rich landowner becomes
a rich landowner, which can be expressed as Pr [rit+1 |poit ]. However, rather than looking at this
conditional probability, it is more natural and informative to normalize this with the probability
31

that an individual who is neither a politician or a rich landowner becomes a rich landowner,
Pr [rit+1 |lit ]. Consequently, the first measure of interest is
Pr [rit+1 |poit ]
.
Pr [rit+1 |lit ]
Our main interest is to compare this ratio to the likelihood that a rich landowner who was not a
politician initially became a politician, which is defined similarly as
o]
Pr [pit+1 |rit
.
Pr [pit+1 |lit ]

Finally, we can also look at

o]
Pr [pit+1 |poit ]
Pr [rit+1 |rit
and
Pr [rit+1 |lit ]
Pr [pit+1 |lit ]

to measure persistence in the landowning and political status again for comparison.33
Table 10 shows 2×2 matrices of these ratios for Cundinamarca and for the nine provinces
(which are made up of the municipalities we studied until now). We compute the standard errors
for these ratios by bootstrapping.34 The results in Table 10 show that in Cundinamarca as a whole
and in eight out of the nine provinces, the probability of transitioning from being a politician to
landowner is greater than the probability of transitioning from being a landowner to a politician
(in both cases normalized by the probability of transition of a non-landowner non-politician).
Moreover, this diﬀerence is statistically significant (at 5% or less) for the whole of Cundinamarca
and for the four larger provinces. This finding is also consistent with our interpretation that
political power is important in obtaining economic rents and resources. In contrast, there seems
to be a smaller role of wealth in enabling individuals to become politicians. This pattern therefore
strengthens our overall conclusion that a more systematic study of the consequences of political
power and of political inequality on economic outcomes and economic development is necessary.35

8

Conclusions

What is the eﬀect of economic inequality on long-run economic development? This question is
central for many theories of comparative development and has gained further attention by recent
33

There are naturally many other ratios of conditional probabilities we can look at, for example,
Pr [rit+1 |pit ]
Pr [rit+1 |rit ]
and
,
Pr [rit+1 |lit ]
Pr [rit+1 |lit ]

but the four that we focus on are suﬃciently informative for our purposes.
34
The standard errors were computed via non-parametric bootstrapping with 500 replications.
35
One caveat is that when we look at individuals that are both landowners and politicians in 1879, they have the
highest probability of (still) being a landowner or remaining a politician in 1890.

32

emphasis from Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1997) and others that the roots of the diﬀerent economic
performances of the north and south of the American continent are in their diﬀerent levels of
economic inequality in the 19th century. Most existing investigations of this question look at
cross-country data (or cross-state and cross-village data) and do not distinguish between economic
and political inequality. However, many theories suggest that economic inequality is likely to lead
to political inequality, so that political power should be concentrated in the hands of those who
are rich, while other equally plausible theories suggest that political inequality, the concentration
of political power in the hands of a few, is likely to lead to economic inequality as the politicallypowerful use politics to become richer. Consequently, we expect the Latin American societies in
the 19th century not only to be economically more unequal, but also to feature greater levels of
concentration of political power in the hands of a few. Nevertheless, neither existing theoretical
discussions nor existing empirical studies distinguish the potentially diﬀerent roles of economic
and political inequality. Understanding whether it is economic or political inequality that matters
for economic development is important both to understand the mechanics of long-run development
and also because outside of the Americas, there are instances of societies with relatively equal
distributions of economic resources but high degrees of political inequality (e.g., many countries
in the sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia).
In this paper, we used unique data from 19th century Colombia to undertake a first investigation of the relative and potentially distinct roles of economic and political inequality on long-run
development. Using land censuses (catastros) from 1879 and 1890, we constructed measures of
land inequality (land gini) and we collected information on the identity of mayors in each of the
municipalities in Cundinamarca from which we constructed an index of political concentration.
Our data indeed confirm that Cundinamarca is more unequal than the Northern United States
in the 19th century. However, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, we find that Cundinamarca is more
equal than the US South. Even more surprising, we find that across Cundinamarca municipalities
there is a negative association between political and economic inequality. Though perhaps political
inequality can be conceptualized and measured in other ways, what we find certainly suggests the
conventional wisdom is too simplistic. Moreover, and again very diﬀerently from the recentlyemerging consensus about the sources of comparative development within the Americas, we find a
positive association between economic (land) inequality and long-run development. Municipalities
with greater land inequality are those that supply more public goods and are more educated and
urbanized today. In contrast, we find a relatively robust negative relationship between political
inequality and economic outcomes. We also showed that politically powerful individuals appear
33

to have been much more likely to become landowners and to have increased the value of their
lands substantially.
Our interpretation of these results is that in weakly institutionalized polities, such as 19thcentury and 20th-century Colombia, economic inequality may be a useful counterbalance against
the most rapacious policies that may be pursued by political elites. This interpretation is consistent both with the negative eﬀect of political concentration (inequality) on long and medium-term
outcomes in Cundinamarca, with the evidence presented by Bates (1981) for Africa, and with the
additional results we presented above, suggesting that it is inequality among landowners, not
overall inequality, that has the positive eﬀect on various economic outcomes. Although this interpretation is consistent with our findings and plausible in view of the experiences of other
countries with weakly institutionalized polities, it is very diﬀerent from the conventional wisdom
in the studies of underdevelopment in Latin America and from the conclusions of the recent
economic literature focusing on the eﬀects of inequality on economic growth. Nevertheless, our
results do not provide a direct test of this interpretation and whether this perspective is useful
for understanding the relationship between inequality and economic growth and the development
path of Latin America remains an open research question.
It should also be emphasized that all of the results presented in this paper, striking though
they may be, are historical correlations. While we control for a variety of geographic factors and
other municipality characteristics, we cannot be sure that these associations correspond to the
causal eﬀect of land inequality and political concentration on long-run economic development.
Nevertheless, given the robustness and the magnitudes of these patterns, they call for more
nuanced theories of comparative development. At the very least, theories that emphasize the
importance of economic inequality should be able to explain these robust correlations. Therefore,
irrespective of whether the correlations presented here have a causal component and of whether
the interpretation we oﬀer is the correct explanation of the patterns observed in Cundinamarca,
the evidence strongly suggests that in addition to the emphasis on economic inequality, there
should be more research to understand the eﬀects of politics and political inequality on economic
outcomes in comparative development.

34

9

References
Acemoglu, Daron (2007a) “Oligarchic vs. Democratic Societies,” forthcoming Journal of

the European Economic Association.
Acemoglu, Daron (2007b) “Modelling Ineﬃcient Institutions,” in Richard Blundell, Whitney Newey and Torsten Persson eds. Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 3 Volumes, Ninth
World Congress of the Econometric Society, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000a) “Political Losers as a Barrier to
Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 90, 126-130.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000b) “Why Did the West Extend the
Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115, 1167-1199.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006a) “Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective,” American Political Science Review, 100, 115-131.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006b) “Persistence of Power, Elites and
Institutions,” NBER Working Paper #12108.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Thierry Verdier (2004) “Kleptocracy and
Divide and Rule: A Theory of Personal Rule,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2,
162-192.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2006) “Emergence and Persistence of Ineﬃcient States” NBER Working Paper #12748.
Aghion, Philippe, Eva Caroli, and Cecilia Garcia-Peñalosa (1999) “Inequality and
Economic Growth: The Perspective of the New Growth Theories,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1615-1660.
Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti (1996) “Income Distribution, Political Instability
and Investment,” European Economic Review, 40, 1203-1225.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 465-490.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2003) “Inequality and Growth: What can the Data
Say?” Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 267-299.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew F. Newman (1993) “Occupational Choice and the
Process of Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274-298.

35

Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Somanathan (2006) “Political Economy of Public Goods:
Some Evidence from India,” Unpublished, MIT Department of Economics.
Barro, Robert J. (1997) The Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. (2000) “Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 5, 5-32.
Bateman, Fred, and James D. Foust (1974) “A Sample of Rural Households Selected
From the 1860 Manuscript Censuses,” Agricultural History, 48, 75-93.
Bates, Robert H. (1981) Markets and States in Tropical Africa, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Benabou, Roland (1996) “Inequality and Growth,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 11-73.
Benabou, Roland (2000) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,” American Economic Review, 90, 96-129.
Benjamin, Dwayne, Loren Brandt and John Giles (2006) “Inequality and Growth in
Rural China: Does Higher Inequality Impede Growth?” Unpublished, Department of Economics,
University of Toronto.
Bergquist, Charles W. (1978) Coﬀee and conflict in Colombia, 1886-1910, Durham: Duke
University Press.
Bernard, Olivier and Fabio Zambrano (1993) Ciudad y Territorio: El Proceso de
Poblamiento en Colombia, Bogotá: Academia de Historia de Bogotá.
Bertrand, Marianne, Francis Kramarz, Antoinette Schoar and David Thesmar
(2006) “Politically Connected CEOs and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from France,” Unpublished.
Bond, Philip, William Barndt, John Gerring and Carola Moreno (2005) “Democracy and Growth: A Historical Perspective,” World Politics, 57, 323-364.
Bourguignon, François and Thierry Verdier (2000) “Oligarchy, democracy, inequality
and growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 62, 285-313.
Bushnell, David (1971) “Voter Participation in the Colombian Election of 1856,” Hispanic
American Historical Review, 51, 237-249.
Bushnell, David (1993) The Making of Modern Colombia: A Nation in Spite of Itself,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Camacho Roldán, Salvador (1892) “Catastro del Estado de Cundinamarca, 1868,” in
Escritos Varios de Salvador Camacho Roldán, Volume 1, Bogotá: Librerı́a Colombiana.
36

Christie, Keith H. (1978) “Antioqeño Colonization in Western Colombia: A Reappraisal,”
Hispanic American Historical Review, 58, 260-283.
Christie, Keith H. (1979) “Gamonalismo in Colombia: An Historical Overview,” North/South:
Canadian Journal of Latin American Studies, 4, 42-59.
Christie, Keith H. (1986) Oligarcas, campesinos y polı́tica en Colombia: aspectos de la
historia socio-polı́tica de la frontera antioqueña, Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Coatsworth, John H. (1998) “Economic and Institutional Trajectories in Nineteenth Century Latin America,” in John H. Coatsworth and Alan M. Taylor eds. Latin America and the
World Economy since 1900, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Coatsworth, John H. (2005) “Structures, Endowments, and Institutions in the Economic
History of Latin America,” Latin American Research Review, 40, 126-144.
Colmenares, Germán (1973) Historia Economica y Social de Colombia, 1537-1719, Bogotá: Tercer Mundo Editores.
Cruz Santos, Abel (1965) Economı́a y hacienda pública, 2 Volumes, Bogotá: Ediciones
Lerner.
Deas, Malcolm (1971) “Algunas Notas sobre la Historia del Caciquismo en Colombia,”
Revista del Occidente, 127, 118-140.
Deas, Malcolm (1977) “A Colombian Coﬀee Estate: Santa Bárbara, Cundinamarca, 18701912,” in Kenneth Duncan and Ian Rutledge eds. Land and labour in Latin America : essays
on the development of agrarian capitalism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Deas, Malcolm (1993) Del poder y la gramática: y otros ensayos sobre historia, polı́tica y
literatura colombianas, Santafé de Bogotá: Tercer Mundo Editores.
Delpar, Helen (1981) Red against blue: the Liberal Party in Colombian politics, 1863-1899,
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
Easterly, William (2007) “Inequality does cause underdevelopment: Insights from a New
Instrument,” forthcoming, Journal of Development Economics.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloﬀ (1997) “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Diﬀerential Growth Paths among New World Economies,” in Stephen Haber ed. How
Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloﬀ (2005) “The Evolution of Suﬀrage
Institutions in the New World,” Journal of Economic History, 65, 891-921.

37

Estado de Cundinamarca (1859) Los doce Códigos del Estado de Cundinamarca, Bogotá:
Echeverrı́a.
Estado de Cundinamarca (1889) Ordenanzas del departamento de Cundinamarca: expedidas por la asamblea de 1888 y códigos, de policı́a y polı́tico municipal seguidos de algunas leyes
nacionales y decretos del poder ejecutivo, Bogotá: Imprenta de la Luz, 1889.
Faccio, Mara (2006) “Politically Connected Firms,” American Economic Review, 96, 369386.
Fisman, Raymond (2001) “Estimating the Value of Political Connections,” American Economic Review, 91, 1095-1102.
Forbes, Kristen J. (2000) “A Reassessment of the Relationship between Inequality and
Growth,” American Economic Review, 90, 869-887.
Galor, Oded and Joseph Zeira (1993) “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of Economic Studies, 40, 35-52.
Galor, Oded, Omer Moav and Dietrich Vollrath (2006) Inequality in Land Ownership,
the Emergence of Human Capital Promoting Institutions and the Great Divergence,”
Gilbert, Dennis L. (1977) The oligarchy and the old regime in Peru, Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
Gomez, Fernando (1969) “Análisis de los Censos de Población del Siglo XIX en Colombia,”
Tesis de Grado, Bogotá, Universidad de los Andes.
Gutiérrez, Rufino (1920) Monografı́as, Bogotá: Imprenta nacional.
Jiménez, Michael F. (1985) “The limits of export capitalism: economic structure, class
and politics in a Colombian coﬀee municipality, 1900-1930,” Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
Department of History, Harvard University.
Johnson, Lyman L. (1994) “The Distribution of Wealth in Nineteenth Century Buenos
Aires Province,” in Kenneth J. Adrien and Lyman L. Johnson eds. The Political Economy of
Spanish America in the Age of Revolution, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton (2003) “Cronyism and capital controls: Evidence
from Malaysia,” Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 351-382.
Jones, Alice H. (1980) Wealth of a nation to be: the American colonies on the eve of the
Revolution, New York: Columbia University Press.
Khwaja, Asim I. and Atif Mian (2005) “Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms?
Rent Provision in an Emerging Financial Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 13711411.
38

Koenker, Roger and Gilbert Bassett (1978) “Regression Quantiles”, Econometrica, 46,
33-50.
LeGrand, Catherine (1986) Frontier expansion and peasant protest in Colombia, 18501936, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suﬀrage?
Democracy and the Scope of Government, With an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 707-765.
Margo, Robert A. (1990) Race and schooling in the South,1880-1950: an economic history,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mazzuca, Sebastián and James A. Robinson (2006) “Political Conflict and PowerSharing in the origins of Modern Colombia,” NBER Working Paper #12099.
McCreery, David (1994) Rural Guatemala, 1760-1940, Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
McGreevey, William P. (1970) An Economic History of Colombia, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Melo, Jorge Orlando (1996) Historia de Colombia: La Dominación Española, Bogotá:
Biblioteca Familiar.
Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard (1981) “A Rational Theory of the Size of
Government,” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 914-927.
Murphy, Kevin J., Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1989) “Income Distribution, Market Size and Industrialization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 537-564.
Nugent, Jeﬀery B. and James A. Robinson (2002) “Are Endowments Fate?” CEPR
Discussion Paper #3206.
Paige, Jeﬀrey M. (1997) Coﬀee and Power: Revolution and the Rise of Democracy in
Central America, Harvard University Press; Cambridge.
Palacios, Marco (1980) Coﬀee in Colombia, 1850-1970: an economic, social, and political
history, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Palacios, Marco (1981) “La Propriedad Agraria en Cundinamarca, 1880-1970: Un Esbozo
sobre la Sociedad de las Tierras Templadas,” Unpublished, El Colegio de México.
Pardo Umaña, Camilo (1946) Las Haciendas de la Sabana, Editorial Kelly: Bogotá.
Park, James W. (1985) Rafael Núñez and the politics of Colombian regionalism, 1863-1886,
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

39

Parsons, James J. (1949) Antioqueño colonization in western Colombia, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Perotti, Roberto (1996) “Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy: What the Data
Say,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 149-187.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American Economic Review, 84, 600-621.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2006) “Democratic capital: The nexus of political
and economic change,” NBER Working Paper #12175.
Posada-Carbó, Eduardo (1997) “The Limits of Power: Elections under the Conservative
Hegemony in Colombia, 1886-1930,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 77, 245-279.
Ramcharan, Rodney (2006) “Inequality and Redistribution: Evidence from US Counties
and States, 1890-1930,” Unpublished, International Monetary Fund.
Rivas, Medardo (1946) Los trabajadores de tierra caliente, Bogotá: Ministerio de Educación
de Colombia.
Robinson, James A. and Miguel Urrutia eds. (2007) Economı́a Colombiana del Siglo
XX: Un Análisis Cuantitativo, Bogotá and México D.F.: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Saﬀord, Frank R. (1972) “Social Aspects of Politics in Nineteenth Century Spanish America: New Grenada, 1825-1850,” Journal of Social History, 5, 344-370.
Saﬀord, Frank R. (1974) “Bases for Political Alignment in Early Independent Spanish
America,” in Richard Graham ed. New Approaches to Latin American History, Austin: University
of Texas Press.
Saﬀord, Frank R. and Marco Palacios (2001) Colombia: Fragmented land, Divided
society, New York: Oxford University Press.
Schaefer, Donald and Mark Schmitz (1985) “The Parker-Gallman Sample and Wealth
Distributions for the Antebellum South: A Comment,” Explorations in Economic History, 22,
220-226.
Schmitz, Mark and Donald Schaefer (1985) “Using Manuscript Census Samples to
Interpret Antebellum Southern Agriculture,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 17, 399-414.
Schwartz, Stuart B. (1996) “The Landed Elite,” in Louisa Schell Hoberman and Susan
Migden Socolow eds. The Countryside in Colonial Latin America, Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press.
Solberg, Carl E. (1969) “A Discriminatory Frontier Land Policy: Chile, 1870-1914,” The
Americas, 26, 115-133.
40

Stein Stanley J. and Barbara H. Stein (1970) The Colonial Heritage of Latin America,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Stone, Samuel Z. (1990) The Heritage of the Conquistadors: ruling classes in Central
America from the Conquest to the Sandinistas, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Uribe-Uran, Victor (2000) Honorable Lives: Lawyers, Families and Politics in Colombia,
1780-1850, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Villamarin, Juan A. (1975) “Haciendas en la Sabana de Bogotá, Colombia, en la Época
Colonial: 1539-1810,” in Enrique Florescano ed.

Haciendas, Latifundios y Plantaciones en

América Latina, Mexico: Siglo Veintiuno Editores.
Wright, Gavin (1986) Old South, New South, New York: Basic Books.

41

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics

Land Gini

Overall Land Gini

Contemporary Land Gini

Political Concentration Index

Overlap
Secondary School
Enrollment
Primary School Enrollment

Urbanization (1993)

Unsatisfied Basic Needs

Literacy Rate

Urbanization (1937)
Share of Buildings without
Access to Public Services
Distance to Bogota

All
Municipalities
(1)

Low Land
Inequality
(2)

High Land
Inequality
(3)

Low Political
Concentration
(4)

High Political
Concentration
(5)

0.65

0.57

0.73

0.66

0.65

(0.10)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.09)

(0.10)

0.86

0.83

0.90

0.86

0.87

0.07

0.07

0.05

0.07

0.07

0.67

0.63

0.73

0.69

0.66

(0.09)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.09)

(0.09)

-0.56

-0.53

-0.57

-0.64

-0.48

(0.10)

(0.08)

(0.10)

(0.06)

(0.06)

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.08

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.03)

(0.04)

0.58

0.52

0.65

0.60

0.56

(0.11)

(0.09)

(0.09)

(0.11)

(0.10)

0.83

0.83

0.86

0.84

0.84

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.05)

0.31

0.22

0.41

0.35

0.26

(0.23)

(0.13)

(0.28)

(0.26)

(0.20)

0.40

0.44

0.33

0.37

0.42

(0.14)

(0.13)

(0.11)

(0.14)

(0.14)

0.40

0.40

0.41

0.42

0.38

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.10)

(0.13)

(0.10)

0.17

0.12

0.20

0.20

0.14

(0.18)

(0.10)

(0.18)

(0.22)

(0.13)

0.91

0.95

0.88

0.88

0.94

(0.12)

(0.07)

(0.13)

(0.16)

(0.08)

88.23

93.49

77.96

85.84

90.53

(45.00)

(38.74)

(48.35)

(44.28)

(46.01)

Values are averages with standard deviations in parentheses. Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the
catastros . Overall Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros taking into account landless
families (see text for details) Political Concentration Index measured as the negative of the number of different individuals in power between 1875 and
1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Overlap is measured as fraction of rich landowners and politicians that are both
landowners and politicians (average for 1879 and 1890). Contemporary Land Gini corresponds to gini coefficient of land value for 2002 constructed from
IGAC catastros . Secondary School Enrollment is constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 17 years old attending school.
Primary School Enrollment also constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 7 and 11 years old attending school. Unsatisfied Basic Needs
constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of households with unfulfilled basic needs (see text for details).
Urbanization figures constructed from the corresponding year censuses as fraction of total population leaving in urban areas. Literacy Rate constructed from
the 1937 Census as number of literate individuals over total population. Fraction of Buildings without Access to Public Services also constructed from 1937
Census as number of buildings without access to electricity, water and sewage. Distance to Bogota is measured in kms. Column 1 reports figures for all
municipalities. Column 2 reports figure for the 49 municipalities with land gini below its median value while column 3 reports figures for the 49
municipalities with land gini above its median value. Column 4 reports figures for the 56 municipalities with Political Concentration Index below its median
value and column 5 reports figures for the 56 municipalities with Political Concentration Index above its median value.

Table 2
Correlation Matrix

Land Gini
Overall Land Gini
Contemporary Land Gini
Political Concentration Index
Overlap
Secondary School Enrollment
Urbanization (1993)
Unsatisfied Basic Needs

Overall Land Contemporary Land
Land Gini
Gini
Gini
1.00
0.48
1.00
0.60
0.23
1.00
-0.25
-0.05
-0.26
-0.08
-0.05
-0.04
0.54
0.16
0.56
0.47
0.11
0.59
-0.56
0.09
-0.49

Political
Concentration
Index

1.00
0.43
-0.30
-0.30
0.37

Overlap

Secondary
School
Enrollment

Urbanization
(1993)

Unsatisfied
Basic
Needs

1.00
-0.09
-0.10
-0.03

1.00
0.64
-0.67

1.00
-0.47

1.00

Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros. Overall Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the
catastros taking into account landless families (see text for details). Contemporary Land Gini corresponds to gini coefficient of land value for 2002 constructed from IGAC catastros. Political Concentration
Index measured as the negative of the number of different individuals in power between 1875 and 1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Overlap is measured as fraction of rich
landowners and politicians that are both landowners and politicians (average for 1879 and 1890). Secondary School Enrollment is constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 17 years
old attending school. Urbanization constructed from the 1993 census as fraction of total population leaving in urban areas. Unsatisfied Basic Needs constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of households
with unfulfilled basic needs (see text for details).

State
Panel A. Northern States
Connecticut
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Maryland
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Vermont
Wisconsin
Total Northern States
Panel B. Southern States
Alabama
Arkansas
Florida
Georgia
Louisiana
Mississippi
North Carolina
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
Total Southern States
Total U.S. States

Table 3
Land Inequality in U.S. States (1860)
Land Gini
No. Observations

Average Land Value

0.34
0.50
0.47
0.48
0.41
0.49
0.55
0.55
0.52
0.35
0.35
0.42
0.38
0.47
0.43
0.44
0.47

259
1,563
5,020
825
623
534
1,516
379
1,180
807
362
4,043
851
2,465
147
544
20,821

3,421
2,659
2,534
2,066
1,702
2,097
1,544
983
1,745
1,860
5,274
3,888
3,381
3,722
3,327
1,748
2,820

0.73
0.70
0.60
0.63
0.83
0.69
0.60
0.63
0.75
0.70
0.71
0.72
0.58

1,005
434
65
818
225
707
391
524
465
551
42
5,055
25,876

3,223
3,048
2,162
3,459
18,197
4,491
2,548
4,293
5,986
3,340
3,555
4,514
3,333

The land ginis for the US south and north were constructed from the complete 'Gallman-Parker and Bateman-Foust
samples, respectively, from the micro data of 1860 US 'census.

(1)
Panel A
Land Gini

0.61
(0.09)

Political Concentration Index
Overlap

Table 4
OLS Regressions for Long Term Oucomes
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Dependent Variable: Secondary School Enrollment
0.48
0.44
0.44
(0.10)
(0.09)
(0.09)
-0.36
-0.35
-0.27
-0.27
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
-0.27
-0.43
-0.01
(0.29)
(0.24)
(0.23)

Contemporary Land Gini
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared
Panel B
Land Gini

No
92
0.30

Yes
92
0.45

0.19
(0.06)

0.11
(0.05)

No
92
0.09

Yes
92
0.52

Political Concentration Index
Overlap

No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
94
93
93
93
92
92
0.09
0.37
0.01
0.32
0.50
0.50
Dependent Variable: Primary School Enrollment
0.10
0.10
(0.05)
(0.05)
-0.08
-0.09
-0.07
-0.11
(0.07)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.06)
0.04
0.02
0.17
(0.16)
(0.12)
(0.14)

Contemporary Land Gini
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared

No
94
0.01

Yes
93
0.51

No
93
0.00

Yes
93
0.49

Yes
92
0.53

Yes
92
0.54

(9)

(10)

0.28
(0.11)
-0.22
(0.11)
-0.07
(0.19)
0.38
(0.13)
Yes
92
0.54

0.16
(0.10)
-0.22
(0.11)
-0.13
(0.19)
0.37
(0.11)
Extended
92
0.61

0.12
(0.06)
-0.11
(0.06)
0.18
(0.14)
-0.04
(0.07)
Yes
92
0.54

0.05
(0.05)
-0.08
(0.06)
0.12
(0.13)
0.00
(0.06)
Extended
92
0.60

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Secondary School Enrollment is constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 17 years old attending school. Primary School Enrollment also
constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 7 and 11 years old attending school. Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros .
Political Concentration Index measured as the negative of the number of different individuals in power between 1875 and 1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Overlap is
measured as fraction of rich landowners and politicians that are both rich landowners and politicians (average for 1879 and 1890). Rich Landowners are defined as those with landholdings among the top 25%
most valuable plots. Contemporary Land Gini corresponds to gini coefficient of land value for 2002 constructed from IGAC catastros . Geographic controls include Altitude (in mts above sea level), Distance
to Bogota (in kms), Area (in sq. kms), Rainfall (in mms) and Year of Foundation. A quartic in distance to Bogota and land value per square km (average for 1879 and 1890) are included in Column 10.

(1)
Panel A
Land Gini

1.11
(0.23)

Political Concentration Index
Overlap

Table 5
OLS Regressions for Long Term Oucomes
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent Variable: Urbanization in 1993
0.79
0.71
(0.21)
(0.21)
-0.77
-0.57
-0.44
(0.26)
(0.27)
(0.29)
-0.65
-1.07
(0.66)
(0.55)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.71
(0.20)
-0.33
(0.32)
-0.51
(0.65)

No
94
0.09

0.21
(0.23)
-0.15
(0.28)
-0.73
(0.56)
1.23
(0.28)
Yes
92
0.50

0.06
(0.23)
-0.26
(0.27)
-0.32
(0.46)
0.97
(0.28)
Extended
92
0.6

No
94
0.14

-0.35
(0.13)
0.38
(0.12)
-0.58
(0.23)
-0.23
(0.13)
Yes
92
0.64

-0.21
(0.11)
0.33
(0.12)
-0.6
(0.24)
-0.33
(0.14)
Extended
92
0.69

Contemporary Land Gini
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared
Panel B
Land Gini

No
92
0.22

Yes
92
0.36

-0.72
(0.12)

-0.49
(0.12)

No
92
0.31

Yes
92
0.57

Political Concentration Index
Overlap

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
93
93
93
92
92
0.31
0.01
0.30
0.38
0.39
Dependent Variable: Unsatisfied Basic Needs
-0.44
-0.44
(0.11)
(0.11)
0.51
0.36
0.28
0.41
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.12)
-0.11
-0.03
-0.62
(0.35)
(0.26)
(0.25)

Contemporary Land Gini
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared

Yes
93
0.51

No
93
0.00

Yes
93
0.45

Yes
92
0.61

Yes
92
0.63

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Urbanization constructed from the 1993 census as fraction of population living in urban areas. Unsatisfied Basic Needs constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of
households with unfulfilled basic needs (see text for details). Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros . Political Concentration Index measured as
the negative of the number of different individuals in power between 1875 and 1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Overlap is measured as fraction of rich landowners and
politicians that are both rich landowners and politicians (average for 1879 and 1890). Rich Landowners are defined as those with landholdings among the top 25% most valuable plots. Contemporary Land
Gini corresponds to gini coefficient of land value for 2002 constructed from IGAC catastros . Geographic controls include Altitude (in mts above sea level), Distance to Bogota (in kms), Area (in sq. kms),
Rainfall (in mms) and Year of Foundation. A quartic in distance to Bogota and land value per square km (average for 1879 and 1890) are included in Column 10.

Panel A
Land Gini
Political Concentration Index
Overlap
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared
Panel B
Land Gini
Political Concentration Index
Overlap
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared

Table 6
OLS Regressions for Medium Term Oucomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dependent Variable: Literacy Rate in 1937
0.27
0.09
0.04
(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.11)
-0.31
-0.27
-0.27
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.12)
-0.16
-0.19
(0.31)
(0.28)
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
97
91
99
92
98
92
91
0.05
0.26
0.06
0.30
0.00
0.26
0.30
Dependent Variable: Urbanization in 1937
0.42
0.31
0.24
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.12)
-0.43
-0.47
-0.42
(0.20)
(0.24)
(0.25)
-0.67
-0.73
(0.37)
(0.40)
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
98
92
100
93
99
93
92
0.08
0.14
0.06
0.18
0.03
0.13
0.20

(8)

(9)

0.04
(0.11)
-0.30
(0.12)
0.17
(0.29)
Yes
91
0.30

0.00
(0.13)
-0.29
(0.14)
0.21
(0.34)
Extended
91
0.31

0.24
(0.12)
-0.37
(0.27)
-0.24
(0.39)
Yes
92
0.20

-0.02
(0.15)
-0.32
(0.31)
0.16
(0.36)
Extended
92
0.35

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Literacy Rate constructed from the 1937 Census as number of literate individuals over total population. Urbanization constructed from 1937 Census as fraction of
population living in urban areas. Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros . Political Concentration Index measured as the negative of the
number of different individuals in power between 1875 and 1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Overlap is measured as fraction of rich landowners and politicians that are
both landowners and politicians (average for 1879 and 1890). Rich Landowners are defined as those with landholdings among the top 25% most valuable plots. Geographic controls include Altitude (in mts
above sea level), Distance to Bogota (in kms), Area (in sq. kms), Rainfall (in mms) and Year of Foundation. A quartic in distance to Bogota and land value per square km (average for 1879 and 1890) are
included in Column 9.

Panel A
Land Gini
Political Concentration Index
Overlap
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared

Table 7
OLS Regressions for Medium Term Oucomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Dependent Variable: Fraction of Buildings without Access to Public Services
-0.41
-0.23
-0.17
-0.16
-0.03
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.08)
0.46
0.41
0.38
0.35
0.35
(0.14)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.20)
(0.23)
0.55
0.61
0.17
-0.07
(0.26)
(0.22)
(0.23)
(0.21)
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Extended
97
91
98
92
98
92
91
91
91
0.13
0.25
0.16
0.33
0.03
0.26
0.36
0.36
0.44

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Fraction of Buildings without Access to Public Services constructed from the 1937 Census as number of buildings without access to electricity, water and sewage.
Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros . Political Concentration Index measured as the negative of the number of different individuals in
power between 1875 and 1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Overlap is measured as fraction of rich landowners and politicians that are both landowners and politicians
(average for 1879 and 1890). Rich Landowners are defined as those with landholdings among the top 25% most valuable plots. Geographic controls include Altitude (in mts above sea level), Distance to
Bogota (in kms), Area (in sq. kms), Rainfall (in mms) and Year of Foundation. A quartic in distance to Bogota and land value per square km (average for 1879 and 1890) are included in Column 9.

Table 8
OLS Regressions for Long and Medium Term Oucomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Long Term Outcomes
Dependent Variable:
Secondary School
Primary School
Urbanization
Enrollment
Enrollment
(1993)
Land Gini
0.30
0.14
0.20
0.13
0.26
0.07
(0.13)
(0.12)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.28)
(0.31)
Overall Land Gini
-0.03
0.04
-0.19
-0.15
-0.07
-0.02
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.28)
(0.29)
Political Concentration Index
-0.23
-0.24
-0.07
-0.06
-0.31
-0.32
(0.09)
(0.10)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.25)
(0.26)
Contemporary Land Gini
0.37
0.37
-0.05
-0.02
1.19
0.95
(0.13)
(0.11)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.29)
(0.27)
Geographic Controls
Yes Extended Yes Extended Yes Extended
Observations
92
92
92
92
92
92
R-squared
0.54
0.60
0.55
0.61
0.49
0.60
Panel B: Medium Term Outcomes
Dependent Variable:

Land Gini
Overall Land Gini
Political Concentration Index
Geographic Controls
Observations
R-squared

Literacy Rate
0.22
0.22
(0.13)
(0.16)
-0.41
-0.41
(0.17)
(0.17)
-0.26
-0.27
(0.12)
(0.14)
Yes Extended
91
91
0.34
0.34

Urbanization
(1937)
0.43
0.14
(0.15)
(0.24)
-0.43
-0.30
(0.21)
(0.28)
-0.41
-0.30
(0.24)
(0.27)
Yes Extended
92
92
0.22
0.36

(7)

(8)

Unsatisfied Basic
Needs
-0.50
-0.34
(0.16)
(0.16)
0.34
0.23
(0.17)
(0.17)
0.25
0.22
(0.10)
(0.11)
-0.22
-0.33
(0.14)
(0.14)
Yes
Extended
92
92
0.64
0.67

Lack of Public
Services
-0.28
-0.11
(0.08)
(0.14)
0.25
0.16
(0.14)
(0.18)
0.38
0.34
(0.17)
(0.20)
Yes Extended
91
91
0.38
0.45

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Land Gini is the average land value gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros . Overall Land Gini is the average land value gini
coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros taking into account landless families (see text for details). Political Concentration Index measured as the negative of the number
of different individuals in power between 1875 and 1895 over number of mayor appointments for which data is available. Contemporary Land Gini corresponds to gini coefficient of land
value for 2002 constructed from IGAC catastros. Secondary School Enrollment is constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 17 years old attending school. Primary
School Enrollment also constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 7 and 11 years old attending school. Unsatisfied Basic Needs constructed from the 1993 Census as
fraction of households with unfulfilled basic needs (see text for details).
Urbanization figures constructed from the corresponding year censuses as fraction of total population leaving in urban areas. Literacy Rate constructed from the 1937 Census as number of
literate individuals over total population. Lack of Public Services is fraction of buildings without zccess to public services constructed from 1937 Census as number of buildings without
access to electricity, water and sewage. Geographic controls include Altitude (in mts above sea level), Distance to Bogota (in kms), Area (in sq. kms), Rainfall (in mms) and Year of
Foundation. Extended Geographic controls include the former plus a quartic in distance to Bogota and land value per square km (average for 1879 and 1890).

Table 9
OLS and Quantile Regressions for % Change in Land Value
Panel A: Balanced Sample for all landowners. Dependent Variable is % Change in Land Value between 1879 and 1890
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Quantile Regression
Quantiles
OLS Regressions
0.15
0.25
0.35
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.65
0.50
0.47
0.42
0.03
0.06
0.15
0.23
0.27
0.29
0.44
Number of years in power between
1879-1890
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.04)
Geographic Controls
No
Yes Extended
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
6391
6156
6156
6156 6156 6156 6156 6156 6156 6156
R-squared/Pseudo R-squared
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
Panel B: Balanced Sample for Landowning Politicians. Dependent Variable is % Change in Land Value between 1879 and 1890
Quantile Regression
OLS Regressions
Quantiles
0.15
0.25
0.35
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.65
0.28
0.29
0.29
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.13
0.19
0.23
Number of years in power between
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.05) (0.08) (0.08) (0.11)
1879-1890
Geographic Controls
No
Yes Extended
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
560
528
528
528
528
528
528
528
528
528
R-squared/Pseudo R-squared
0.01
0.01
0.17
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01

(11)

(12)

0.75
0.85
0.65
1.02
(0.04) (0.07)
Yes
Yes
6156 6156
0.01
0.02

0.75
0.85
0.48
0.53
(0.14) (0.22)
Yes
Yes
528
528
0.01
0.03

Standard Errors in parentheses. The sample in Panel A consists of individuals that appeared as landowners both in 1879 and 1890 in the same municipality. The sample in Panel B consists of individuals that appeared
as landowners both in 1879 and 1890 and were politicians in any given year between 1879 and 1890. Geographic controls include Altitude (in mts above sea level), Distance to Bogota (in kms), Area (in sq. kms),
Rainfall (in mms) and Year of Foundation. Extended controls in column 3 include geographic controls and municipality dummies.

Table 10
Conditional Probability Ratios
(a) Bogota
Ratios
Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

rito

p ito

13.58
(1.61)
1.98
(0.89)

4.54
(1.26)
15.66
(4.06)

(c) Facatativa
Ratios
rito
Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

35.44
(4.43)
21.34
(11.78)

(e) Guatativa
Ratios
rito
Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

(b) Choconta

76.04
(13.25)
20.28
(9.64)

p ito

16.28
(4.66)
50.02
(32.16)

Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

23.11
(7.86)
41.71
(22.75)

Ratios
Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

80.70
(15.98)
14.74
(7.19)

22.94
(10.52)
33.52
(18.87)

71.33
(11.37)
9.38
(3.52)

p ito

23.77
(6.68)
40.43
(12.58)

rito

p ito

45.25
(8.47)
5.93
(2.61)

17.05
(7.07)
36.85
(15.65)

(h) Ubate
p ito

Ratios

34.97
(4.28)
2.58
(1.16)

7.33
(2.46)
27.56
(7.47)

Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

32.95
(3.81)
6.35
(2.36)

p ito

(d) Guaduas
Ratios
rito

rito

(i) Zipaquira
Ratios
rito
Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

rito

(f) Oriente
p ito

(g) Tequendama
Ratios

Ratios

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

rito

p ito

39.60
(6.13)
7.80
(3.62)

22.63
(5.93)
30.15
(15.05)

(j) Cundinamarca
p ito

Ratios

18.01
(4.53)
53.22
(18.75)

Pr[rit +1 | •]
Pr[rit +1 | l it ]

Bootstrapped Standard Errors in parentheses

Pr[ p it +1 | •]
Pr[ p it +1 | l it ]

rito

p ito

39.19
(1.86)
6.48
(0.87)

14.55
(1.41)
34.48
(4.25)

Figure1
Land Gini and School Enrollment in the U.S.
(1870)

.8

NEW HAMPSHIRE

School Enrollment in 1870
.2
.4
.6

VERMONT
IOWA
OHIO
WISCONSIN
MICHIGAN
CONNECTICUT
INDIANA
NEW YORK
PENNSYLVANIA
ILLINOISMINNESOTA
NEW JERSEY
KANSAS

MISSOURI

MARYLAND
ARKANSAS
TENNESSEE
LOU

0

TEXAS
ALABAMA
FLORIDA
GEORGIA
NORTH
CAROLINA
SOUTH
CAROLINA
VIRGINIA
MISSISSIPPI

.3

.4

.5
.6
Land Gini in 1860

.7

.8

The land ginis for the US south and north were constructed from the complete Gallman-Parker and Bateman-Foust samples, respectively, from the micro data of
1860 US census. School enrollment constructed from the 1870 Census as Number of persons attending school over population between 5 and 18 years old.

.85

Figure2
Land Gini and School Enrollment in the U.S.
(1950)

MICHIGAN
CONNECTICUT

School Enrollment in 1950
.75
.8

IOWA
WISCONSIN
NEW
YORK
NEW JERSEY
KANSAS
NEW OHIO
HAMPSHIRE

MINNESOTA
ILLINOIS

INDIANA
PENNSYLVANIA
VERMONT
MISSOURI
FLORIDA
MARYLAND

LOU
ALABAMA
ARKANSAS
MISSISSIPPI
TENNESSEE
NORTH
CAROLINA
GEORGIA

.7

SOUTH CAROLINA
VIRGINIA
TEXAS

.3

.4

.5
.6
Land Gini in 1860

.7

.8

The land ginis for the US south and north were constructed from the complete Gallman-Parker and Bateman-Foust samples, respectively, from the micro data of
1860 US census. School enrollment constructed from the 1950 Census as Number of persons between 5 and 18 years old attending school over total population
between 5 and 18 years old.

Figure 3
Land Gini and Secondary School Enrollment in Cundinamarca

.3

Secondary School Enrollment in 1993
.4
.5
.6
.7

.8

Sesq
Faca
Chia
Gira
Madr
Soac
Zipa
Cota
Sopo
Tenj
Funz
FusaSTeq
Zicn
Boja
Tabi Gach
Mosq
Caji
LaM
Cogu Vill SFra
LaC
Nilo
Toma
Toca
Guas
ElC Sasa
Utic
Anap
Ubat
Nemo
Fuqu Guac
Caqu
Rica
Cucu
Belt
Vian
Queb
Tena
Quip Pach LaV
Jeru
Choa
Une
Suba
Gata
Simi
PuliViot
SJua
Chip
LaPa
Pasc
Noca
Guaq Fome
Sues
Mant
Chag Pand Susa
Suta
Choc
Quet
GuayTibi
ViPz
Bitu
Mach Nari
Guad
Nima
Juni
Paim
Leng
LaPe
ElP
Gala
VergUbal
Taus
Carm
SCay
Capa
Fosc
Guat

Ubaq

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

Land Gini
Land gini is the average gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros. Secondary School Enrollment constructed from the 1993 Census as
fraction of kids between 12 and 18 years old attending school.

Figure 4
Political Concentration and Secondary School Enrollment in Cundinamarca

Secondary School Enrollment in 1993
.4
.5
.6
.7

.8

Sesq
Faca
Gira
Zipa

Chia
Madr
Soac
Sopo
Tenj
Funz
Fusa
Zicn
STeq
Tabi Boja
Mosq

Cota
Arbe

Quip Vian

.3

Gach
Caji
LaM
VillSFraTomaCogu
LaC
Nilo
Toca
Guas
ElC
Sasa Tiba
Utic
Anap
Ubat
Guac
Nemo
Fuqu
Caqu
RicaAnolBelt
Cucu
Queb
Pach
Choa Jeru
UneTena
LaV
Suba
GataSimi
Puli
Viot
SJua
Chip
LaPa
Pasc
Noca
Guaq
Pand
Sues
Fome
Mant
Chag
Supa
Suta
Susa
Choc
Quet
Guti
Guay
ViPz
Bitu
Tibi
Mach Topa
Nari
Guad
Juni
Nima
Paim
Leng
ElP LaPe
Gala
Verg Ubal
Taus
Yaco
Carm
SCay
Capa
Fosc
Medi
Guat

Ubaq

-.8

-.7

-.6
-.5
Political Concentration Index

-.4

-.3

Political Concentration Index defined as the negative of the number of different individuals in power between 1875 and 1895, over the number of mayor appointments
for which data is available. Secondary School Enrollment constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 18 years old attending school.

Figure 5
Land Gini in Cundinamarca

BOGOTA

Land gini is the average gini coefficient for 1879 and 1890 constructed from the catastros.

Figure 6
Political Concentration Index in Cundinamarca

BOGOTA

Political Concentration Index defined as the negative of the number of different individuals in power between 1875 and
1895, over the number of mayor appointments for which data is available.

Figure 7
Secondary School Enrollment in Cundinamarca

BOGOTA

Secondary School Enrollment constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 18 years old
attending school.

0

Secondary School Enrollment in 1993
.2
.4
.6
.8

Figure 8
Contemporary Land Inequality and Secondary School Enrollment in Colombia

.5

.6

.7
Land Gini in 2002

.8

.9

Land gini constructed from the 2002 IGAC catastros. Secondary School Enrollment constructed from the 1993 Census as fraction of kids between 12 and 18 years
old attending school.

Figure 9
Land Accumulation and Political Power: Quantile Regressions

Coefficient on Number of Years in Power between 1879 and 1890

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

OLS

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0.15

0.25

0.35

0.45

0.5

-0.2
Quantile

0.55

0.65

0.75

0.85

