                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         BANKING AND INTEREST RATES IN MONETARY POLICY ANALYSIS:
                       A QUANTITATIVE EXPLORATION

                                        Marvin Goodfriend
                                       Bennett T. McCallum

                                       Working Paper 13207
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w13207


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2007




This paper was prepared for presentation at the Carnegie-Rochester Conference meeting of November
10-11, 2006, in Pittsburgh, PA. The authors are grateful to Stephen Cecchetti, Simon Gilchrist, Allan
Meltzer, and Huw Pill for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Marvin Goodfriend and Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Banking and Interest Rates in Monetary Policy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration
Marvin Goodfriend and Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 13207
June 2007
JEL No. E44,E52,G21

                                                 ABSTRACT

The paper reconsiders the role of money and banking in monetary policy analysis by including a banking
sector and money in an optimizing model otherwise of a standard type. The model is implemented
quantitatively, with a calibration based on U.S. data. It is reasonably successful in providing an endogenous
explanation for substantial steady-state differentials between the interbank policy rate and (i) the collateralized
loan rate, (ii) the uncollateralized loan rate, (iii) the T-bill rate, (iv) the net marginal product of capital,
and (v) a pure intertemporal rate. We find a differential of over 3 % pa between (iii) and (iv), thereby
contributing to resolution of the equity premium puzzle. Dynamic impulse response functions imply
pro-or-counter-cyclical movements in an external finance premium that can be of quantitative significance.
 In addition, they suggest that a central bank that fails to recognize the distinction between interbank
and other short rates could miss its appropriate settings by as much as 4% pa. Also, shocks to banking
productivity or collateral effectiveness call for large responses in the policy rate.

Marvin Goodfriend
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
marvingd@andrew.cmu.edu

Bennett T. McCallum
Tepper School of Business, Posner 256
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu
1. Introduction

       Recent years have seen great changes in monetary policy analysis, as economists in central

banks and academia have come together on an analytical approach of the general type discussed by

Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), Goodfriend and King (1997), Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999),

Woodford (2003), and many others. This approach is characterized, as argued by McCallum

(2002), by investigations of alternative rules for monetary policy conducted in models that are based

on private-agent optimizing behavior but with specifications that include features designed to lend

empirical veracity, thereby aspiring to be structural and accordingly usable (in principle) for policy

analysis. Despite a widespread belief that this approach is fundamentally sound, and that recent

work represents a major improvement over the practice typical 15 or 20 years ago, there are some

reasons for unease. Prominent among these are the absence from the standard framework of any

significant role for monetary aggregates, financial intermediation, or distinctions among various

short-term interest rates that play different roles in the transmission mechanism.

       A recent paper by Goodfriend (2005) develops a qualitative framework designed to

overcome these particular weaknesses. Specifically, it “… integrates broad money demand, loan

production, asset pricing, and arbitrage between banking and asset markets” (2005, p. 277) and

illustrates the logical necessity (in principle) for monetary policy to take account of—among other

things—the difference between the interbank rate of interest (used as the policy instrument) and

other short rates including the government bond rate, the collateralized bank loan rate, the (nominal)

net marginal product of capital, and a shadow nominal intertemporal rate—each of which differs

from the others. As noted by Hess (2005), however, Goodfriend (2005) provides no evidence or

argument concerning the quantitative importance of these features and distinctions. The primary

objective of the present paper, accordingly, is to formulate a quantitative version of Goodfriend’s

model, develop a plausible calibration, and utilize this model to assess the magnitude and policy

                                                   1
relevance of the effects and distinctions just mentioned for steady state interest rates and aggregate

variables, and for dynamic monetary policy simulations. Among other things, the paper will

investigate the role of the “external finance premium” that is emphasized in the prominent work of

Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999). It will do so using a model in which the external finance

premium is endogenously determined by no-arbitrage relationships in an environment in which loan

production depends upon both collateral and loan-monitoring inputs, with capital serving less

efficiently as collateral than bonds, while bank-deposit money is crucial for facilitating transactions.

In this setting, the external finance premium may move either pro-cyclically or counter-cyclically in

response to shocks, depending upon parameters of the model.

           How does the present paper compare with previous efforts to outline and quantify the role of

financial intermediation (banking) in monetary policy? Probably the most prominent line of work

of this type is that begun by Bernanke and Gertler (1989, 1995) and continued by Bernanke, Gertler,

and Gilchrist (1999), but the literature also includes notable contributions by Kiyotaki and Moore

(1997), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), Kocherlakota (2000), Cooley, Marimon, and Quadrini (2004),

and others. It is apparently the case, however, that in all of these studies the models are

fundamentally non-monetary—i.e., do not recognize the existence of a demand for money that

serves to facilitate transactions.1 This omission could be of first-order importance for the financial

accelerator, however, for its mechanism works via increases in the supply of collateral induced by

asset price increases. In models with money, however, such increases also increase the demand for

collateral as spenders go to the banking system for additional money to facilitate the additional

spending induced by the initiating shock. Accordingly, our analysis focuses on the net effect of

these offsetting forces.

           Our model’s “banking accelerator” transmission effects work in much the same way as the


1
    Diamond and Rajan (2006) is a noteworthy qualitative study of the role of banking in monetary policy.

                                                            2
financial accelerator does in existing models. For instance, monetary policy that stimulates

employment and output in the presence of sticky prices raises the marginal product of capital, the

price of capital, and the value of collateral in the economy, thereby tending to reduce the external

finance premium for a given quantity of bank deposits demanded. However, our model includes in

addition “banking attenuator” effects, which recognize that monetary stimulus to spending also

increases the demand for bank deposits, thereby tending to raise the external finance premium for a

given value of collateral-eligible assets in the economy.

       Also of some indirect relevance to the present exploration are the studies of Ireland (2003),

McCallum (2001), and Woodford (2003, pp. 300-311), which seek to quantify the effects of

neglecting monetary aggregates in model specifications that do not adopt the usual approximation

that is necessary to keep monetary aggregate magnitudes from appearing in the intertemporal

optimizing conditions of a standard policy-analysis model. These papers, all of which found only

small effects of this approximation, did not include any explicit banking sector, however, and did

not recognize distinctions among various short-term interest rates.

       In effect, ours is a two-sector model with a goods-producing sector and a banking sector.

Goods are produced with capital and work effort as usual. The banking sector produces loans (and

thus deposits) according to a production function with inputs of monitoring effort and collateral, the

latter consisting of government bonds and capital (employed in the goods-producing sector) held by

households. The distinctions among various interest rates arise in the model because loans and

deposits are costly to produce, in the sense that they require work effort, while collateral services

allow an economization of that effort. Hence, the total return on bonds (or capital) has an explicit

pecuniary component and also an implicit liquidity service-yield component that reflects the

collateral services that this asset provides. Portfolio balance requires risk-adjusted equality between

the various assets’ total returns. Thus the sum of pecuniary and service-yield returns must equal a

                                                   3
shadow total nominal risk-adjusted interest rate. However, the pecuniary bond rate is less than the

net nominal marginal product of capital because bonds are more productive as collateral than

capital. In equilibrium the interbank rate, which is the cost of loanable funds for a bank, is below the

(uncollateralized) loan rate by the marginal cost of loan production. Finally, the loan market and the

asset markets are linked by a no-arbitrage condition between the uncollateralized loan rate and the

shadow total nominal rate.2

         The strategy of the paper is two-fold. First, it is to use observed average historical values of

interest rates and rate spreads, together with observations on banking and macroeconomic

aggregates, to calibrate parameters by reference to steady-state equilibrium values for the model

with realistic trend productivity growth in the production of goods and loans. Our aim in this regard

is to determine the extent to which the introduction of money and banking into an otherwise

standard growth model can account for observable interest rate differentials, and how much money

and banking matters quantitatively (on average) for aggregates like the capital stock, employment,

and output. In this regard, we develop the implications of money and banking with reference to the

famous equity premium puzzle of Mehra and Prescott (1985), summarized by Campbell (1999) as

the puzzle of “why the average real stock return is so high in relation to the short-term interest rate.”

         The second part of our strategy is to linearize the model around the calibrated steady state to

explore how much the inclusion of money and banking matters quantitatively for an otherwise

standard “new neoclassical synthesis” (aka, “new Keynesian”) model of monetary policy. In

particular, we wish to investigate quantitatively how much a central bank can be misled by relying

on a new neoclassical synthesis (NNS) model without money and banking when managing its

interbank-rate policy instrument.

         We begin by illustrating the presence of the two effects or mechanisms—the accelerator and

2
  Different financial assets play an important role in the model’s transmission process, in a manner that is somewhat
reminiscent of monetarist views summarized by Meltzer (1995).

                                                            4
the attenuator—by which money and banking influence the model economy’s dynamics.3 Next, we

illustrate the extent to which a central bank could misjudge its interbank rate response to a goods

productivity shock by not taking money and banking into account. Finally, we consider shocks

emanating from the banking sector itself—a shock to loan monitoring productivity and a shock to

effective collateral that is meant to represent widespread financial distress.

         The paper’s outline is as follows. In Section 2, we begin by building upon the specification

of the Goodfriend (2005) model and highlighting some of its features. Next, in Section 3 we

emphasize the various interest rates that appear in the model and the frictions that make them differ

from each other. Then in Sections 4, 5, and 6 we develop the steady state solution that forms the

basis for the linearized version of the model, which will be used in subsequent analysis, and discuss

the steady state calibration and some of the quantitative consequences of incorporating money and

banking. In Section 7 we complete the specification and linearization of our dynamic model.

Finally, in Section 8 we conduct various policy experiments to see how this model performs in

comparison to more standard specifications without any banking sector. Conclusions are briefly

outlined in Section 9.

2. Core Model Outline

         The model that we will use to investigate these issues regarding the role of money and

banking needs to be specified at the level of preferences and technology, so as to be potentially

structural and invariant to policy specification. In order to keep the analysis as simple as possible,

we have specified the model in terms of an optimizing problem for a typical household, which not

only consumes a bundle of differentiated commodities, supplies labor, and saves but also produces

for sale a differentiated good and in addition operates a (competitive) banking firm. Thus the basic

3
  In discussions of the monetary transmission process, it is common to find references to various transmission
“channels,” and we are tempted to utilize this terminology. In general equilibrium analysis, however, the concept of a
transmission channel is usually ambiguous, since the behavior of all variables is interrelated and a change in a single
parameter may affect several marginal conditions. Consequently, we have made an effort to resist this temptation.

                                                           5
optimizing analysis is conducted in one step. It will take a bit of discussion, nevertheless, to

describe the details of the typical household’s decision problem. When that task is completed, we

will specify that there are many households and aggregate by assuming that they are all similar and

finding a symmetric equilibrium.

        The typical household’s objective function is to maximize, at time t = 0, the value of

             ∞
(1)      E 0 ∑ βt [φ log(c t ) + (1 − φ) log(1 − n st − mst )]
            t =0



where ct is consumption during period t of Dixit-Stiglitz consumption bundles and (1 − n st − mst ) is

leisure in t, with n st representing labor supplied to the production of goods (in the household firm or

elsewhere) and mst is labor likewise supplied to banking activities (to be described below). In the

household’s budget constraint, we must recognize that the household pays for its consumption

expenditures with income from its production and sale of goods, net receipts from supplying labor,

net sales of its financial assets,4 and net sales of capital goods. (For simplicity, we are going to keep

the aggregate stock of capital on a deterministic steady growth path—with a steady-state magnitude

that is determined endogenously—but individual households can buy or sell capital goods so their

market price is a variable.) The household has market power in the product that it supplies, with θ

being its elasticity of demand, stemming from a value of θ for the elasticity of substitution in

consumption in the usual Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator setup. Consequently, the household maximizes

(1) subject to two constraints. The first is the budget constraint

                            Bt H t −1                           P
(2)      q t (1 − δ)K t +     A
                                + A + w t (n st + mst ) + c At ( At )1−θ
                            Pt   Pt                             Pt

                                Ht                            B
         − w t (n t + m t ) −       − tax t − q t K t +1 − A t +1 B − c t = 0 ,
                                PtA
                                                          Pt (1 + R t )

4
 Its financial assets are high-powered money and one-period government bonds. Note that asset-liability positions
between households and banks are netted out, a step that requires that banking firms possess no monopoly power.

                                                                 6
and the second is the sales equals net production constraint needed to reflect monopolistic

competition in the supply of the household’s own produced good, namely,

(3)      K ηt (A1t n t )1−η − cAt (Pt / PtA ) −θ = 0 .

Here the variables are as follows: qt = real price of capital,5 Kt = quantity of capital at start of t, Bt+1

= nominal bonds held at end of t, Pt = price of household’s produced good in t, PtA = consumption

goods price index, nt = labor demanded by household as producer, mt = labor demanded by

household’s banking operation, wt = real wage rate, Ht = nominal holdings of base money held at

the end of t, taxt = real lump-sum tax payments in t, and R Bt = nominal interest rate on government

bonds purchased in t and redeemed in t+1. The Lagrangian multiplier on (2) is denoted λt and for

(3) it is ξt, with βt inserted (in both cases) in the Lagrangian expression for each period to make the

multipliers represent values as of the indicated period t, not the startup date 0. In (3), A1t is a shock

to productivity in goods production, similar to a standard technology shock in the real-business-

cycle literature, whose mean increases over time at the trend growth rate γ. The superscript A on

any variable, it might be noted, indicates that the variable is an economy-wide measure that each

individual household takes as given.

         In addition, the model includes one more constraint, which will build in most of our money-

and-banking content. Since we require that the model must pertain to a monetary economy, we

need to incorporate the transaction-facilitating properties of money—the medium of exchange—in

some explicit manner.6 The most concrete way possible is via a constraint requiring the household

to pay for consumption spending during period t with money held in that period. Our specification

will have the medium of exchange composed entirely of bank deposits, and will require that


5
  The relative price in terms of consumption goods.
6
  In the present version of our model, we do not distinguish between transaction balances and time deposits at banks.
Medium of exchange money is implicitly central to our analysis because it is by managing the aggregate quantity of
reserves, which banks hold to facilitate transactions, that monetary policy affects interest rates.

                                                           7
consumption during t must be rigidly related to deposits held at the end of t. We assume that this

constraint always binds, and as a consequence will require below that ct = V D t / PtA , where Dt is

nominal deposits and V is the constant that reflects the assumed rigidity.7

         In this context, we come to the banking sector. We write the simplest possible bank balance

sheet, namely,

(4)      Ht + Lt = Dt,

where H, L, and D are high-powered (base) money, loans to households, and deposits, respectively,

for the typical bank.8 Our transaction constraint is

                VD t
(5)      ct =        ,
                PtA

which, together with (4), implicitly represents a derived demand for high-powered (base) money.

For reference below, we let rr be the bank’s chosen ratio of Ht (which equals bank reserves at the

central bank) to deposits, so from the balance sheet we have rrDt + Lt = Dt or Dt = Lt/(1 − rr).

         Finally, the analytical heart of the banking sector specification is a model of loan

“production” or, more accurately, loan management. This crucial activity is conducted, we assume,

by a combination of collateral and loan monitoring, the latter activity being performed by workers

whose labor is supplied by households to the banking sector, as mentioned above. Specifically, we

posit the following production function pertaining to the management of loans:

(6)      L t / PtA = F(b t +1 + A3t kq t K t +1 )α (A2t m t )1−α                 0 < α < 1.

Here we have a Cobb-Douglas production function with factor inputs being labor mt (for



7
  This is not our favorite specification; we plan to loosen it in subsequent work. Given, however, that we are using this
constraint—similar in spirit to a “cash in advance” constraint—it is necessary to incorporate some factor such as V to
take account of the fact that the velocity of aggregate bank deposits is far less than 1.0 for quarterly time periods. We
follow the usual convention of calibrating the model so that time periods represent quarters.
8
  Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) offer a microeconomic explanation of the synergy between deposit and loan
provision in banking.

                                                                   8
“monitoring”) and collateral b t +1 + A3t kq t K t +1 , with bt+1 = Bt +1 / PtA (1 + R Bt ) .9 In the latter

expression the effective amount of collateral possessed by a typical household depends upon,

among other things, the price of capital goods, qt. The constant k, 0 < k < 1, reflects the inferiority

of capital to bonds for collateral purposes, resulting because capital goods (unlike bonds) typically

require substantial monitoring to verify their physical condition and market value. The variables

A2t and A3t are shock terms, reflecting stochastic technology effects, analogous to A1t in the goods

production function included in (3). Here A2t, like A1t, has a trend growth rate of γ whereas A3t is

trendless.

         With the model as specified, we derive first-order optimality conditions pertaining to the

choice variables ms, m, ns, n, K, P, and B,10 and also define the variable11

(7)      Ω t = αc t /(b t +1 + A3t kq t K t +1 ).

Then imposing symmetry and market clearing, and also constant aggregate capital, we obtain the

following conditions for equilibrium:

            1− φ
(8)                   = w tλt
         1 − n t − mt

               φ          (1 − α)c t
(9)      wt =         − 1
               ct λ t     mt

                                               η
                               K 
(10)     wt = (ξt/λt)A1t(1−η)          
                               n t A1t 

          φ                                     λ t +1                  λ ξ  A1 n 1−η 
(11)          − 1 kΩ t q t − q t + β(1 − δ)E t         q t +1  + βηE t  t +1 t +1  t +1 t +1   = 0
           c λ
          t t                                   tλ                      λ t λ t +1  K         
                                                                           


9
  Banks expend effort and require borrowers to post collateral, but in equilibrium there is no default. This modeling
choice is based, in part, on progress that has been made in understanding the implications of credit market imperfections
in limited commitment environments where there is no equilibrium default, such as Kocherlakota (1996).
10
   The system has some recursivity such that ct and Ht can be solved for after the other variables.
11
   The role of variable Ωt will be described in Section 3.

                                                            9
            φ                         λ P                 
(12)               − 1 Ω t − 1 + βE t  t +1 t (1 + R Bt )  = 0
            ct λ t                     λ t Pt +1          

(13)       ξt/λt = (θ−1)/θ

(14)       bt+1 = Bt +1 / PtA (1 + R Bt ) .

(15)       gt − taxt = H t / PtA − H t −1 / PtA + Bt+1/ (1 + R Bt +1 )PtA − Bt/ PtA

Here (15) is the government (including central bank) budget constraint. In a symmetric, flexible-

price equilibrium, equations (2)-(15) serve to determine values of the fourteen endogenous variables

c, n, m, w, q, P, λ, ξ, L, D, Ω, B, tax, and RB given exogenous shock processes and policy-set time

paths for H, g, and b.12 Alternatively, and more realistically, we will also study equilibria in which

the central bank sets values of an overnight interest rate, rather than Ht. In the foregoing list of

variables, we have not included the capital stock, K, because our equilibria are defined with Kt

equal to its steady-state value in each period. The steady-state value of K is, nevertheless,

determined endogenously.

           In our experiments involving dynamic adjustments we will utilize a sticky-price version of

the model by eliminating the labor demand equation (10) and replacing it with a standard Calvo

price adjustment relation, in a manner that will be described below in Section 5.

3. Interest Rates

           Now we turn our attention to the various interest rates mentioned in the introduction. With

the exception of the bond rate for loans to the government, these did not appear in the analysis of

Section 2 because of our expositional strategy of treating goods producers and banks as owned and

operated by households. Here we introduce a one-period default-free security that provides no

collateral services to its holder and accordingly bears a shadow “total” return that represents a

purely intertemporal rate of interest that the sum of risk-adjusted pecuniary and service yields on

12
     For simplicity, we keep government spending gt equal to zero throughout.

                                                                10
other assets must match. We denote the nominal rate on this fictitious security as RtT, as in

Goodfriend (2005), and will use it as a “benchmark” rate in what follows. From the specification of

the household optimization problem above, it can be seen that R Tt must satisfy the familiar condition

                         λ t Pt +1
(16)   1 + R Tt = E t              .
                        βλ t +1Pt

How does this rate relate to the bond rate that appeared above, R Bt ? By comparison with first-order

condition (12) for optimal household holdings of bonds, we see that

        1 + R Bt       φ         
(17)             = 1−         − 1 Ω t .
        1+ Rt  T
                       ct λ t    

Thus these two rates coincide only if Ωt = 0 and/or φ/ctλt − 1 = 0. The former condition makes good

intuitive sense, as Ωt ≥ 0 can be viewed as the partial derivative of the constraint (5) with respect

to collateral, so the rates can differ only if collateral services are valued at the margin. But with our

                                                       φ         
production function in (6) and 0 < α < 1, both Ωt and         − 1 will be positive in all periods.
                                                       ct λ t    

                           φ         
Therefore we can identify         − 1 Ω t as the liquidity service yield on bonds, which we denote as
                           ct λ t    

LSYtB. From (17), then, we have the approximate equality

(18)    R Tt − R Bt = LSYtB .

       In our model’s non-stochastic steady state, bonds and capital will have the same risk

properties, but capital will serve as collateral less well than bills, by the factor k. Accordingly, one

might guess that the liquidity service yield on capital, LSYtK , would satisfy the approximation

(19)    LSYtK = k × LSYtB .




                                                   11
In fact, that result can be verified by a more complex calculation analogous to the one for bonds.13

           A crucial interest rate for monetary policy analysis is the interbank rate, denoted R IB
                                                                                                 t . Since



such a rate serves as the policy rate for the Federal Reserve and many other central banks, R IB
                                                                                              t will


be viewed as the policy instrument in some of our experiments in Section 8. How, then, is the

interbank rate R IB
                 t related to other rates? The basic fact is that, in our model, a bank can obtain



funds from the interbank market at the rate R IB
                                              t and could loan them to households, if it incurred all



the necessary costs, at the benchmark rate R Tt . This reflects a no-arbitrage condition between the

loan market and the asset market. Then what are these costs? We have postulated above that loan

production requires monitoring costs and collateral costs as specified in equation (6). Here we

temporarily adopt the fiction that the collateral costs are borne by the bank, i.e., we consider

uncollateralized loans. At the cost-minimizing optimum mix of factor inputs, the real marginal cost

of loan production equals the factor price divided by that factor’s marginal product for each factor

of production. Thus we can find this marginal cost as the real wage divided by the partial derivative

of Lt/Pt with respect to mt, where the latter is employment of labor services (for monitoring) by the

typical bank. From (6) we find this partial derivative to be (1 − α)(Lt/Pt)/mt so using expression (4)

we obtain Vmtwt/(1−α)(1−rr)ct as the real marginal cost of loan management. Profit maximization

by banks implies, then, that

                            Vw t m t      
                  t ) 1 +
           (1 + R IB                                  T
(20)                                        = (1 + R t ),
                       (1 − α)(1 − rr)c t 

which can be approximated as

                               Vw t m t      
(21)        R Tt − R IB
                     t =                     .
                          (1 − α)(1 − rr)c t 


13
     This result, and the one in the previous paragraph, is more fully developed in Goodfriend (2005).

                                                             12
       Now, although we can imagine uncollateralized loans to households at the “total” asset

market rate R Tt , actual loans are collateralized in equilibrium. Accordingly, since (1 − α) is the

factor share for monitoring, the marginal cost of loan production is multiplied by (1 − α) and the

relevant relationship becomes

                      Vw t m t 
              t ) 1 +
       (1 + R IB                           L
(22)                             = (1 + R t ),
                   (1 − rr)c t 

where R Lt is the interest rate on collateralized loans. As before, the corresponding approximation is

                      Vw t m t 
(23)    R Lt − R IB
                 t =              .
                      (1 − rr)c t 

       Finally, in our setup, banks are paying households a rate R Dt on their deposits. Given

competitive conditions, this rate differs from the interbank rate only because the fraction 1−rr of

non-interest bearing deposits are not loaned, implying that

(24)    R Dt = R IB
                 t (1−rr).



       Given this plethora of interest rates and rate differentials, which differential is it that

measures the “external finance premium” in the context of our model? We identify the external

finance premium with the real marginal cost of loan production, since our loan production costs

reflect the cost of external finance emphasized by Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), among

others. Household borrowers pay a loan rate that covers real marginal cost in addition to the

interbank rate, which equals the deposit rate except for a small discrepancy due to a non-zero (but

low) reserve ratio. Hence, the real marginal cost of loan production is an external finance premium

from the household’s perspective.

       It is useful to distinguish between an uncollateralized and a collateralized external finance

premium in our model. The external finance premium on an uncollateralized loan (UEFP) would be


                                                   13
R Tt − R IB
         t because this interest rate spread reflects the full real marginal cost of loan production. In



effect, the uncollateralized loan rate is equated to R Tt .

            On the other hand, the spread between the collateralized loan rate and the interbank rate is

R Lt − R IB
         t = (1 − α)( R t − R t ) because the smaller R t − R t interest rate spread need only cover
                        T     IB                        L     IB




the portion of real marginal loan cost due to the monitoring effort required when the borrower puts

up the requisite collateral. In effect, households that borrow on a collateralized basis receive a

deduction on the loan rate equal to the share α of collateral in loan costs. For calibration, we

identify the collateralized external finance premium, which we denote as CEFP, with the spread

between the prime rate and the interbank rate.

            Because the banking sector is perfectly competitive and loan production features constant

returns to scale, net interest income ( R Tt − R IB
                                                 t ) Lt/Pt equals the sum of payments to the factor



inputs in loan production, mtwt + bt+1 LSYtB + qt(Kt+1) LSYtK. The zero profit condition indicates

that the liquidity service yields on bonds and capital can be interpreted as “rent” paid to borrowers

for the collateral services that their assets provide in loan production. Bonds and capital earn lower

pecuniary returns than RtT, the benchmark on a fictitious bond that provides no collateral services,

by amounts equal to the “rent” that bonds and capital earn as deductions on borrowing costs.

Drawing upon equations (19), (18), (9), and (23) above, it can be shown by succesive substitution

that the external finance premium and the liquidity service yields on bonds and capital are related to

each other as LSYtK = k×LSYtB = k Ωt [(1−rr)/V(1 − α)] CEFPt.

4. Steady State Solution

            The next step is to present the deterministic, zero-inflation, steady-state version of the model

in Section 2 as a basis for calibration and our first batch of analytical exercises.14 Preliminary


14
     Henceforth, we will just say “steady state” rather than “deterministic, zero-inflation, steady state.”

                                                               14
consideration of the steady-state system indicated that the inclusion of output growth would be

essential to any degree whatsoever of realism. Accordingly, we assume that the shock terms A1t

and A2t in the production functions for goods and loans each trend upward at the growth rate γ.

Therefore, deterministic expressions for these two variables can be written as A1t = A10(1 + γ)t and

A2t = A20(1 + γ)t. For simplicity we normalize by setting A10 = A20 = 1. For a steady state, then, λt

must shrink at the rate γ. Next we note that the relative price of capital will, in the steady state,

equal 1, so that detrended average per-household capital Kt is an endogenous constant, K.

Consequently, by substituting out certain variables we can express the core steady-state system in

terms of seven equations involving only the seven variables c, m, n, w, λ, Ω, and K.15 Here c, w, λ,

and K are constant detrended values of the variables written above, which grow (or shrink) at the

rate γ, while the others are constant without any detrending. We will include q in the expressions to

reveal its importance in the system, but the reader should keep in mind that q = 1 in the steady state

and that k is a parameter. As a piece of notation, we use boc to denote the constant steady-state

value of bonds to consumption and assume that the fiscal authority behaves so as to stabilize boc at

an exogenous, policy-determined value.

         The first step is to substitute (6) into (5) and write the result as

                                      α       1−α
                VF            kqK   m 
(25)     1=             boc +                   .
              (1 − rr)         c  c

Then equations (7) – (11) above can be represented as follows:

                    α
(26)     Ω=
               boc + kqK / c

           1− φ
(27)              = wλ
         1− n − m


15
  In addition, the variable r, which denotes the before-depreciation marginal product of capital, could be obtained
recursively after the other seven variables are determined from r − δ = (η(θ−1)/θ)(n/K)1−η.

                                                           15
             φ   (1 − α)c
(28)    w =  − 1
             λc  m

                                    η
             (θ − 1)(1 − η)  K 
(29)    w=                   
                   θ        n

         φ             β           η(θ − 1)            
(30)     − 1 kΩ − 1 +      1 − δ +          (K / n)η−1  = 0
         cλ           1+ γ            θ                

Finally, we also have one relation that amounts to the overall resource constraint that incorporates

equations (2), (3), and (15); it is as follows:

(31)    1 = (K / c)η (n / c)1−η − δK / c .

Thus we have (25)-(31) as the seven equations that determine the steady-state values of c, m, n,

w, λ, Ω, and K, these being the only relevant variables since boc and q are exogenous.

        Given these core-model variables, and a given steady-state inflation rate, one can then

readily solve for steady-state values of RT, RB, RIB, RL, and RD using equations (16), (17), (21),

(23), and (24). Accordingly, we now turn to our calibration.

5. Calibration

        One leading objective in the paper is to explore the quantitative consequences of money and

banking for interest rates and monetary policy in an otherwise conventional benchmark NNS model.

Because the model in this paper is not as flexibly specified as we would like, our aims are fairly

modest. First, we want to determine whether a steady-state calibration exists that fits the relevant

observed variables tolerably well. Second, we want to explore under this calibration how much

money and banking matters quantitatively for the various interest rates and the model’s other

endogenous macroeconomic variables.

        The model has twelve parameters that need to be specified. Six of the parameters appear in

the benchmark model without money and banking. For these we follow convention. First, we


                                                   16
calibrate φ = 0.4 to yield roughly 1/3 of available time working in either goods production or

banking. Second, we choose η = 0.36 to reflect relative shares of capital and labor in goods

production. Third, we choose θ to yield a markup of 1.1. Fourth, we choose a conventional

(quarterly) value of β = 0.99. Fifth, we set the quarterly depreciation rate δ = 0.025. Sixth, we set γ

= 0.0050 to correspond to 2% productivity growth per year.

       We calibrate the fiscal policy parameter boc by using values of U.S. public debt held

domestically by private entities, relative to GDP, as of the third quarter of 2005. The resulting

figure is boc = 0.56.

       That leaves five parameters relating to money and banking. First, we calibrate velocity as

the ratio of U.S. GDP to M3 for the fourth quarter of 2005, implying that V = 0.31. Second, we set

the reserve ratio at rr = 0.005, measured as the ratio of U.S. total bank reserves to M3 as of

December 2005. Finally, we calibrate the remaining three banking parameters α, k, and F jointly to

match, as best as we can, the following conditions: (i) a 1% per year average short-term real

“riskless rate” that is typical in the finance literature, e.g. Campbell (1999, p. 1233), (ii) a 2%

average collateralized external finance premium that is in line with the average spread of the prime

rate over the federal funds rate in the postwar United States, and (iii) a share of total U.S.

employment in depository credit intermediation as of August 2005 of 1.6% as reported by the

Bureau of Labor Statistics. Accordingly, the three remaining parameters are calibrated as α = 0.65,

F = 9.0, and k = 0.2. The relatively low productivity of capital implied by the latter is consistent

with the fact that banks specialize in information-intensive lending, as opposed to (e.g.) mortgage or

auto lending in which collateral is more productive in defraying monitoring costs.

       Our model of money, banking, and interest rate spreads is constructed on what we regard as

a sensible theoretical foundation. It was at the start of the exercise not at all obvious that banking

parameters in the context of the macro model could be found that would achieve a reasonable

                                                   17
calibration. Nevertheless, we shall see below that the calibration works tolerably well and in our

view does provide a basis for judging the quantitative importance of money and banking in the

steady state and in the dynamic analysis of monetary policy.

6. Steady-State Analysis

           We begin the analysis of the steady state below by describing how well the benchmark

calibration given in Section 5 is able to match the endogenous interest rates and aggregates to the

respective observables. Then we illuminate the quantitative consequences of money and banking for

the steady state in two ways.16 First, we compute a counterfactual calibration by presuming that the

banking sector is 10 times as efficient in loan production as in the benchmark calibration. We

compare “highly efficient banking” and benchmark calibrations to show how much money and

banking matters quantitatively. Second, we perform two experiments based on the benchmark

calibration to illustrate the model’s sensitivity to the debt to GDP ratio17 and the velocity of

aggregate bank deposits.

           The steady-state values of the endogenous variables for the benchmark calibration are

reported in the top panel of Table 1. Starting with the labor market variables, we see that total

available working time is close to 1/3 as desired. Moreover, the ratio of time worked in banking to

total work effort, m/(n+m), is 1.9% under the benchmark calibration, not far from the 1.6% ratio in

the U.S. economy. The steady-state capital/output ratio is 2.7 annualized, which is also in an

acceptable range.

           Turning to the interest rates, note that the steady state is computed at zero inflation so that

we can interpret all the interest rates as “real” rates. To start, note that the rate of interest RT on the

benchmark fictitious security that provides no collateral services is exactly 6% per annum. This

follows directly from the calibrated values of β and γ, together with log utility, which imply that RT

16
     Linguistically, we refer to “money and banking” in the singular, since it is the combination that is of importance.
17
     Our model does not feature Ricardian equivalence because of the collateral services provided by bonds.

                                                              18
= ρ + γ, where β = 1/(1+ ρ). Strictly speaking, the interbank rate RIB and the government bond rate

RB are both short-term interest rates in the model, so they should both be near the 1% per annum

(p.a.) average short-term rate. The calibration puts the interbank rate at 0.84% p.a., which is

satisfactorily close to 1%. However, the government bond rate is 2.1% per year under the

calibration, which is less satisfactory. That said, the two rates do straddle the 1% p.a. average short-

term rate, and neither is too far from 1%. In addition, it is noteworthy that the average maturity of

the stock of public debt outstanding used to calibrate the model is around 5 years. On this basis one

might presume that RB under the calibration is more representative of a 5-year bond rate than the

short-term T-bill rate. Thus it is interesting to note that Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997, p.

415) report an average 5-year term premium of around 1.2% p.a. relative to the short rate, which

happens to match closely the spread between RB and RIB in our calibrated steady state. Such

evidence provides a plausible reason why RB is elevated under our calibration, and suggests that it

would be useful to modify the model to distinguish various maturities of government bonds

outstanding in order to improve the calibration. Finally, the 2% p.a. collateralized external finance

premium under the calibration lines up very well with the average spread between the prime rate

and the interbank rate. This agreement reflects one aspect of our strategy of choosing banking

parameters so as to approximate the three conditions mentioned above.

       In order to illuminate the extent to which money and banking matters quantitatively, for

steady-state interest rates and macroeconomic aggregates, consider a counterfactual calibration in

which loan production is 10 times as efficient as in the benchmark calibration, implying that

banking services are much less costly to produce. Specifically, let F = 90. The endogenous steady-

state variables produced by this counterfactual calibration are shown in the bottom panel of Table 1,

labeled “highly efficient banking.” The striking feature of the resulting steady state is that all the

interest rates converge to RT, while the external finance premium and work in banking shrink so

                                                   19
much as to be reported as approximately zero—zero to four decimal places.

         Interpreting this counterfactual as a steady state in which banking services are almost free,

we can compare it to the benchmark steady state in order to determine how much money and

banking matters quantitatively for the endogenous variables. By this comparison, money and

banking appears to matter very much in a number of ways. Costly money and banking pushes short-

term interest rates, RB and RIB, lower by about 4 and 5 percentage points p.a., respectively, than they

would be otherwise in the steady state.18 Money and banking does this by creating a return to

collateral and a consequent liquidity-service yield that pushes RB far below RT, and by making

external finance costly in terms of work effort thereby forcing RIB far below RT. Specifically, under

the benchmark calibration, the presence of costly money and banking creates a LSYB of 4% per

annum and a real marginal cost of uncollateralized loan production of 5% per annum. Note also,

that the calibration implies a ratio of the collateralized to the uncollateralized external finance

premium of (RT – RL)/(RT – RIB) = 1 − α = 0.35.

         Money and banking has significant quantitative consequences for nonfinancial macro-

economic aggregates, too. Thus the steady-state capital stock is 5.7% higher in the benchmark

calibration than in the counterfactual “highly efficient banking” steady state.19 The reason is as

follows. The return RT on the fictitious security that yields no collateral services is invariant to the

efficiency of the banking system. Hence, the total net return to capital, which (abstracting from

differential riskiness) must equal RT, is invariant across steady states. At the benchmark calibration

LSYK = kLSYB = 0.2(0.04) = 0.008, so the marginal product of capital net of depreciation must be

0.8 percentage points p.a. lower, thereby requiring a higher K/n ratio. The K/n ratios are 28.7 and


18
   From the perspective of our paper, we would say that the low risk-free rate in Huggett (1993) is due to an implicit
broad liquidity services yield on the risk-free asset in his model.
19
   The extra accumulation of capital in our model is related to that in Aiyagari (1994). We would say that the steady-
state spread between the rate of time preference and the marginal product of capital in Aiyagari’s model represents an
implicit broad liquidity services yield on capital.

                                                          20
26.5 in the benchmark and highly efficient banking steady states, respectively. The capital stock, K,

is 5.7% higher in the benchmark calibration in spite of the fact that work in goods production, n, is

2.5% lower. The net result is that consumption, c, is about 1% lower due to costly money and

banking, and total work m + n is about 0.5% lower.

           Why exactly does money and banking push the interbank rate RIB down so far, according to

the benchmark calibration? The reason is that households have an inelastic demand for aggregate

bank deposits in the model which must be funded by borrowing from banks. A no-arbitrage

condition keeps the uncollateralized loan rate equal to RT. Banks must cover the marginal cost of

loan production to willingly accommodate the demand for loans needed to fund the desired

deposits. At a zero net interest margin, RIB = RT, a bank would rather lend funds in the interbank

market (where the marginal lending cost is zero). An excess supply of interbank credit pushes RIB

down to the point where the net interest margin just covers the real marginal cost of loan

production. At that point the interbank credit market, the loan market, and the deposit market all

clear.

           The steady-state implications of money and banking in the benchmark calibration can be

appreciated from the perspective of financial economics with reference to the “equity premium

puzzle,” which asks why real stock returns average 6 percentage points per annum above real short-

term interest rates, such as the federal funds rate or the 3-month T-bill rate.20 We have seen above

that the inclusion of money and banking implies a liquidity services yield that pushes RB below RT

by about 4 percentage points p.a., and competitive banks that push RIB more than 5 percentage

points below RT. However, according to the benchmark calibration the liquidity services yield on

capital only pushes the net marginal product of capital 0.8 percentage points p.a. below RT in the

steady state. Thus, according to the benchmark calibration, money and banking push real interest


20
     See, e.g., Campbell (1999, p. 1234).

                                                   21
rates down relative to the return to capital, which we identify with equity, by a net of 4.2 percentage

points for RIB and 3.2 percentage points for RB. Thus, it would appear that considerations of the

kind related to money and banking identified in our model make a quantitatively significant

contribution to resolving the equity premium puzzle.21

         Before moving on to Sections 7 and 8, where we discuss the implications of money and

banking for monetary policy more comprehensively, we consider the consequences of money and

banking for the “real neutral interbank interest rate” from a steady-state perspective. In monetary

policy practice, the neutral interbank rate is the level of the interbank rate thought to be consistent

with full employment, with the economy growing at trend, and with the price level stabilized on a

path consistent with the central bank’s inflation target. Within our model, the neutral interbank rate

accordingly has a natural interpretation as the real interbank rate in the steady state. Here we

describe the sensitivity of the steady-state interbank rate to the ratio of government bonds to GDP

and to the velocity of aggregate bank deposits, to indicate the magnitude of variations that a central

bank should expect in the neutral interbank rate, according to our model, in economies in which

costly money and banking is a reality.

         We find, first, that a ratio of government bonds to GDP (boc) 50% higher than in the

benchmark calibration raises RIB by 0.9 percentage points p.a., and a boc ratio 50% lower reduces

RIB by 1.2 percentage points p.a.22 These RIB changes reflect changes in the real marginal cost of

loan production associated with the effect of different values of boc on the weighted value of

collateral in the economy. Second, we find that velocity (V) 10% higher than in the benchmark

calibration increases RIB by 0.8 percentage points p.a. and velocity 10% lower reduces RIB by 1

percentage point p.a. The interbank rate is sensitive to V because velocity governs the demand for


21
   See Bansal and Coleman (1996) for an asset-pricing model that distinguishes between explicit pecuniary and implicit
service yields in a study of the equity premium, but in a manner quite different than ours.
22
   We interpret this experiment as if the steady-state rate of inflation is high enough to keep RIB above the zero bound.

                                                           22
bank deposits and the induced demand for bank loans to fund deposits.

7. Linearization

        We now move on to the dynamic issues mentioned in the introduction. In that regard we

need to complete the specification of our dynamic model, linearize it in a suitable manner, and

calibrate the new components. The first step is to recognize the presence, irrelevant in steady-state

analysis, of sluggish price adjustments. For that purpose we adopt the most nearly standard of all

price-adjustment formulations, the discrete-time version of the Calvo (1983) mechanism. We

recognize that there are grounds for objection to this specification, but as our model is strongly

unorthodox in other ways, we consider it best to stay close to the mainstream with this component.

Accordingly, we adopt the following price adjustment equation, applicable at the household level

and also to the general price level for goods in a symmetric equilibrium:

(32)    ∆pt = βEt∆pt+1 + κmct + ut                                          κ > 0.

Here pt = log Pt = log PtA so ∆pt represents the inflation rate, while mct is the real marginal cost of

goods production. With sticky prices, relation (13) above is replaced by

(33)    mct = ξt/λt,

so marginal cost is not constant in this case. We have added two equations and only one variable

(not counting pt or its defining equation) so some relationship from Section 2 has to be eliminated.

It is, naturally, the labor demand function (10), which represents behavior under full price

flexibility. In the numerical results below, we set κ = 0.05, intended to represent a typical value in

the recent literature.

        The other major addition to the model of Section 2 is a specification of monetary policy

behavior by the central bank. In the policy experiments below we will use two alternative types of

policy rules. The first is a rule for setting the interbank interest rate, RtIB. Specifically, we adopt a

rule of the general type made famous by Taylor (1993), allowing (as in most recent work) inclusion
                                                    23
of a lagged value of RtIB to reflect the prevalence of interest-rate smoothing by many central banks:

              t = (1 − µ 3 )[µ 0 + (1 + µ1 ) ∆p t + µ 2 mc t ] + µ 3 R t −1 + e t .
            R IB                                                       IB
(34)

Here we have written the rule in a fashion that implicitly sets the central bank’s target inflation rate,

say π*, equal to zero. With a Cobb-Douglas production function, mct serves as a measure of the

output gap used by Taylor (1993).

            While (34) expresses monetary policy behavior in a rather realistic way, it will be useful for

diagnostic purposes also to consider some policy experiments based on an alternative type of rule

that depicts the central bank as controlling the growth rate of the stock of high-powered (base)

money, Ht. Specifically, we will also report results based on the following monetary policy rule, in

which ht = log Ht and ∆h t is the growth rate of Ht:

(34’)       ∆h t = ρH ∆h t −1 + e Ht .

Here and in what follows, we use symbols with a “hat” to represent fractional deviations from

steady-state values. Also, in (34’) we have 0 < ρH < 1 while eHt represents the random,

unsystematic component of policy behavior. In our model, Ĥ t is related to consumption and the

price level by equations (4) and (5); the implied linearized relationship is

(35)        ˆ = cˆ + Pˆ .
            H t   t    t



            Equations (32), (33), (34) [or (34’)], and (35) are combined with linearized versions of

equations (4)-(15). Because we are using a symmetric equilibrium condition, the number of

equations needed is smaller than in Section 2. Essential relationships are as follows:23

                              n     ˆ         m 
(36)        λˆ t + ŵ t =            nt +           mˆt
                           1− n − m        1− n − m 




23
     Here ait denotes the fractional deviation from trend for Ait, i = 1, 2, 3.

                                                                    24
                          c(1 − α)          c(1 − α)  ˆ
(37)             ˆ t + 
          ŵ t + m                  cˆ t + 1 +        λt = 0
                         mw                   mw 


(38)     ˆ =  kK / c  (cˆ − qˆ − a3 ) − 
         Ω
                                                 b       ˆ                       B
           t                t t    t                   b t , with b = B/(P(1+R )c)
              b + (kK / c)               b + (kK / c) 

                 δK                            δK  ˆ
(39)     cˆ t = 1 +    (1 − η)(nˆ t + a1t ) −      qt
                    c                          c 

                                          αbc         ˆ                αkK(1 + γ ) 
(40)     cˆ t = (1 − α)(a2 t + m
                               ˆ t)+                  (b t + cˆ t ) +                   (a3t + qˆ t )
                                     bc + kK(1 + γ )                   bc + kK(1 + γ ) 

(41)      mcˆ t = nˆ t + w
                         ˆ t − cˆ t

(42)      ∆p̂ t = Pˆ t − Pˆ t −1

          kΩφ 
(43)           ĉ t =
          cλ 

    φ    ˆ                 φ                           β                                               β
kΩ  − 1 (Ω  t + a3t ) +  kΩ          − 1 − 1 qˆ t +          1 − δ + ηmc(n / K)1−η  E t λˆ t +1 +      (1 − δ)E t qˆ t +1
    cλ                     cλ                       1+ γ                                              1+ γ
  βηmc                                                               kΩφ    β                                  
+      (n / K)1−η  E t ( mcˆ t +1 + (1 − η)(nˆ t +1 + a1t +1 ) ) −        +     (1 − δ + ηmc(n / K)1−η )  λˆ t
  1+ γ                                                               cλ 1 + γ                                  

The last of these, which is the linearized version of the first order condition with respect to the

capital stock, is obviously a complex condition. Be that as it may, inspection of equations (32),

(33), and (35)-(43) shows that the endogenous variables that appear in this system are

                ˆ , λˆ , ξˆ , w
∆pˆ t , mcˆ t , Ω                          ˆ t , cˆ t , qˆ t , and Pˆ t . Thus, with policy determination of the paths of
                              ˆ t , nˆ t , m
                  t   t    t



Ĥ t and bˆ t we have the proper number of relationships for this essential set of variables.24 Once

their solutions are found, it is tedious but conceptually straightforward to calculate the interest rates

R Tt , R Bt , R IB        L
                t , and R t using linearized versions of the relationships (16), (17), (21), and (22) given in


Section 3.

24
  Of course, the dynamic solution requires proper attention to transversality conditions, etc. In all the results reported
below, the utilized solution is the only stable solution.

                                                                25
8. Dynamic Analysis

       Here we study dynamics using the linearized model calibrated at the steady state, as

amended in Section 7 to include Calvo-style staggered pricing and a policy rule, to explore how

much costly money and banking matters quantitatively for an otherwise standard NNS model of

monetary policy. In our exercises, the dynamic consequences of money and banking for monetary

policy are illustrated in two ways. First, we demonstrate the presence of two conflicting effects by

which money and banking affect the transmission of monetary policy. We identify a banking

“attenuator” effect that tends to blunt the impact of monetary policy actions. However, there is also

a banking “accelerator” in the model, resembling the familiar financial accelerator, with the

potential to amplify theimpact of monetary policy actions. We discuss the mechanics and

implications of the two potentially conflicting aspects of monetary transmission for the behavior of

the economy and the effectiveness of monetary policy.

       Second, we illustrate how much a central bank could be misled quantitatively in its

interbank-rate policy actions by ignoring money and banking altogether. To this end, we investigate

the extent to which a central bank could misjudge its interest rate policy response to a generic goods

productivity shock by not taking into account the existence of money and banking. Then we

consider two shocks emanating from the banking sector itself (which have no counterpart in the

benchmark NNS model): a shock to loan monitoring productivity and a shock to effective collateral.

The latter is meant to capture the effects of widespread financial distress.

       The banking attenuator and accelerator effects are highlighted, respectively, in Figures 1 and

2. Each figure reports impulse responses of key endogenous variables to a 1 percentage point shock

to policy rule (34’) assumed to generate the growth of high-powered money. The experiments

depicted in the two figures differ only in the assumed autoregressive (AR) coefficient of the money

growth rule. Specifically, Figure 1 reports outcomes for a modest degree of money growth

                                                  26
persistence, with AR coefficient ρH = 0.6, whereas money growth in Figure 2 is highly persistent

with ρH = 0.99.

       In Figure 1, the modest degree of money growth persistence stimulates a 0.6 percentage

point increase in consumption on impact that dies away relatively quickly as firms adjust prices to

neutralize the cumulative money growth effect on the markup and, thereby, on other real variables.

The aggregate demand stimulated by expansionary monetary policy is accommodated by an

expansion of hours worked in goods production and an elevated real wage. There is also a relatively

large increase in the real price of capital, q, due to the depressed capital-labor ratio and the elevated

marginal product of capital.

       The banking attenuator is evident in Figure 1 in the following sense. According to the broad

liquidity constraint (25), the increase in consumption generates a proportionate increase in the

demand for bank deposits that must be accommodated by a commensurate increase in loan

production. The increase in the value of the capital stock associated with the rise in q provides

additional collateral value that helps produce more loans. However, as revealed by the simulation,

the banking system also expands loan production effort, m, to accommodate the increased demand

for deposits and loans.

       Figure 1 shows that the net effect, summarized in (21) and (23), of m, w, and c is to raise the

external finance premium EFP temporarily by around 0.8 percentage points. The plot in Figure 1

pertains to both collateralized and uncollateralized versions of the EFP because linearized versions

                                  ˆ t +w
of both (21) and (23) give EFPt = m    ˆ t − cˆ t with hatted values being fractional deviations from

steady state. We see that RIB initially rises but by less than RT so the RT− RIB interest rate spread

rises at its peak by 0.8 percentage points. Both nominal interest rates rise initially, reflecting

inflation expectations, but RIB by less. RT first rises and then falls relative to expected inflation due



                                                    27
to movements in the pure real rate of interest associated with the expected change in λ according

to (16). Consequently, RIB itself falls after one period by about 0.6 percentage points on net.25

         In this case the external finance premium is procyclical—it rises in response to an

expansionary monetary policy shock along with the real marginal cost of loans. If the model were

to allow for investment financed externally at the margin, the procyclical external finance premium

would attenuate the effect of monetary stimulus on investment. As it stands, a net attenuation is

present in the model because effort is drawn into banking with the expansion of goods production.

The procyclical effect on the external finance premium reflects the fact that monetary stimulus on

consumption is accompanied by an increased demand for banking services to accommodate the

demand for bank deposits. The net effect depicted in Figure 1 contrasts with the countercyclical

finding in the work of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), among others, in part because they

neglect the direct relationship between consumption and the demand for bank deposits through the

demand for money.

         Figure 2 reports the results of a highly-persistent money growth shock that generates a

highly persistent 1 percent rate of inflation, nearly twice the peak response of inflation in Figure 1.

The higher rate of inflation in this case neutralizes much of the impact on consumption, which now

rises by only 0.1 percent before it begins to fall. Hours worked in goods production and the real

wage peak after a lag at only 0.2 percent above the steady state, respectively. However, the q price

of capital still rises by around 0.4 percent and remains persistently elevated. The increased value of

capital collateral relative to consumption allows broad liquidity constraint (25) to be satisfied with a

substantial decline of nearly 0.5 percent of hours worked in banking.

         Figure 2 shows that the net effect, according to (23), of m, w, and c is to lower the external

finance premium persistently by as much 0.4 percentage points. RIB rises by 1.4 percentage points

25
   The reported decline in RIB is relative to the steady-state. We interpret this simulation under the condition that the
steady-state rate of inflation is sufficiently positive that RIB remains above the zero bound.

                                                             28
on impact reflecting the sum of inflation expectations and the countercyclical external finance

premium. The banking “accelerator” effect on monetary stimulus in this case reflects the fact that

the banking sector requires less work effort to satisfy the increased demand for bank deposits, so

that the real marginal cost of loan production falls. The present discounted value of the persistently

elevated future marginal product of capital keeps the q price of capital high enough on impact to

overcome the presence of the banking attenuator and support a net banking accelerator.

       The mechanics of the banking accelerator are much the same as in Bernanke, Gertler, and

Gilchrist (1999), and others, where a countercyclical external finance premium amplifies and

propagates monetary policy shocks through a positive feedback loop that involves the monetary

stimulus, asset returns, the q price of capital, and the consumption value of loan collateral. The

difference is that in our model the accelerator effects are overridden by the attenuator in the case at

hand. As currently specified, our model is perhaps unduly favorable to the attenuator in that all

output is consumed and the velocity of bank deposits with respect to consumption is assumed

constant. Realistic modifications of the model—allowing output to be invested and the velocity of

deposits to vary—could shift the balance considerably.

       We now proceed to ask: How much could a central bank that ignores money and banking

misjudge the proper interest rate policy action to stabilize inflation in response to a goods

productivity shock? We answer by comparing the responses of the real natural interbank rate of

interest to a goods productivity shock in the model with and without money and banking. We do

this by utilizing interest rate policy rule (34) with µ1 = 50, µ2 = 0, and µ3 = 0. With its strong

response to inflation, this specification keeps inflation approximately equal to zero, which, given

(32), stabilizes real marginal cost mc of goods production at its steady-state value. Thus, this

specification of the interest rate rule essentially makes nominal interest rates behave like real natural




                                                   29
interest rates consistent with the underlying imperfectly competitive real business cycle model with

flexible prices and a constant profit-maximizing markup.

          In this context, we introduce a 1 percent shock to a highly-persistent first-order

autoregressive goods productivity process with AR coefficient 0.99. The impulse responses shown

in Figure 3 indicate that the following endogenous variables are nearly invariant to the shock: n, dp,

RT, and RB. The model has log utility and non-storable output, so we would expect hours worked in

goods production to be relatively insensitive to the highly-persistent shock to the level of

productivity in goods production. The inflation rate is essentially stabilized, as is the benchmark

nominal interest rate RT according to (16), because expected inflation and the expected change in λ

are approximately zero. The relative stability of R T reflects the fact that desired household saving

is relatively insensitive to the highly persistent shock to the level of productivity.

          The striking contrast is that c, w, q, m, and the external finance premium all rise persistently

by 0.6 or 0.7 percent. Why? With hours in goods production relatively stable, increased productivity

shows up as a percent jump in consumption approximately equal to labor’s share. The jump in the

wage reflects the increase in labor productivity. And the q price of capital reflects the highly

persistent increase in the marginal product of capital. The increase in banking hours reflects the

increased demand for deposits associated with the rise in consumption via the linearized broad

liquidity constraint (40). The small decrease in hours worked in goods production partly reflects the

increase in banking hours. As a result, the external finance premium jumps by 0.6 percentage

points.

          These results reveal a striking quantitative effect of the presence of money and banking in

the model. A central bank unaware of the effect of money and banking on interest rate spreads in

general and on the interbank rate in particular would expect all real natural interest rates to behave

like RT. Hence, a central bank determined to make its interbank rate policy instrument shadow

                                                     30
movements in the real natural rate, so as to stabilize inflation perfectly, would move its interbank

rate relatively little in response to a highly persistent productivity shock. Yet, the model with

money and banking requires the central bank to cut its interbank rate by around 0.6 percentage

points to stabilize inflation fully in response to such a shock. That amounts to a 2.4 annualized

percentage point misjudgment of the desired interbank rate policy action.

        What if the central bank followed a version of the Taylor rule without smoothing? To find

out, we compute impulse responses to a 1 percent positive goods productivity shock with AR

coefficient 0.99, but with interest rate rule (34) calibrated as µ1 = 1.5, µ2 = 0.5, and µ3 = 0. The

striking result reported in Figure 4 is that this rule permits 2 percent deflation that is highly

protracted! The deflation is associated with a persistent decline in real marginal cost (an elevated

markup) in goods production. Expected deflation pushes all three nominal interest rates sharply

lower. Hours in goods production, consumption, the wage, and the price of capital are all marginally

lower than in Figure 3. The key banking variables, monitoring effort and the external finance

premium, are both persistently higher under the specified rule.

        Inclusion of money and banking, then, makes this version of the Taylor rule deflationary. If

money and banking was costless, then there would be a single interest rate in the model, RT. And

the associated real interest rate would move little in response to the highly persistent goods

productivity shock. (The permanent income theory of consumption says that aggregate demand

would increase to absorb most of the increase in aggregate supply without much variation in the real

interest rate.) Hence, the output gap would be small, and deflation could be averted with a relatively

small cut in the interest rate.

        According to our calibration, however, the real interbank rate must fall significantly relative

to the real benchmark rate, RT. However, the Taylor rule says that the real interbank rate cannot fall

if inflation and the output gap are stabilized. Hence, in dynamic equilibrium the economy must

                                                    31
settle at a point where there is just enough of an output gap and deflation for the Taylor rule to

induce a cut in the real interbank rate to satisfy equilibrium in the banking sector. Thus, our model

of money and banking suggests the existence of a quantitatively significant problem for plausible

versions of the Taylor rule.26

         Our remaining examples of the quantitative consequences of money and banking involve

two shocks that emanate from the banking sector itself and thus have no counterpart in the usual

NNS model: a shock to the productivity of monitoring effort and a shock to effective collateral.

         The detrended productivity of monitoring effort in banking is represented by a2t in the

linearized broad liquidity constraint (40), and is determined exogenously by a first-order AR

process. We assume an AR coefficient of 0.99 for the banking productivity shock to capture the

near-permanent nature of surprising improvements or disappointments in technological progress in

banking. Assuming the same specification as in Figure 3 for the interest rate rule employed to

stabilize inflation fully, Figure 5 displays impulse responses to a one percent banking productivity

shock. As expected, the inflation rate is stabilized reasonably well, as are RT and RIB. Hours worked

in banking falls by 0.85 percent in response to improved productivity in banking. There is little

change in the q value of collateral, and therefore little effect on the supply of loans for given hours

worked in banking. The fall in m, together with the negligible change in the wage and the small

increase in consumption, produces a 0.9 percentage point fall in the external finance premium,

which is reflected in an equivalent rise in RIB. This means that a 1 percent improvement in banking

technology requires the central bank to raise its real interbank rate policy instrument by 3.6

percentage points at an annual rate to stabilize inflation.

26
   In this regard, the potential for large mistaken interbank rate policy actions might be reduced if the model were
modified to allow banks to acquire government bonds as assets. As currently specified, banks do not borrow in the
interbank market in order to hold government bonds outright. Since a bank would incur little loan production costs on
either side of this arbitrage, a bank could profit by utilizing funds borrowed in the interbank market to buy government
bills as long as RB exceeded RIB.


                                                           32
         Here again money and banking potentially matter a great deal quantitatively for interest rate

policy. A central bank unaware of the consequences of money and banking that wished to shadow

the natural real interbank rate to stabilize inflation would miss completely the need to raise its

interbank rate instrument to do so. The central bank would be surprised at the resulting strength of

economic activity and inflationary pressure. Impulse responses not reported here show that a

central bank following the Taylor rule of Figure 4 would in this case create inflation persistently in

excess of 0.5 percent.27

         For our last experiment we consider a shock meant to capture the consequences of financial

distress that weakens a borrower’s property rights to his capital, thereby making capital less

productive in securing and producing loans. We model financial distress as a shock to k in (6),

which shows up as a shock to a3t in the linearized equations (38) and (40). We assume that a3t is

generated as an exogenous first-order AR process with AR coefficient of 0.9 to reflect modest

persistence associated with resolving financial distress. Again, we specify the interest rate rule as

above to stabilize inflation fully in order to illustrate the effect of financial distress on the natural

interbank rate of interest.

         Figure 6 displays impulse responses to a 1 percent negative shock to effective collateral.

The inflation rate is stabilized reasonably well, as are RT and RB. Hours worked in banking rise by

1.2 percent in response to the decline in effective collateral. This rise in m, together with the

implied small changes in c and w, produces a 1.2 percentage point rise in the external finance

premium, reflected in an equivalent fall in the natural real interbank interest rate.



27
   Again, there are reasons why shocks to banking technology need not precipitate such large movements in the natural
interbank rate. First, the natural interbank rate is invariant to productivity shocks when banking and goods productivity
trend upward together as in the steady state. Second, the variance of detrended banking productivity shocks that move
independently of goods productivity shocks might be relatively small, with modest implications for the natural
interbank rate. Third, if banks were allowed to hold government securities outright in the model, then arbitrage between
RIB and RB would induce banks to sell government securities in response to the positive banking productivity shock,
which would mitigate the rise in the natural interbank rate.

                                                           33
       Once more, developments relating to money and banking potentially matter a great deal for

interest rate policy. In this case, it is implausible that a central bank would remain unaware of the

money and banking shock. Evidence of financial distress would be directly observable and reported

in the media. Central banks generally recognize the need to cut the interbank rate in response to

widespread financial distress. But, given the absence of money and banking in models of monetary

policy, there is no way to judge how much to cut the interbank interest rate.

       The simulation indicates that a 1 percentage point decline in effective collateral would

require an initial 4.8 annualized percentage point cut in the interbank interest rate followed by a

gradual return to neutral. This sensitivity of the natural interbank rate to widespread financial

distress seems large in the sense that central banks rarely make such immediate, deep cuts in the

interbank rate, even in response to a financial crisis.

       To get a more realistic idea of the effect of financial distress, we consider a more realistic

interest rate rule in Figure 7. Figure 7 displays impulse responses to the negative collateral shock

when monetary policy is governed by a specification of interest rate policy (34) reflective of a

Taylor rule with a lagged interest rate: µ1 = 1.5, µ2 = 0.5, and µ3 = 0.8. In this case, interest rate

smoothing delays the cut in the interbank rate, which reaches a trough after about one year only 2.5

percentage points p.a. below neutral. Realistic interest rate policy produces more realistic

macroeconomic outcomes: there is a recession with a 2 percent contraction in hours worked and a 2

percent per annum deflation. From this perspective, the sensitivity of the natural real interbank rate

to the effective collateral shock evident in the simulation may not be implausibly large.

       In fact, financial distress is likely to be accompanied by a flight to safety resulting in an

increased demand for bank deposits relative to consumption. The decline in velocity would cause an

even larger fall in the natural interbank rate than in Figure 6. On the other hand, if banks were

allowed to hold government securities outright in the model, then arbitrage between RIB and RB

                                                    34
would induce banks to buy government securities in response to the financial distress. Such

arbitrage would bring down RB and RT, cushion the decline in RIB, and improve the capacity of the

model economy to respond to financial distress.28

9. Conclusions

           We conclude with a brief summary of the paper’s scope and findings. Our objective was to

reconsider the role of money and banking in monetary policy analysis by means of an analytical

framework that includes both a banking sector and transaction-facilitating money in an optimizing

model that is otherwise of the standard new neoclassical synthesis type. The addition of the

banking sector leads to several unusual features, including a number of distinct interest rates. The

model is implemented quantitatively, based on a calibration that attempts (within specificational

constraints) to be realistic for an economy such as that of the United States.

           Results obtained are of two types, pertaining to steady-state and dynamic properties of the

model. In the former case we are reasonably successful in providing an endogenous explanation for

substantial steady-state differentials between the short-term interbank interest rate, typically

employed as the central bank’s policy instrument, and the following: (i) the collateralized loan rate,

(ii) the uncollateralized loan rate, (iii) the one-period government bond rate, (iv) the net marginal

product of capital, and (v) a shadow nominal purely intertemporal rate, i.e., our “benchmark” rate.

One steady-state experiment involves a counterfactual calibration that makes banking services

almost costless to produce; this scenario results in interbank and bond rates that are 4 percentage

points per annum higher than with our baseline calibration, thereby indicating a major quantitative

effect of a banking sector. Effects on the steady-state capital stock are also sizeable; with costless

banking services, the capital stock is over 5 percent lower than in the baseline calibration. Among

other results, in the baseline calibration we find a differential of over 3 percentage points per annum


28
     In this context, footnotes 25 and 26 are relevant.

                                                          35
between short-term interest rates and the return to capital, a magnitude that may contribute

significantly to resolving the famous “equity premium puzzle.” Finally, we report experiments with

the baseline calibration that indicate a sizable sensitivity of the steady-state “neutral” interbank rate

to the debt to GDP ratio and to the velocity of aggregate bank deposits.

       Dynamic results are based on impulse response functions implied by a linearized version of

the model. Here we demonstrate the quantitative significance of a “banking attenuator” effect that

works in the opposite direction from the “financial accelerator” effects emphasized by Bernanke,

Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999)—although these effects are also present in the model.

       One of the more significant findings in this dynamic context is that, according to the model,

a central bank that based its rate-setting policy on analysis that failed to recognize the distinction

between the interbank rate and the benchmark intertemporal rate could miss its appropriate settings

by as much as 4 percentage points. For instance, we show that a central bank that utilized an

interbank interest rate instrument, with parameters chosen to represent a moderate version of the

Taylor (1993) rule, would produce a persistent 2 percent per annum deflation in response to a 1

percent, highly-persistent positive shock to productivity in goods production.

       Finally, we demonstrate the quantitative consequences of two shocks emanating from the

banking sector itself: a shock to banking productivity and a shock to effective collateral reflecting

financial distress. For instance, we indicate that the central bank would need to cut the real

interbank rate initially by nearly 5 percentage points per annum to fully stabilize inflation and

output against a moderately persistent, 1 percent decline in effective collateral. Moreover, we show

that a more realistic policy response reflecting instead a Taylor-style rule with interest rate

smoothing fails to offset the contractionary consequences of financial distress, instead permitting a

recession with 2 percent per annum deflation and a 2 percent contraction in employment. In short,

in our calibrated model, the effects of money and banking are quantitatively of major importance.

                                                   36
                      Table 1: Steady-State Calibrations

                             Benchmark Calibration
                          (quarterly data; zero inflation)
    c       m              n           w              λ                Ω          Κ
0.8409   0.0063        0.3195          1.949          0.457            0.237      9.19

   RT               RIB                RL                       RB              CEFP
 0.015            0.0021             0.0066                   0.0052           0.0045

                            Highly Efficient Banking
                    (Same calibration as above except F = 90.)
   c       m              n             w             λ                  Ω          Κ
0.8490    0.000        0.3276         1.894         0.471              0.249      8.69

   RT                RIB               RL                       RB             CEFP
 0.015             0.015             0.015                     0.015            0.00




                                        37
38
39
40
                                             References

Aiyagari, S.R., 1994. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving, Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 109, 659-684.

Bansal, R., and W.J. Coleman II, 1996. A monetary explanation of the equity premium, term

       premium, and risk-free rate puzzles, Journal of Political Economy 104,1135-1171.

Bernanke, B.S., and M. Gertler, 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations, American

       Economic Review 79, 14-31.

_________________________, 1995. Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary policy

       transmission, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27-48.

Bernanke, B.S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist, 1999. The financial accelerator in a quantitative

       business cycle framework. In J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of

       Macroeconomics , vol. 1C. North-Holland Publishing Co.

Calvo, G., 1983. Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework, Journal of Monetary

       Economics 12, 383-398.

Campbell, J.Y., 1999. Asset prices, consumption, and the business cycle. In J.B. Taylor and M.

       Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics , vol. 1C. North-Holland Publishing Co.

Campbell, J.Y., A.W. Lo, and A.C. MacKinlay, 1997. The Econometrics of Financial Markets.

       Princeton University Press.

Carlstrom, C., and T. Fuerst, 1997. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations: A

       computable general equilibrium analysis, American Economic Review 87, 893-910.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler, 1999. The science of monetary policy: A new

        keynesian perspective. Journal of Economic Literature 37, 1661-1707.

Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini, 2004. Aggregate consequences of limited contract

       enforceability, Journal of Political Economy 112, 817-847.
                                                  41
Diamond, D., and R. Rajan, 2006. Money in a theory of Banking. American Economic Review 90,

       30-53.

Goodfriend, M., 2005. Narrow money, broad money, and the transmission of monetary policy. In J.

       Faust, A. Orphanides, and D. Reifschneider, eds., Models and Monetary Policy: Research in

       the Tradition of Dale Henderson, Richard Porter, and Peter Tinsley. Board of Governors of

       the Federal Reserve System.

Goodfriend, M., and R.G. King, 1997. The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of monetary

       policy, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1977, eds. by B.S. Bernanke and J.J. Rotemberg.

       MIT Press.

Hess, G.D., 2005. “Discussion,” In J. Faust, A. Orphanides, and D. Reifschneider, eds., Models and

       Monetary Policy: Research in the Tradition of Dale Henderson, Richard Porter, and Peter

       Tinsley. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Huggett, M., 1993. The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance economies,

       Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17, 953-69.

Ireland, P.N., 2004. Money’s role in the business cycle, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36,

       969-983.

Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein, 2002. Banks as liquidity providers: an explanation for the

       coexistence of lending and deposit-taking, Journal of Finance 57, 33-73.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore, 1997. Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105, 211-248.

Kocherlakota, N., 2000. Creating business cycles through credit constraints, Federal Reserve Bank

       of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 24(3), 2-10.

_____________, 1996. Implications of efficient risk sharing without commitment, Review of

       Economic Studies 63, 595-609.




                                                 42
McCallum, B.T., 2002. Recent developments in monetary policy analysis: the roles of theory and

       evidence, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 88, Winter, 67-96.

_____________ , 2001. Monetary policy analysis in models without money, Federal Reserve Bank

       of St. Louis Review 83(4), 145-160.

Mehra, R., and E.C. Prescott, 1985. The equity premium puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics

       15, 145-161.

Meltzer, A.H. 1995. Monetary, credit, and (other) transmission processes: A monetarist perspective,

       Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 49-72.

Rotemberg, J.J., and M. Woodford, 1997. An optimization based econometric framework for the

       evaluation of monetary policy. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. B.S. Bernanke and

       J.J. Rotemberg, eds. MIT Press.

Taylor, J.B., 1993. Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference

       Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.

Woodford, M., 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton

       University Press.




                                                43
