NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL RESERVE MANAGEMENT AND SOVEREIGN DEBT
Laura Alfaro
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 13216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13216

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

We thank Joshua Aizenman, Manuel Amador, Jaewoo Lee, Enrique Mendoza, Julio Rotemberg, two
anonymous referees and participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Annual Pacific
Basin Conference and University of São Paulo for valuable comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign Debt
Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 13216
July 2007, Revised October 2008
JEL No. F32,F33,F34,F4
ABSTRACT
To study the joint decision of holding sovereign debt and reserves, we construct a stochastic dynamic
equilibrium model that incorporates willingness-to-pay incentive problems. In this setup, debt and
assets are not perfect substitutes, as reserves can be used even after a country has defaulted. We calibrate
the model to a sample of emerging markets. We obtain that the reserve accumulation does not play
a quantitatively important role in this model. In fact, the optimal policy is not to hold reserves at all.
This finding is robust to considering interest rate shocks, sudden stops, contingent reserves and reserve
dependent output costs.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Fabio Kanczuk
University of São Paulo
R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
BRAZIL
kanczuk@usp.br

1 Introduction
There is a renewed interest in policy and academic circles about the optimal level of foreign
reserves sovereign countries should hold. This recent interest follows the rapid rise in international reserves
held by developing countries. In 2006, for example, reserve accumulation amounted to 20% of GDP in lowand middle-income countries; whereas this number was close to 5% in high-income countries. The increase
in reserve assets is not exclusive of China or the East Asian countries; it has become widespread
phenomenon among emerging markets, including countries that hold a large amount of external debt (see
Figure 1). This practice has raised interesting questions in the literature regarding the cost and benefits of
reserve accumulation. The cost of holding reserves has been estimated at close to 1% of GDP for all
developing countries (Rodrik 2006).1 Against this cost, an explanation commonly advanced is that countries
may have accumulated reserves as an insurance mechanism against the risk of an external crisis—self
protection through increased liquidity.2
Recently, researchers have undertaken the task of writing analytical models to characterize and
quantify the optimal level of reserves and provide policy advice to countries.3 Most of the formal models
used in the current analysis tend to take the level of international debt as given and solve for the optimal
liquidity-insurance services that reserves can provide. In other words, the recent literature has set aside the
joint decision of holding sovereign debt and reserves. Although this strategy has allowed for a better
understanding of the interplay between foreign reserves and a sovereign’s access to international markets,
there are several concerns with this approach. First, some of the implications of this assumption may not be
generalized once one considers the joint decision by a sovereign to hold foreign debt and reserves. For
example, in models a la Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), international debt serves an “insurance” role. That is,
1

Rodrik (2006) estimates the cost of reserves as the spread between the private sector’s cost of short-term borrowing

abroad and the yield the Central Bank earns on its liquid foreign assets.
2

For policy advice in this direction, see Feldstein (1999) and Caballero (2003). The “Greensan-Guidotti-IMF” rule

proposes full coverage of short-term external liabilities to mitigate the risk of currency crises.
3

See for example Aizenman and Lee (2005), Aizenman and Marion (2003), Caballero and Panageas (2005), Jeanne

(2007), and Lee (2004).

2

the demand for international loans derives from a desire to smooth consumption. Given the sovereign’s
willingness-to-pay incentive problems, additional reserves in these types of models tend to reduce
sustainable debt levels.4 Second, the strategy of assuming constant debt levels does not address one of the
puzzles behind the current accumulation of reserves. Sovereign countries have an alternative way of
reducing the probability and negative effects of external crisis: to reduce the level of sovereign debt. That is,
even in the case where reserve accumulation has positive liquidity benefits in terms of reducing the
probability of suffering financial crises and the output costs associated with it, a similar net asset position
can be obtained by reducing instead the level of foreign debt.5
In this paper, we address these concerns by incorporating debt sustainability issues into the optimal
reserve management analysis. Our main objective is to study the implications of the joint decision of
holding sovereign debt and reserves. We construct a stochastic dynamic equilibrium model of a small open
economy with non contingent debt and reserve assets. Our starting setup is a model a la Eaton-Gersovitz and
similar to Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), but where the sovereign has the choice to hold
reserves. In this setup, debt and assets are not perfect substitutes, as reserves can be used even after a
country has defaulted. In other words, both defaultable debt and reserves are means to smooth consumption.
We assess the quantitative implication of the model by calibrating a sample of emerging markets. We obtain
that reserve accumulation does not play a quantitatively important role in the model. In fact, a robust result
that emerges from our numerical exercises is that the optimal policy is not to accumulate reserves.6
We extend the model in several ways. Most of the recent papers advancing the insurance motive

4

The cost to a sovereign of the denial of foreign credit is that the country must resort to other methods for consumption

smoothing (such as building stock piles) or it must accept a greater fluctuation in its consumption. This penalty and
hence the sustainable levels of foreign debt are higher the greater the cost to the borrower of exclusion. This cost in
turn is higher the more limited domestically available options for smoothing consumption are and the lower the cost of
smoothing via the international capital markets is (i.e., the lower the world interest rate); see Eaton et al. (1986).
5

Rodrik (2006) mentions that countries could choose instead to reduce short-term debt in order to gain liquidity. More

generally, countries can reduce foreign debt.
6

We perform several exercises exploring the robustness of the result; see section 4.

3

behind reserve accumulation have been motivated by the sudden loss of access to international capital
markets and the collapse of domestic production which have characterized the emerging markets crises of
the nineties—a phenomenon Calvo (1998) labeled as “sudden stops.”7 In line with the sudden stops
literature, most of the formal analysis studying optimal reserve management model reserve accumulation as
a cushion against external shocks and capital flows reversals while the level of international debt is taken as
given. That is, in these models, countries engage in reserve accumulation to seek self-insurance against the
potential tightening of international financial constraints rather than income fluctuation per se as in more
standard debt models. These models have made important progress in providing an integral framework to
analyze quantitatively some of the limitations and risks of the integration of developing countries to
international financial markets. But by taking the level of debt as given, they have abstracted from
willingness-to-pay concerns associated with sovereign debt and the sovereign’s choice over the composition
of its assets and liabilities.
In order to analyze the interplay of both effects, we study an economy that is (i) hit by random
shocks in the interest rate (which we take to be “contagion shocks”), and (ii) in addition to the interest rate
shocks, the economy faces additional output costs associated with abrupt current account reversals (which
we take to mean “sudden stops”). However, as mentioned, our model retains willingness-to-pay concerns.
Note that since we focus on debt and reserve management problems, in this paper we do not attempt to
advance the understanding of the contagion or sudden stops phenomena.8 Instead we incorporate them into
the analysis in a highly stylized form. Our approach, nevertheless, reveals interesting results. Once again the

7

Additional empirical regularities include the sharp contractions in domestic production and consumption and the

collapse of the real exchange rate and asset prices. See Arellano and Mendoza (2003) and Edwards (2004) for
overviews of the stylized facts and the literature studying the “sudden stops” phenomena.
8

See Mendoza (2006) for important work on this direction. As the author explains, the economics behind sudden stops

remains to be understood. The standard real business cycle models do not seem to account for the main stylized facts of
these events. Durdu, Mendoza and Terrones (2008) quantitatively analyze the role of foreign assets in a model of
incomplete asset markets in which precautionary saving affects asset holding via business cycle volatility, financial
globalization, and sudden-stop risk.

4

optimal policy does not involve accumulating reserves. Rather, the government reacts by reducing the
amount of outstanding debt. Moreover, these results are robust to the possibility of holding contingent
reserves, which, as suggested by Caballero and Panageas (2005), are a more efficient device to insulate the
country from sudden stops.
We then study the role of output costs. The sovereign debt literature has found output costs to play
an important quantitative role even in models where debt should otherwise be sustainable (see Alfaro and
Kanczuk (2005)). Although these output losses are well documented, their micro-foundation remains to be
understood.9 Nevertheless, some empirical evidence suggests that reserves may reduce the output costs
associated with sudden stops (see Frankel and Cavallo (2004)). In order to incorporate these stylized facts in
our analysis, we consider a case where foreign reserves reduce output costs exogenously. Interestingly, in
this case, if reserves reduce output costs, they reduce sustainability. For this reason, we obtain once again
that it is optimal not to hold reserves.
The main implication that emerges from our work is that greater attention should be given to the
explicit modeling of the sovereign’s motivations, incentives, and constraints (political economy rationales)
as they seem necessary towards understanding the observed levels of foreign reserve holdings.10 To be sure,
scholars have considered additional motives for holding reserves. In earlier literature, reserve holdings were
associated with exchange rate management policies.11 More recently, it has been argued that the rapid rise in
reserves has little to do with self insurance, but instead with the policymaker’s desire to prevent the
appreciation of the currency and maintain the competitiveness of the exporting sector (the mercantilist view
by Dooley et al. (2003)).12 Yet, another strand of the literature has considered political economy issues.
Aizenman and Marion (2003), for example, analyze the role of interest groups, corruption, and opportunistic
behavior by future policy makers. In their setup, a policy recommendation to increase international reserve

9

See Calvo (2000), Dooley (2000) and Mendoza and Yue (2008) for potential explanations.

10

Amador (2003), for example, studies the role of political economy considerations in a sovereign debt model.

11

See Frenkel and Jovanovic (1981), Edwards (1983) and Flood and Marion (2002) for a review of the literature.

12

See Aizenman and Lee (2005) for a test of the importance of precautionary and mercantilist motives in accounting

for the hoarding of international reserves; for “fear of floating” see Calvo and Reinhart (2002).

5

holdings may be welfare reducing because it may increase the chance of a financial crisis. More generally,
our work suggests that policy recommendations may differ from the consensus once sovereign debt issues
are considered. This, is in line with Rogoff`s (1999) critical remark: “Whereas the debate over why
countries repay may seem rather philosophical, it is quite dangerous to think about grand plans to restructure
the world financial system without having a concrete view on it.”
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the benchmark model. Section 3
defines the data and calibration. The results and their robustness are discussed in Section 4, which is
complemented by a comment about the role of reserves as collateral. Section 5 concludes.
2 Model
Our economy is populated by a sovereign country that borrows funds from a continuum of
international risk-neutral investors. The economy faces uncertainty in output. As preferences are concave in
consumption, households prefer a smooth consumption profile. In order to smooth consumption, the
benevolent government may choose optimally to default on its international commitments. As in Arellano
(2008) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), if the government defaults on its debts, it is assumed to be
temporarily excluded from borrowing in the international markets. The novelty of our model is that the
government has available another device to smooth consumption: in addition to issuing debt, the
government can hold international reserves. And even when the government is excluded from borrowing
international funds, a reserve buffer can be used to reduce consumption volatility.
In more precise terms, we assume the sovereign’s preferences are given by
∞

U = E ∑ βt u (ct )
t =0

u (c ) =

with,

c1−σ − 1
(1 − σ)

(1)

where σ > 0 measures the curvature of the utility, β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, and ct denotes household
consumption.
If the government chooses to repay its debt, the country’s budget constraint is given by
ct = exp( zt ) − ( Bt − qtB Bt +1 ) + ( Rt − qtR Rt +1 )

(2)

6

where Bt denotes the debt level in period t, Rt denotes the reserve level in period t, and zt is the technology
state in this period, which determines the output level. The debt and reserve price functions, qB(st) and qR(st),
are endogenously determined in the model, and potentially depend on all the states of the economy, st,
which will be described in each of the different scenarios we study. In the benchmark version of the model,
the state of the economy is completely defined by the ordered set st = (Bt, Rt, zt).
We assume the technology state zt can take a finite number of values and evolves over time
according to a Markov transition matrix with elements π (zi , zj ). That is, the probability that zt +1 = zj given
that zt = zi is given by the matrix π element of row i and column j.
When the government chooses to default, the economy’s constraint is

ct = (1 − δ) exp( zt ) + ( Rt − qtR Rt +1 )

(3)

where the parameter δ governs the additional loss of output in autarky, a common feature in sovereign debt
models (see Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005)). After defaulting, the sovereign is temporarily excluded from
issuing debt. In particular, we assume that θ is the probability that it regains full access to the international
credit markets.
To grasp some intuition, consider a sovereign’s choice to default, and compare expressions (2) and
(3). On the one hand, defaulting entails an instantaneous reduction in the costs of rolling debt. This means
higher consumption, particularly when the debt service is large. On the other hand, defaulting implies a
lower output and a reduction in the possibilities of smoothing consumption in future periods. This is because
the sovereign loses access to international credit markets. Reserves should have a role in these
circumstances, because they allow for some consumption smoothing even when the sovereign cannot issue
debt. In other words, even though this is a model of borrowing, there is still a role for reserves; defaultable
debt is not contingent enough. The question we ask is whether there is a quantitative role for reserves in a
calibrated version of the model.
International investors are risk neutral and have an opportunity cost of funds given by ρt, which
denotes the risk-free rate. The investors’ actions are to choose the debt price q tB , which depends on the
perceived likelihood of default, and the reserves price q tR .

7

For investors to be indifferent between the riskless asset and lending to a country, it must be that
qtB =

(1 − ψ t )
(1 + ρt )

(4)

qtR =

1
(1 + ρt )

(5)

and

where ψt is the probability of default, which is endogenously determined and depends on the sovereign
incentives to repay debt.
The timing of the decisions is as follows. In the beginning of each period, the sovereign starts with
debt level Bt and reserve levels Rt, and receives the endowment exp(zt). She faces the reserve price schedule
q tR ( s t ) and the bond price schedule q tB ( s t ) . Taking these two schedules as given, the sovereign

simultaneously makes three decisions: (i) she chooses the next level of reserves, Rt+1; (ii) she decides
whether to default on her debt or not; and (iii) if she decides not to default, she chooses the next level of
debt, Bt+1.
The model described is a stochastic dynamic game. We focus exclusively on the Markov perfect
equilibria. In these equilibria, the sovereign does not have commitment, and players act sequentially and
rationally. In order to describe the equilibrium, notice first that the international investors are passive, and
their actions can be completely described by equations (4) and (5). In order to write the sovereign problem
recursively, let νG denote the value function of the sovereign if she decides to maintain a good credit history
this period (G stands for good credit history). Similarly let νB denote the value function of the sovereign
once it defaults (B stands for bad credit history). The value of being in a good credit standing at the start of a
period can then be defined as,
v = Max{vG , v B }

(6)

This indicates that the sovereign defaults if νG < νB. The value functions νG can be written as,
v G ( st ) = Max{u (ct ) + β Ev( st +1 )}

(7)

subject to (2), and the value function νB by
v B ( st ) = Max{u (ct ) + β[θEv G ( st +1 ) + (1 − θ) Ev B ( st +1 )]}

(8)

subject to (3).

8

To compute the equilibrium, it is useful to define a default set as the states of the economy in which
the sovereign chooses to default. The default set in turn determines the prices qB and qR, through expressions
(4) and (5). With these prices at hand, one can solve the sovereign problem (6), (7), and (8). The solution for
(7) determines a default, which can be used in the next iteration.
3 Calibration

We calibrate our model so that each period corresponded to one year. Our list of 28 emerging
economies is composed of those countries classified as such by The Economist.13 We use data available
since 1965. To calibrate the technology state z, we estimate an AR(1) process for the (logarithm) of the GDP
for each country i, that is,
ln( yi ,t +1 ) = α i ln( yi ,t ) + εi ,t +1 , where εi ,t ≈ N (0, σεi )
We obtain that the GDP weighted average (across countries) parameters are α = 0.85 and σε =
0.044, and the dispersion around these values is fairly small. We then assume the technology state can be
discretized into three possible values, zlow, zavg and zhigh. They are spaced so that the extreme values are 2.5
standard deviations away from the mean. We use the Quadrature Method (Tauchen, 1986) to calculate the
transition probabilities. We also discretized the space state of debt and reserves, assuming they could take
values from zero to 60% of GDP. We assumed these grids were large and fine enough not to affect the
decision rules.
We set the probability of redemption θ = 0.5, which implies an average stay in autarky of 2 years, in
line with the estimates by Gelos et al. (2003).14 In the benchmark case, the output cost is set equal to δ =
13

Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel,

South Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Turkey, Venezuela.
14

There are differences in the average stay in autarky among the different default events. For example, as noted by

Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2007), from initial declaration of debt services problems to final agreements, the default
episodes of the 1980s took longer than the 1990s one (due to the overly optimistic assumptions and the regulatory
incentives faced by the banks against declaring a sovereign in default). We experiment with longer average default
periods (6 years) obtaining similar results.

9

10%, but we experiment with other values as well, δ = 5% and δ = 20% as in Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005).15
Following the Real Business Cycle literature, we calibrate the parameter of preference curvature σ = 2 and
the risk free rate ρ = 0.04, which corresponds to the U.S. interest rate. As Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and
Gopinath (2006) note, in the model debt is used to front load consumption and thus high impatience is
necessary for generating features of the data such as the high debt levels and reasonable default in
equilibrium. Correspondingly, we set the time preference factor equal to β = 0.50, but we experiment with
higher values as well. A summary of the calibration parameters is found in Table 1.
4 Results
4.1 The Model with No Reserves

In order to compare our results with the literature, we first solve for an economy without reserves.
That is, we assume that Rt = 0 for any t, and solve, given the state, for the optimal default choice and for the
optimal level of debt. In this simple case, the state of the economy is completely defined by the asset level
and the technology, st = (Bt, zt).
Figures 2a and 2b depict, respectively, the sovereign’s default decision and the choice of the next
period debt level contingent on the sovereign not defaulting during this period. The curve denoted by “base”
refers to the most favorable situation: one where the sovereign is hit by the high technology shock, zhigh. The
curve denoted by “low technology” refers to the case where the sovereign suffers a bad technology shock,
zlow.

Figure 2a indicates that when the technology shock is high (“base”) the sovereign defaults when the
debt level is higher than 50.5% of GDP. If the technology shock is low (“low technology”), the maximum
amount of sustainable debt is 41.1%. Since, as expected, default is used as a means to smooth consumption,
default is more likely the lower the output levels.
Figure 2b shows that the next period debt level is higher the better the technology state and the
higher this period debt. The positive relationship between consecutive debt levels was anticipated because,
for a given technology shock, the sovereign would attempt to avoid sharp changes in the level of debt as
15

Note that for lower values of δ, the model can sustain very low debt levels relative to the stylized facts.

10

these imply higher consumption volatility. The positive relationship between technology and debt is a fairly
surprising result, although already discussed by other researchers (see Arellano (2008)). It means that the
sovereign does not use debt primarily as a way to smooth consumption, a departure from the “pure” Eaton
and Gersovitz (1981) framework. Instead, debt is predominantly used to front-load consumption, given that
the discount factor β is lower than the inverse of the risk-free interest rate. As mentioned, consumption
smoothing is mostly achieved through default, as in contingent debt service models, such as Grossman and
Van Huyck (1988).
Calculating the invariant distribution of the states, we determine that the sovereign is excluded from
the market 1.29% of the time, and the average debt is 46.0% of output, as reported in Table 2. These results
are broadly consistent with the stylized facts—the average debt holding for the countries of figure 1 is
approximately 41%.
4.2 The Role of Reserves

In our benchmark model, we allow the sovereign to hold reserves. The state of the economy is
defined by st = (Bt, Rt, zt). We solve again for the equilibrium and obtain the optimal choices of defaulting,
holding of debt, and reserves, which are reported in figures 3a to 3d. These figures contain 3 curves each. As
before, we report the decision rules for the cases named “base” and “low technology,” which refer
respectively to situations with good and bad technology shock, and reserves kept equal to zero (Rt = 0). But,
in addition, these figures report the decision rule for the case named “high reserves,” which correspond to a
situation with the worst technology state (zlow) and the maximum level of reserves in the grid chosen in our
computer implementation (Rt = 60 % of GDP).
Figure 3a should be compared with Figure 2a. It shows that the decision to default is the same for
the cases “base” and “low technology.” The effect of holding reserves (“high reserves”) is to reduce the
amount of sustainable debt. This is expected because reserve holdings reduce the cost of exclusion from the
capital markets. Figure 3b is very similar to Figure 2b. It indicates that holding reserves reduces the next
period level of debt.
Figures 3c and 3d show the decision to hold reserves in the next period when the sovereign has and
does not have access to the capital markets, respectively. These figures are not particularly interesting,

11

because most of the curves (precisely the “base” and “low technology” ones) coincide with the horizontal
axis. The important result one draws from Figures 3c and 3d is that the sovereign chooses to hold low levels
of reserves in the next period, whatever the state of the economy in this period. In particular, she decides to
deplete her reserve holdings whenever her outstanding debt level is lower than 6.3% of GDP. Furthermore,
and more interestingly, by jointly analyzing the “high reserves” curves from Figures 2b and 2c, one can see
that the sovereign would tend to use her reserve holdings to repay part of her debt.
Calculating the invariant distribution of the states, we obtain that the sovereign is excluded from the
market 1.29% of the time, the average debt is 46.0% of output, and the average reserve level is zero (see
Table 2). Notice that the debt level and the frequency of default results are the same that we obtained in the
economy without reserves. This is consistent with the fact that reserve holdings are equal to zero.
Indeed, the main lesson from this experiment is that it is optimal not to hold reserves at all. To
appreciate the intuition behind this result, consider first the benefits and costs of holding reserves. As
discussed before, the benefits of holding reserves are associated with the consumption smoothing they allow
in case the country defaults. Reserve holding are also costly, as the sovereign impatience is higher than the
reserves remuneration. Or, in other words, in order to build its stock of reserves, an economy has to
consume less. But, more importantly, reserve holdings endogenously affect the willingness to default of the
sovereign. As a consequence, reserve holdings reduce the amount of “sustainable” debt, or, more precisely,
increases debt services for a given level of debt. Thus, reserve holdings make debt more costly to the
sovereign.
4.3 Robustness: Parameter Calibration

Holding reserves may seem to be a priori suboptimal because the sovereign can, instead, reduce the
amount of outstanding debt. That is, both reserve holdings and outstanding debt are alternative ways of
achieving consumption smoothing. In bad times, when the economy is hit by a bad output shock, in order to
smooth consumption, the sovereign can increase the amount of debt to its maximum sustainable level. But
in the case when the sovereign has outstanding debt levels lower than the maximum sustainable level, there
is “more room” to borrow before debt becomes unsustainable. (More precisely, since default is less likely
when outstanding debt is smaller, borrowing is relatively cheaper).

12

However, this logic is too simplistic for many reasons. First, reserves are a device to smooth
consumption even after the country has defaulted, a circumstance in which the country cannot increase debt.
Second, reserves affect the sovereign’s willingness-to-pay in complex ways. And, in particular, there is no
reason for the amount of sustainable debt to vary linearly and uniformly with the amount of reserve
holdings. In other words, there is no guarantee that reducing outstanding debt by, say, X dollars, increases
the ability to smooth the same amount that holding X dollars as reserves does. Third, as Grossman and Han
(1999) show, smoothing consumption through increasing debt is less effective than smoothing consumption
through defaulting. Or, using their typology, “contingent service” generates more consumption smoothing
than “contingent debt.” And since reserves are useful even after defaulting, they can be even more so when
the sovereign opts to pay service contingently.
To further grasp this last point, we develop a simple two-period economy in the appendix. This very
stripped-down model shows how the combination of “defaultable” debt and reserves (a risk free bond)
completes the market. It underscores that there is indeed a theoretical role for holding reserves in the model
and also indicates which parameters are crucial to make reserves positive in equilibrium. In particular, in the
two-period economy we show that the equilibrium amount of reserves should increase both with the
parameter β (discount factor) and with the parameter σε (the standard deviation of the endowment process).
Taking all these together, one can conclude that there are many reasons why reserves holdings and
less debt outstanding are not perfect substitutes. Consequently, it is not possible to say, a priori, that the
optimal reserve holding is zero. Our result is, therefore, a quantitative one, which depends on the model and
calibration. As a direct consequence, it becomes crucial to understand how robust our result is to the
parameter calibration, which we tackle next, and to model specification, which we analyze in the following
sections.
First, to check if our results are highly dependent on the benchmark calibration, we simulate the
model with parameters changed by amounts equal to 10% of their benchmark values. We obtain that zero
optimal reserve result survive this tests.
Then, following the analysis in the appendix, we experiment with much higher values for β. We
report the results in table 3. Interestingly, a simulation with β = 0.90 implies debt values equal to 21.4% of

13

GDP, which is fairly in line with Asian countries. But, again for this case, the optimal level of reserves is
equal to zero. As we keep increasing β, we obtain that the country does not default anymore. In such
situation, debt and (negative) reserves become perfect substitutes, as they have the same payoff in all states
of nature. Indeed, for β higher than 0.945 the amount of reserves in equilibrium becomes positive, but the
amount of debt is now equal to zero. Thus, these experiments never result in positive amounts for both
reserves and debt.16 They show the model may imply in positive reserve amounts, but do not illustrate the
potential role of reserves in completing the market.
Once more following the two-period analysis, we then experiment with much higher values for σε,
the volatility associated with the endowment process. Table 4 reports the results. As we increase σε, we
obtain the sovereign tends to default more often and to reduce the amount of debt. This is again the
indication that default is the chosen alternative to smooth consumption. For σε = 0.33, which is 7.5 times the
volatility of the benchmark calibration, the equilibrium amount of reserves becomes positive. This is exactly
what we are looking for, a situation in which reserves and debt coexist to complete the market. As we
increase σε further, to 10 times the benchmark calibration, reserves are positive even when the economy is
being excluded from the international markets. Finally, for σε = 1.32, which is 30 times the benchmark
calibration, reserve holdings are greater than GDP, and the probability of default surprisingly falls17.
The implication of this set of experiments is that there is indeed a theoretical role for reserves in the
16

As a side issue, one should remember that in our model the parameter β is capturing not only impatience but also the

fact that emerging countries grow more than developed ones (the lenders), and therefore want to frontload
consumption. More formally, one could write a model in which endowment grows at a rate (1 + γ), and transform all
the variables into their stationary counterparts. The new model would resemble our model with the original β replaced
by β’, with β’ = β*/ (1 + γ)σ - 1. Here β* is the impatience parameter which can be calibrated by the international
interest rate, whereas (1 + γ) measures the difference in output growth between the emerging and developed countries.
Thus, in practice, β’ should be lower than β* = 1/(1 + ρ) = 0.962.
17

To better grasp the quantitative implication of these alternative assumptions, note that in the benchmark calibration,

with σε = 0.044, the welfare costs of fluctuations were 9.7.10-4 consumption units. In contrast, endowment volatilities
of σε = 0.33 and σε = 1.32 imply, respectively, in welfare costs of 5.5.10-2 and 8.7.10-1 units of consumption.

14

model, but not for reasonable parameter calibration. Reserve holdings are positive only if (i) the endowment
process is much more volatile than what we observe in emerging countries18, or (ii) the impatience
parameter is set to values that imply zero debt, which is also inconsistent to what we observe in emerging
markets and conflicts with the consumption front-loading that we expect from fast growing economies.19
In the next sections we evaluate the robustness of our results to the model specification. We return
to the benchmark calibration and increasingly change the features of the model.
4.4 Contagion

As a first robustness test to model specification, we consider the existence of “contagion effects,” or
shocks to the international interest rate. The intuition here is that interest rate shocks may be an additional
motivation to default on debt; debt services may become too costly to the sovereign. And, in as much as
defaulting becomes a good alternative, holding reserves becomes a useful device to smooth consumption in
the periods the sovereign is excluded from the international capital markets.
In order to simulate contagion, we modify equations (4) and (5) to the following expressions

and

qtB =

(1 − ψ t )
(1 + ρtB )

(4’)

qtR =

1
(1 + ρtR )

(5’)

where we now denote the risk free rate by both ρB and ρR. This notation may initially appear awkward, as
there should be only one rate. But, as we discuss next, this is a useful way to consider “irrational” contagion
effects in the model.
We then assume that the risk-free interest rate associated with the debt can take on of two values: ρB
∈ {0.04, 0.20}. The low value corresponds to tranquil times and the high value to nervous times. We further

18

The results in terms of volatility are similar to those in Durdu, Mendoza, and Terrones (2008).

19

Note that one could also increase the persistence of the endowment process, or boost the curvature of the utility

function in order to amplify the importance of consumption smoothing. However, this would again imply unrealistic
parameter calibrations.

15

assume that ρB evolves over time according to a Markov process. We calibrate the transition matrix that
describes this process such that, on average, a contagion occurs every ten years and lasts for two years. This
is in line with the stylized facts about sudden stops (see Edwards (2004) and Mendoza (2006).
Whereas the risk free rate associated with the debt oscillates, we assume the risk-free rate associated
with reserves is constant and equal to ρR = 0.04. That is, the emerging markets always get the regular (and
thus lower) interest rate remuneration on their reserves, and hence reserve accumulation does not benefit
from the higher interest rates associated with contagion.
The idea of this model specification is that in nervous times there is some type of “irrational”
contagion, which makes the emerging market face a high international rate, regardless of the risk of default.
It is useful to remember that in our model the probability of default is endogenously determined and affects
the equilibrium bond price qB even for a constant ρB. The occurrence of contagion is thus something else. It
represents a situation in which the emerging market faces a higher international rate even if it does not
default.
Notice also that the effect of contagion is akin to (partly) shutting down the international market.
That is, in nervous times the emerging economy can still borrow funds abroad, but it has to do so at a higher
cost. The calibration of ρB = 0.20 implies the interest premia that are usually seen during crisis. Raising ρB
further is equivalently to increasingly closing the market. Noteworthy, this contrasts to the usual modeling
in the literature, in which the maximum amount of debt is reduced to an exogenously specified level during
contagion. In our model, the credit constraint occurs through prices rather than quantity, and the debt ceiling
is endogenously determined and affected by the holdings of reserves.
In this specification, the state of the economy is defined by st = (Bt, Rt, zt, ρBt). After solving for the
equilibrium, we can again analyze the policy functions. Figures 4a and 4b depict the default and the next
period of debt choices, and are analogous to Figures 3a and 3b. The curves “base,” “low technology,” and
“high reserves” are defined as before, and refer to the case in which ρB = 0.04, that is, tranquil times. The
additional curve, “high interest,” corresponds to the case with the worst technology shock, with the highest
reserve holdings and with the high international interest rate ρB = 0.20. That is, this curve carries the same
hypotheses of the curve labeled “high reserves” in addition to the interest rate shock or contagion

16

assumptions.
Notice that the results for the cases “base,” “low technology,” and “high reserves” are the same as
before. The case “high interest” shows that contagion implies that the sovereign opts to default at smaller
debt levels. This could imply more defaults, as one would have expected. However, at the same time,
contagion implies an abrupt reduction in the amount of debt outstanding. Thus, it is not possible, by looking
only at these figures, to know the true impact of contagion on the frequency of defaults.
When we calculate the invariant distribution of the states, we obtain that the sovereign is excluded
from the market only 0.52% of the time, the average debt is 25.1% of output, and the average reserve level
is zero (see Table 2). Thus, contrary to our initial intuition, the sovereign optimally responds to the existence
of contagion by reducing the outstanding debt and defaulting less frequently instead of defaulting more
often. As a consequence, reserves again play no role. We chose not to report the decision of reserve holding
(the analogs to curves 3c and 3d) because they do not add additional information. As before, it suffices to
know that the sovereign opts to deplete her reserve holdings for any relevant state of the economy. We also
redo this experiment with many other parameter calibrations, and with much higher contagion premiums
(e.g., with ρB = 2.00), getting similar results.
4.5 Sudden Stops

A pertinent criticism of our contagion experiment is that it fails to capture some of the most crucial
characteristics of sudden stops. In particular, although we assumed sudden increases in the lending rate, we
have not considered that there might be output costs associated with abrupt reversals in the current account
(or, equivalently, sharp reduction of debt holdings). Maybe because of this, our solution pointed out that the
sovereign would choose to reduce its debt holdings, instead of defaulting.
This criticism motivates us to modify the model and include exogenous output costs associated with
sudden stops. This amounts to changing our equation (2) to
ct = (1 − Δ ) exp( zt ) − ( Bt − qtB Bt +1 ) + ( Rt − qtR Rt +1 )

(2’)

where Δ are the sudden-stop output costs. We set Δ = 10% if Bt+1 < Bt - 0.05, and Δ = 0 otherwise. By doing
so, we are calibrating output costs equal to 10% every time there is a current account reversal greater than

17

5% of GDP (see Calvo et al. (2006)).
Figures 5a and 5b are the analogs to figures 4a and 4c, once the sudden stop output costs are
introduced in the model. Comparing Figure 5a with 4a, one notices that additional output costs associated
with sudden stops reduce debt sustainability. The reason is such output costs reduce the benefits associated
with the access to the international capital market, and thus make default more appealing. Figure 5b is
surprising for the non-monotonicity of the policy functions, for which we do not have good intuition. But it
reveals, as expected, that interest rate shocks do not imply in abrupt reductions of debt.
In line with these observations, the invariant distribution of the states (Table 2) reveals that the
sudden-stop economy has more debt outstanding than the contagion economy (30.7% against 25.1% of GDP
respectively), and is associated with more default episodes (1.54%). Noticeably, there are more defaults and
less debt in the sudden-stop economy than in the benchmark economy. However, once again we obtained
that reserve holdings are equal to zero.
We experimented with the sudden-stop economy using other parameters (higher output costs and
smaller current account reversal tolerance, in addition to the various combinations of β, σε and ρB), and
obtained that the optimality of holding no reserves seems to be very robust to different calibrations. Our
general reading of this experiment is that, in order to respond to sudden-stop shocks, the sovereign does not
increase the default frequency much but, instead, reduces the amount of outstanding debt (when compared
to the “benchmark” economy outcomes). This, in turn, implies that sudden-stops are not quantitatively
important to rationalize building a reserve buffer.
4.6 Contingent Reserves

In a series of papers, Caballero advocates that emerging markets should hold contingent reserves.20
The intuition is fairly simple. Contingent reserves, which pay higher rates during “sudden stops,” should be

20

See Caballero (2003) and Caballero and Panageas (2005). Caballero and Panageas (2005) have in mind concrete

examples of instruments with contingent payoffs. However, more generally one can think that if capital outflows and
sudden stops are associated with devaluations, the payoff of reserves (usually denominated in foreign currency) will be
negatively correlated with these events.

18

better than non-contingent reserves since they allow for more consumption smoothing. The authors also
describe the conditions for a contingent asset to qualify for this use (it cannot be controlled by the individual
country, and its payoff has to be correlated with the occurrence of sudden stops) and quantify the gains from
its use. For the purpose of this paper, the possibility of holding contingent reserves should be seen as an
additional reason to holding a reserve buffer, as it increases its benefits.
In order to simulate the existence of contingent reserves in our economy, we let the price of reserves
take on two values: ρR ∈ {ρLOW, ρHIGH}. We also assume that there is a perfect correlation between ρR and
ρB, that is, ρR = ρLOW when ρB = 0.04, and ρR = ρHIGH when ρB = 0.20. We keep the rest of the model

identical to the sudden-stop economy.
The fact that international investors are risk neutral implies that there is a restriction on the values of
ρLOW and ρHIGH. Since the expected value of the contingent reserves should be equal to the risk less interest

rate, this pins down ρLOW for a given value of ρHIGH. In order to simulate the economy, we experiment for
different values for ρHIGH. In fact, the choice of ρHIGH corresponds to different leverages, or different blends
of contingent and non-contingent reserves.
However, regardless of the choice of ρHIGH, the result was the same and identical to the case with
non-contingent reserves. That is, the invariant distribution results in the economy with contingent reserves
are equal to those obtained with the sudden-stop economy in the previous subsection. The policy functions
obtained are also identical to those reported in figures 5a and 5b.
As before, experimentation with many combinations of parameters did not lead to new insights. The
essential contribution of this experiment is that the benefits from contingent reserves are not quantitatively
important enough to reverse the previous result. Once again, the optimal reserve holding is zero.
4.7 Output Costs Reduction

Defaulting countries experience output costs beyond the observed reduction in investment and
labor. Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005) find that additional output costs of defaulting are necessary to sustain the

19

debt levels observed in emerging markets even in a model of contingent services.21 Although these
additional output losses are well documented, their micro-foundation remains to be understood. One
possibility, pointed out by Dooley (2000), is that the loss in output is caused by the inability of debtors and
creditors to quickly renegotiate contracts and the inability to condition the loss of output ex-ante by reasons
of nonpayment. This creates a time interval during which residents of the country in default are unable to
borrow from locals or foreigners, for example, due to the inability of new credits to be credibly senior to
existing credits. If this is factually relevant, then reserves could potentially be used to mitigate the output
costs of default. The empirical evidence provided by Frankel and Cavallo (2004) suggest that reserves may
reduce output costs following a default.22
To investigate the possibility that this could affect our results, we analyze a case where reserves
reduce output costs in an exogenous fashion. To implement this in the model, we change equation (3) to
ct = (1 −

δ
) exp( zt ) + ( Rt − qtR Rt +1 )
1 + ω1 Rtω 2

(3’)

Note that the output cost δ was substituted by the expression δ/(1 + ωRtω2 ), where ω1 and ω2 are
positive parameters and Rt is the level of reserves (measured in percentage of output). As our benchmark,
we set ω1 = 100 and ω2 = 1, which implies that, when reserves amount to 10% of GDP, the costs from
defaulting halves. We also experimented with ω2 < 1, for which the marginal reduction in the output cost of
the first unit of reserves tends to infinity.23
From the solution of the model, we obtain again the policy functions for the default choice and the
next period level of debt, which we depict in Figures 6a and 6b. The most noticeable change is that debt is
now less sustainable than before, as one would expect. The invariant distribution points out to lower debt
levels and fewer defaults (see Table 2). Once again, we obtain that reserve holdings are equal to zero. This

21

As Grossman and Han (1999) point out, in contingent service models debt is sustainable even if the sovereign can

save after defaulting and regardless the existence of additional output costs.
22

Although there is a view that foreign reserves might reduce the probability of sudden stops, the empirical evidence

on this relation is not conclusive, see Edwards (2004), Frankel and Cavallo (2004) and Rodrik and Velasco (1999).
23

We thank Joshua Aizenman for this suggestion.

20

was robust to all values of ω1 and ω2 we tried, including choices such as ω1 = 10000 and ω2 = .5.
Paradoxically, as before, adding a new role for reserves implies in fewer defaults and, thus, no need for
reserves.
4.8 Discussion: Reserves as Collateral

From the point of view of our framework, the main role of reserves is to act as a buffer stock, useful
for consumption smoothing even when the sovereign is excluded from capital markets. As we discussed,
and the quantitative exercises show, according to this view, reserve holdings are consistent with less debt
sustainability. A completely different view, sometimes advanced in the literature, is that reserves can be
used as collateral, thus increasing debt sustainability.
But can reserves really be used as collateral? Our view is that this role, if it exists, is at best very
limited. Reserves are legally protected against attachment by creditors. Under the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act of 1976 of the United States and similar laws in other countries, central bank assets,
including international reserves, are usually protected against attachment.24 Hence, reserves work as
collateral only in the case where governments willingly, and more importantly credibly, pledge them as
such.25 Most governments, however, are generally careful to keep their reserve assets untouchable, thus
limiting their role as collateral. As Eaton et al. (1986) note, “if the collateral is retained in the borrowing
country, there is no mechanism by which the creditor can seize it, and if the collateral is moved outside the
country, where the creditor can seize it, the value of the loan is effectively reduced by the value of the
collateral. A fully and effectively collateralized loan would then be of no value to the borrower.”

24

This is also the case even when the central bank is the issuer of the debt. The Bank for International Settlements

(BIS) in Switzerland is also protected against attachment proceedings; governments and central banks in many cases
place assets with the BIS. This, however, is not the case in Germany, where under German law, reserves are open for
attachment. See Scott (2005) and Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006).
25

Reserves, however, can affect the bargaining position of a country in a negotiation. See Detragiache (1996) for a

bargaining model that incorporates reserves along these lines.

21

5. Conclusions

On the one hand, reserve accumulation is costly because it implies in less current consumption. On
the other hand, holding reserves may be beneficial. Reserves can be used to smooth consumption when a
country (i) is excluded from capital markets after defaulting, (ii) is hit by “irrationally” high interest rates
due to international contagion, or (iii) suffers from a so-called “sudden-stop” phenomenon. In addition,
reserves may be particularly useful (iv) if their payoff is contingent on the state of nature, or (v) if they can
mitigate the output costs associated with a default.
We study the optimal reserve policy in a stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model which is
calibrated to match a typical emerging market economy. The model is general enough to contemplate the
potential benefits of reserves mentioned above and, importantly, endogenously determine the optimal debt
level. We obtain that the optimal policy is not to hold reserves at all.
To obtain our results, we resorted to many simplifications. In particular we acknowledge the lack of
micro foundations related to the sudden stop phenomenon. More generally, why countries hold debt remains
to be understood in the literature. We believe that a better understanding of these issues could improve the
analysis, but we do not expect that doing so would change our results qualitatively in terms of the
desirability of reducing the amount of outstanding debt as opposed to increasing reserves.
Overall, our paper contributes to the existing debate by arguing that current reserve holding do not
seem to correspond to the optimal behavior of a sovereign that can both choose the levels of debt and hold
reserves. Some form of transaction costs, which were not considered in our model, could rationalize
countries holding some small amount of reserves, say, to cover for their very short-term debt. But this
cannot account for large reserve stocks.
Our results have normative implications. They suggest that a positive model, that aims to reproduce
the stylized facts, would need to focus on alternative motivations for reserve accumulation. Perhaps the
recent reserve holdings observed in emerging markets can be better explained by political economy
motivations associated with exchange rate management policies. Yet, another issue worth considering is the
interaction between the government’s and the private sector’s holdings of debt and reserves. Exploring these
rationales further is an important topic for future research.

22

6 References

Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath. 2006. Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current Account, Journal of
International Economics 69, 64--83.
Amador, Manuel. 2003. A Political Economy Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment. Mimeo.
Aizenman, J. and J. Lee 2005. International Reserves: Precautionary Versus Mercantilist Views, Theory and
Evidence. IMF Working Paper 01/198.
Aizenman, J. and N. Marion 2003. International Reserve Holdings with Sovereign Risk and Costly Tax
Collection. The Economic Journal 114, 569--591.
Alfaro, L. and F. Kanczuk. 2005. Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim: A Quantitative Approach. Journal
of International Economics 65, 297--314.
Arellano, C. 2008. Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Markets. American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Arellano, C. and E. Mendoza. 2003. Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’ in Small Open Economies: an
Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for emerging Market Crises, in: Chandha, A. (Ed),
Dynamic Macroeconomics Analysis: Theory and Policy in General Equilibrium, Cambridge
University Press.
Calvo, G. 1998. Capital Flows and Capital Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops. Journal
of Applied Economics 1, 35--34.
Calvo, G. 2000. Balance of Payments Crises in Emerging Markets: Large Capital Inflows and Sovereign
Governments, in: Krugman, P. (Ed.), Currency Crises, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo and E. Talvi. 2006. Phoenix Miracles in Emerging Markets: Recovering without
Credit from Systemic Financial Crises. NBER Working Paper 12101.
Caballero, R. 2003. On the International Financial Architecture: Insuring Emerging Markets. NBER
Working Paper 9570.
Caballero, R. and S. Panageas. 2005. Contingent Reserves Management: An Applied Framework. Mimeo.
Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart. 2002. Fear of Floating. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 379--408.
Detragiache, E. 1996. Fiscal Adjustment and Official Reserves in Sovereign Debt Negotiations. Economica

23

63, 81--95.
Dooley, M. 2000. Can Output Losses Following International Financial Crises be Avoided? NBER Working
Paper 7531.
Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber. 2003. An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System.
NBER Working Paper 9971.
Durdu, B., E. Mendoza, and M. Terrones. 2008. Precautionary Demand for Foreign Assets in Foreign Stop
Economies: An Assessment of the New Mercantilism. Journal of Development Economics,
forthcoming.
Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz. 1981. Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis. The
Review of Economic Studies 48, 289--309.
Eaton, J., M. Gersovitz and J. E. Stiglitz. 1986. The Pure Theory of Country Risk. European Economic
Review 30, 481--513.
Edwards, S. 1983. The Demand for International Reserves and Exchange Rate Adjustments: The Case of
LDCs. 1964-1972. Economica 50, 269--80.
Edwards, S. 2004. Thirty years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals and Sudden
Stops. IMF Staff Papers 51, 1--49.
Feldstein, M. 1999. A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets. Foreign Affairs, March/April 1999.
Flood, R. and P. Marion. 2002. Holding International Reserves in an Era of High Capital Mobility, in:
Collins S. and Rodrik, D. (Eds), Brookings Trade Forum 2001, Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press.
Frankel, J. and E. A. Cavallo. 2004. Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden
Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality. NBER Working Paper 10957.
Frenkel, J. and B. Jovanovic. 1981. Optimal International Reserves: A Stochastic Framework. Economic
Journal 91, 507--514.
Gelos, G. R., R. Sahay and G. Sandleris. 2003. Sovereign Borrowing by Developing Countries. What
Determines Market Access? IMF Working Paper 04/221.
Grossman, H. I. and T. Han. 1999. Sovereign Debt and Consumption Smoothing. Journal of Monetary

24

Economics 44, 49--58.
Grossman, H. I. and J. B. Van Huyck. 1988. Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim: Excusable Default,
Repudiation, and Reputation. American Economic Review 78, 1088--1097.
Jeanne, O. 2007. International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much of a Good Thing.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Lee, J. 2004. Insurance Value of International Reserves: An Option Pricing Approach. IMF Working Paper
04/175.
Mendoza, E. 2006. Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with Collateral Constraints: A
Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s Q. NBER Working Paper 12564.
Mendoza, E. and V. Yue, 2008. A Solution to the Default Risk-Business Disconnect. Mimeo.
Rodrik, D. 2006. The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves. NBER Working Paper 11952.
Rodrik, D. and A. Velasco. 1999. Short-Term Capital Flows. NBER Working Paper 7364.
Rogoff, K. 1999. Institutions for Reducing Global Financial Instability. Journal of Economic Perspectives
13, 21--42.
Scott, H. 2005. International Finance: Transactions, Policy, and Regulation, 12th Edition. New York:
Foundation Press.
Tauchen, G. 1986. Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and Vector Autoregressions.
Economics Letters 20, 177--181.
Sturzenegger, F. and J. Zettelmeyer. 2007. Debt Defaults and Lessons from a Decade of Crisis. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
7 Appendix: A Two-Period Economy

To better grasp the role of reserves in our model, this appendix develops a two-periods stripped
down version. As such, it cannot shed light on the “willingness to pay” incentives of the sovereign, which
hinge on the costs from the exclusion from the market. But this simpler version underscores how the
combination of reserves and “defaultable” debt completes the market. It also suggests which parameters are
crucial to obtaining positive reserves in equilibrium.
In this simple economy, the sovereign preferences are given by

25

u(c1, c2) = c1 + β E [ u(c2) ]

(A1)

where c1 and c2 denote households’ consumption in the first and second period, β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount
factor, and u is a second differentiable function with u’ > 0 and u’’< 0. Households receive an endowment y
in the second period, according to the following stochastic process,
y = 1 + σ with probability equal to ½ (good state of nature), and

(A2)

y = 1 – σ with probability equal to ½ (bad state of nature).

Note that we only kept the curvature of the utility function in the second period, as this is enough to
create the gains from smoothing consumption across the different states of nature. In turn, this assumption
makes the first period endowment irrelevant for the maximization problem. The parameter β has the role of
indicating the benefit from consuming earlier rather than latter. The parameter σ equals the standard
deviation of the (second period) endowment process.
The sovereign has two instruments to transfer resources across periods: defaultable bonds and
reserves. As usual, reserves correspond to riskless bonds, which bear interest rates given by ρ. In contrast,
defaultable bonds are contingent claims. The sovereign only repays debt in the good state of nature (high
endowment). More explicitly, the country budget constraint can be written by,
c1 = B - R

(A3)

c2 = 1 + σ + R(1 + ρ) – B(1 + r) in the good state of nature and
c2 = 1 - σ + R(1 + ρ) in the bad state of nature

where B is the debt level, R is the amount of reserves, and r denotes the “contractual” interest rate on debt.
International investors are risk neutral, and must be indifferent between the riskless asset and lending to a
country. This implies,
1 + ρ = (½) (1 + r) + ( ½ ) 0

(A4)

The maximization of the sovereign problem as a function of the level of debt B and reserves R
implies the system of equations, which define the equilibrium allocation of the model.
u’(1 – σ +R(1 + ρ)) = 1/[β(1+ρ)]

(A5)

u’(1 + σ +R(1 + ρ) – B(1 + r)) = 1/[β(1+ρ)]

(A6)

The first of these equations can be used to show the following comparative statics,

26

Proposition. The equilibrium level of reserves increases with the increases with the discount factor and

with the volatility of the endowment, i.e., ∂R/∂β ≥ 0 and ∂R/∂σ ≥ 0 ■

Higher discount factor means that the costs of consuming latter are smaller, and since reserves are a
means to postpone consumption, its equilibrium amount should increase with β. Reserves increase with σ
because they interact with debt to complete the markets, and this insurance motive becomes more important
when endowment volatility is higher.
It should be noted that this simple analysis is implicitly considering that the solution is interior. By
doing so, it is allowing reserves to be negative, in which case R actually corresponds to riskless debt. In
contrast, the full fledged model makes the realistic assumption that reserves are constrained to be non
negative. To make this point more explicit, consider the example in which ρ = 0 and u(.) is a logarithmic
function. With these additional assumptions, we can obtain the explicit solution R = β + σ – 1. Thus, in this
particular case, reserves are only positive (and thus really mean reserves) when β + σ > 1. In other words, if
we had constrained reserves to be non-negative, they would only exist for β + σ > 1.
A second related issue with this simple analysis is that it assumes that the sovereign always defaults
in bad states of natures. This is a useful assumption here because, as mentioned, we cannot incorporate the
willingness to pay analysis in a two-period model. However, in the full-fledged model, default is chosen
optimally, and the sovereign may choose never to default. In such case, debt B and reserves R would
become perfect substitutes. The experiments in section 4.3 show that this is indeed what happens when we
choose high β values.

27

Table 1: Calibration of Benchmark Model

α = 0.85

Technology autocorrelation

σε = 0.044

Technology standard deviation
Probability of redemption

θ = 0.50

Output costs

δ = 0.10

Risk aversion

σ = 2.00

Risk free interest rate

ρ = 0.04

Discount Factor

β = 0.50

Table 2: Invariant Distributions for Alternative Models

Model Specification

Exclusion from
Market
(% time)

Debt if not excluded
(% GDP)

Reserves if
not excluded

Reserves if
excluded

(% GDP)

(% GDP)

No Reserves

1.29

46.0

0

0

Benchmark

1.29

46.0

0

0

Contagion

0.52

25.1

0

0

Sudden-Stops

1.54

30.7

0

0

Contingent Reserves

1.54

30.7

0

0

Output Reduction

0.54

28.7

0

0

28

Table 3: Invariant Distributions in Benchmark Model with Higher discount factor

Discount factor (β)

Exclusion from
Market
(% time)

Debt if not excluded
(% GDP)

Reserves if
not excluded

Reserves if
excluded

(% GDP)

(% GDP)

.50

1.29

46.0

0

0

.70

1.29

30.8

0

0

.90

1.29

21.4

0

0

.94

0

18.9

0

-

.945

0

0

.0071

-

.95

0

0

49.2

-

.955

0

0

75.8

-

.96

0

0

295.4

-

Table 4: Invariant Distributions in Benchmark Model with Higher Volatility

Volatility (σε )

Exclusion from
Market
(% time)

Debt if not excluded
(% GDP)

Reserves if
not excluded

Reserves if
excluded

(% GDP)

(% GDP)

0.044

1.29

46.0

0

0

0.11

2.56

45.9

0

0

0.22

11.2

44.3

0

0

0.33

11.2

42.1

4.1

0

0.44

11.2

39.8

16.6

0.2

0.66

11.2

32.9

81.2

3.1

1.32

8.1

8.7

131.0

0.6

29

Venezuela

Turkey

Thailand

South Africa

Slovenia

Slovakia

Reserves

Saudi Arabia

Russia

Philippines

Peru

Pakistan

Mexico

Malaysia

Lithuania

Latvia

Korea

Israel

Indonesia

India

Estonia

Egypt

Czech

Colombia

China

Chile

Brazil

Argentina

Figure 1: External Debt and Reserve Holdings of Emerging Countries in 2006 (as a % GDP)

120.0

100.0

Debt

80.0

60.0

40.0

20.0

0.0

30

Figure 2a: Default Decision in the “No Reserves” Economy

Default Decision

default

do not default

0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP

base

low technology

Figure 2b: Debt Decision in the “No Reserves” Economy
60.0

50.0

Debt(t+1)/GDP

40.0

30.0

20.0

10.0

0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

31

Figure 3a: Default Decision in the “Benchmark” Economy

Default Decision

default

do not default

0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

base

31.6
Debt(t)/GDP

low technology

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

50.5

56.8

high reserves

Figure 3b: Debt Decision in the “Benchmark” Economy
60.0

50.0

Debt(t+1)/GDP

40.0

30.0

20.0

10.0

0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

32

Figure 3c: Reserve Decision in the “Benchmark” Economy,
with Access to the International Capital Market
25.0

Reserves(t+1)

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

Figure 3d: Reserve Decision in the “Benchmark” Economy,
with NO Access to the International Capital Market
3.5
3.0

Reserves(t+1)

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

33

Figure 4a: Default Decision in the “Contagion” Economy

Default Decision

default

do not default
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP

base

low technology

high reserves

high interest

Figure 4b: Debt Decision in the “Contagion” Economy
60.0

50.0

Debt(t+1)/GDP

40.0

30.0

20.0

10.0

0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

high interest

34

Figure 5a: Default Decision in the “Sudden-Stop” Economy

Default Decision

default

do not default
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

high interest

Figure 5b: Debt Decision in the “Sudden-Stop” Economy
60.0

50.0

Debt(t+1)/GDP

40.0

30.0

20.0

10.0

0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

high interest

35

Figure 6a: Default Decision in the “Output Reduction” Economy

Default Decision

default

do not default

0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

high interest

Figure 6b: Debt Decision in the “Output Reduction” Economy
60.0

50.0

Debt(t+1)/GDP

40.0

30.0

20.0

10.0

0.0
0.0

6.3

12.6

18.9

25.3

31.6

37.9

44.2

50.5

56.8

Debt(t)/GDP
base

low technology

high reserves

high interest

36

