NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEW MARKET FOR FEDERAL JUDICIAL LAW CLERKS
Christopher Avery
Christine Jolls
Richard Posner
Alvin E. Roth
Working Paper 13213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13213

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

The authors are grateful to Anne Alstott, Akhil Amar, Ian Ayres, Heather Gerken, James Hines, Alvin
Klevorick, Martin Kurzweil, Judith Resnik, Benjamin Roin, Benjamin Sachs, Steven Shavell, Benjamin
Shultz, Kirsten Solberg, Betsey Stevenson, Cass Sunstein, David Tannenbaum, Stanton Wheeler, Stephen
Williams, Ernest Young, seminar participants at Harvard Law School and Yale Law School, and participants
at the National Bureau of Economic Research Law and Economics Program Meeting and the American
Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting for very helpful comments and discussions. Jon
Goldin, Andrew Kim, Dina Mishra, and Michael Simkovic provided outstanding research assistance.
Finally, special thanks to Ellen Keng for her invaluable assistance with tabulating our survey data.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard Posner, and Alvin E. Roth. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The New Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard Posner, and Alvin E. Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 13213
July 2007
JEL No. J41,J44,J48,K49
ABSTRACT
In the past, judges have often hired applicants for judicial clerkships as early as the beginning of the
second year of law school for positions commencing approximately two years down the road. In the
new hiring regime for federal judicial law clerks, by contrast, judges are exhorted to follow a set of
start dates for considering and hiring applicants during the fall of the third year of law school. Using
the same general methodology as we employed in a study of the market for federal judicial law clerks
conducted in 1998-2000, we have broadly surveyed both federal appellate judges and law students
about their experiences of the new market for law clerks. This paper analyzes our findings within the
prevailing economic framework for studying markets with tendencies toward "early" hiring. Our data
make clear that the movement of the clerkship market back to the third year of law school is highly
valued by judges, but we also find that a strong majority of the judges responding to our surveys has
concluded that nonadherence to the specified start dates is very substantial -- a conclusion we are able
to corroborate with specific quantitative data from both judge and student surveys. The consistent
experience of a wide range of other markets suggests that such nonadherence in the law clerk market
will lead to either a reversion to very early hiring or the use of a centralized matching system such
as that used for medical residencies. We suggest, however, potential avenues by which the clerkship
market could stabilize at something like its present pattern of mixed adherence and nonadherence,
thereby avoiding the complete abandonment of the current system.
Christopher Avery
Harvard University
John F. Kennedy School of Government
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chris_avery@harvard.edu
Christine Jolls
Yale Law School
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
christine.jolls@yale.edu

Richard Posner
University of Chicago Law School
1111 E. 60th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
hkafra@uchicago.edu
Alvin E. Roth
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 308
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
aroth@hbs.edu

[T]hough I knew it was coming and I knew it would be bad, I had no idea just
how [bad].
–2004 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #261 1
I received the offer via voicemail while I was in flight to my second interview. The
judge actually left three messages. First, to make the offer. Second, to tell me that
I should respond soon. Third, to rescind the offer. It was a 35 minute flight.
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #132 (parentheses
omitted)
One of [Judge X’s] clerks even chastised me for “overly stringent adherence to
this timeline they have” and noted that other students from my school were
willing to interview ahead of schedule. It was a real conflict for me. I felt like I
had to choose between cheating and (potentially) not getting a clerkship.
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #4
Many people/professors brazenly cheated.
−2004 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #508
[P]eople who followed the rules were at a disadvantage.
−2006 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #292
It’s sad (pathetic?) that judges aren’t obeying their own rules. [It] flies in the face
of the whole notion of “law and order.”
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #147
It’s very disheartening to see so many Federal judges—the ostensible paragons of
rules and fair play—breaking their own rules and scheduling interviews before
the agreed-upon date in the law clerk hiring plan. I expected better.
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #193
There is absolutely no reward for those students who keep to their moral
obligation.
−2006 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #369
The cheating abounds! I have brought this to the attention of the committee but do
not even get the courtesy of a reply.
−Federal appellate judge, 2005, Survey #80

1

For further information about our surveys, see the text and appendix of this paper.

1

*

*

*

It’s terrible. Just about anything, including malicious lies, forcible running with
scissors, and active misuse of electric cords, would be better.
−1999 applicant for federal judicial clerkships (Avery, Jolls, Posner and
Roth 2001:838)
You will have to arrest me before I will again set foot in [specified courthouse]. I
would not wish this process on my worst enemy.
−2000 applicant for federal judicial clerkships (Avery, Jolls, Posner and
Roth 2001:839)
[T]he current non-system makes applicants see judges behaving in ways which
are unseemly, to put it mildly. That view of our behavior will inevitably shape
what these people think of the judiciary. To the extent that many of these
applicants will become leaders in the bar and in politics, we will as judges reap
what we have sown. They will hold us in contempt and will not be wholly wrong.
−Federal appellate judge, 1999 (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth
2001:835)

As the new millennium dawned, the market for federal judicial law clerks was in a state
of near crisis. The final two clerkship applicants and federal appellate judge quoted above, as
well as many others like them, expressed deep and wide-ranging concerns with the functioning
of this market in 1998–2000 (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:834-45). In an attempt to gain
some control of the market, in March of 2002 a group of prominent federal appellate judges
organized a one-year moratorium on the hiring of federal judicial law clerks; federal judges were
requested to skip hiring entirely in 2002 and were then to resume hiring in the fall of 2003, with
the primary pool of candidates the third-year law students who under past practice would have
been hired as second-year students in the fall of 2002 (Becker and Edwards 2002). Likewise, in
subsequent years judges were to hire students during the fall of their third year of law school. 2
This new system for the hiring of clerks is presently structured around a set of “start dates” for
2

See Summary of the Law Clerk Hiring Plan for 2004, online at
http://www.cadc.uscourts.gov/bin/Lawclerk/Lawclerkpdf/Summary_of_the_Plan_for_2004.pdf (visited Apr
27, 2007); Federal Judges Law Clerk Hiring Plan: Fall 2005 & Fall 2006, online at
http://www.ca7.uscourts.gov/hr/lc_hiring_plan.pdf (visited Apr 27, 2007).

2

the transmission of applications, the scheduling and conducting of interviews, and the making of
offers. 3
The law clerk market that is the subject of this regulatory regime is widely viewed as
important both to the functioning of the federal court system and to the career paths of lawyers.
Many judges believe that clerk quality has a significant effect on judges’ productivity and thus on
the functioning of the federal court system (Wald 1990:153). With respect to lawyers’ career paths,
federal court clerkships provide valuable knowledge and experience to clerks (Wald 1990:153-54).
Federal court clerkships are also often stepping stones to various elite legal posts (Kozinski
1991:1709). A series of law review publications over the years in the Yale Law Journal, the
University of Chicago Law Review, and other leading journals has analyzed the recurrent
difficulties experienced by the law clerk market (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001; Becker,
Breyer and Calabresi 1994; Clark 1995; Epstein 2006; Kozinski 1991; Mikva 1986; Oberdorfer
and Levy 1992; Priest 2005; Wald 1990).
The current regime for hiring federal judicial law clerks is a substantial departure from
the system (or “non-system”) in effect prior to the 2002 moratorium, and thus it is important to
inquire into the operation of the new regime. As was the case at the time of a study we conducted
in 1998–2000 of the law clerk market under the premoratorium regime (Avery, Jolls, Posner and
Roth 2001), anecdotal impressions are widespread, but hard data are elusive. So beginning in the
fall of 2004 we have annually surveyed both federal appellate judges and law students about the
operation of the law clerk market, using the same general approach we took in our earlier study.
We describe our survey methodology in the appendix to this paper. As elaborated in the
appendix, our surveys go through the fall of 2005 for federal appellate judges and through the
fall of 2006 for third-year law students.
3

See sources cited in note 2.

3

The responses to our new surveys provide evidence of three important points about the
operation of the present system. First, as we expected, the movement of the market to the third
year of law school is highly praised by judges responding to our surveys. The move in timing is a
significant advantage of the current system. 4 After offering a basic framework for analysis of the
law clerk market section I, we present in section II our survey evidence on the additional
information made available by the backward movement in timing and on judges’ reactions to this
beneficial feature of the new system.
Our second main finding is more troubling. As we describe in section III, our survey
responses reveal a level of interviewing and offering of positions prior to the specified start dates
that we find surprisingly high even in light of the many anecdotal accounts with which we are
familiar. Our surveys provide a quantitative perspective on the frequency of such behavior,
suggesting widespread nonadherence to the start dates. We find that in both 2004 and 2005,
roughly half of the responding judges had concluded that either “a substantial number” of
appellate judges did not adhere or (even worse) “relatively few judges fully adhered” 5 to the start
dates for conducting interviews and making offers. And even more directly, as early as the fall of
2004 a third of the judges reported on their survey responses that they themselves had
commenced interviewing prior to the specified start date for conducting interviews, and just
under a quarter reported that they had begun making offers before the specified start date for
making these offers. Despite the extent of nonadherence, we can imagine ways in which the law
clerk market could stabilize at a point of modest, albeit highly imperfect, adherence to the start

4

While we were not at all surprised by this finding, not all observers agree on this point. George Priest (2005),
in a comprehensive analysis of the law clerk market, questions whether earlier hiring is a problem for judges.
Our data paint a picture different from the one he suggests. See section II.

5

See note 18 for the full text of the survey question.

4

dates, and we offer several theories (along with relevant data from our survey responses) along
these lines in section III.
Our third set of findings concerns the rapidity with which clerkship matches are made
under the present regime—in significant part as a result of the use of “exploding offers” in the law
clerk hiring process. Section IV discusses our survey evidence on the quantitative importance of
these short-fuse offers, which require students to act on clerkship offers extremely quickly, often
before they can determine whether more preferred judges with whom they have had or scheduled
interviews will end up offering them positions. (The student whose offer was both made and
retracted during a thirty-five minute airplane flight provides an extreme example, though, as
noted in section IV, other students’ experiences were even more extreme.) Section IV also
presents further evidence of the high speed at which the law clerk market clears under the present
regime. In other markets such high levels of market compression have induced many participants
to move before the markets’ designated start dates in order to avoid the congestion. Again,
however, we sketch potential ways in which the law clerk market might avoid this outcome and
thus achieve at least partial success in keeping clerk hiring in the third year of law school.
Although our primary intended contribution in this paper is descriptive and empirical, the
operation of the current law clerk market presents moral issues as well, as suggested by the
student quotations with which we began. No judge is required to adhere to the start dates; they
are merely recommendations by a committee of judges. Individual judges may have strong
reasons to jump the gun. But uneven judicial compliance with the start dates, even if individually
rational, may harm the applicant pool, and indeed the judiciary, as a whole. We hope by

5

increasing the understanding of the law clerk market to illuminate some of its ethical dilemmas
and assist the search for means of resolving them. 6
I. Framework
Our primary concerns in analyzing the market for federal judicial law clerks are how well
this market succeeds in maximizing the satisfaction of judges and applicants with their clerkship
matches and how well it performs in encouraging participants to conform to, rather than flout, its
rules. 7 An ideal measure of how well this market is working might be the degree to which it
maximizes the “production of justice”—a metric that, unlike the measures just noted, takes into
account the overall quality of the legal system, including effects on those who are not participants
in the law clerk market. It is possible, for instance, that failing to match the most desired
clerkship candidates to the most desired judges—that is, failing to match in accordance with the
parties’ preferences—actually improves the “production of justice” by harnessing the abilities of
superior clerks to relatively less desired judges. A contrary possibility is that top law clerks
benefit more from the mentoring or the professional networks of more desirable judges, and this
may produce broader benefits for society as these clerks pursue their own careers in the law after
their clerkships. Moreover, if the effect of matching clerks and judges is multiplicative, the quality
6

As we discuss below, a prominent avenue for reforming the law clerk market would entail the adoption of a
centralized matching system of the sort used in many other markets with timing problems—an approach
favored by some commentators on the law clerk market. See note 33. In a typical centralized matching system,
such as the one used in the market for medical residents, applicants and employers each submit rank orderings
reflecting their preferences to a central clearinghouse following a decentralized process of application and
interviewing (e.g., Roth and Xing 1994:997). In the law clerk market, however, judges have never chosen to so
much as experiment with such a system, despite the recurrent and severe problems the law clerk market has
experienced over nearly a quarter century. See section III.A. Thus, a reasonable inference is that judges (if not
applicants) prefer to avoid moving to a centralized matching system if at all possible. Our own view, described
in our prior study, is that a version of centralized matching, though with very significant alterations to respond
to the special features of the law clerk market, would be desirable (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:86884), but we will not repeat our previous arguments here.

7

Because judges at the time of our prior study did not have in place any rules related to the timing of
transactions in the law clerk market, our prior study focused on how well the law clerk market succeeded in
maximizing the satisfaction of judges and applicants with their clerkship matches.

6

of the judicial product may be maximized by sorting the best clerks to the most desired judges. But
since it is impossible as a practical matter to say not only how “mismatches” (from the
perspective of judges’ and applicants’ preferences) affect the overall quality of the legal system
but what are genuine mismatches in that system, our analysis focuses on the two criteria noted
above.
In analysis of the law clerk market, two distinct attributes of the hiring process are
important: the time at which hiring occurs in the applicant’s law school career and the nature of the
hiring process itself. We consider these two features in turn below.
A.

Time of Hiring
Before the current reform, clerks were hired on the basis of only a single year’s

performance in law school. An obvious advantage of moving the hiring date for clerks later is
that information that emerges after the first year of law school may well be relevant to judges’
and clerks’ satisfaction with the match. Employers may, however, inefficiently hire applicants
well before a job will commence even though additional information related to job performance
would become available later (Roth and Xing 1994:1034-35, 1039-40). Competitive pressure to
attract candidates can lead offer dates to move earlier and earlier even if all market participants
would be better off with later hiring.8
Empirical evidence from another market that has experienced problems with early
transactions—the market for college football bowls—suggests that the efficiency gains from later
transactions, with the resulting improvement in match quality, may be significant (Fréchette,
Roth and Ünver, forthcoming). And because the college bowl market, in contrast to the law clerk
8

Priest (2005:149-51, 156-58) suggests that early hiring in the law clerk market represents not a market failure
but rather optimizing behavior by participants in this market. But the economics literature noted in the text
shows how individually rational behavior by market participants may lead to an outcome in which all market
participants are worse off than they would be if hiring were constrained to occur at a later time.

7

market, is one in which prices can adjust freely, the apparent inefficiency of early transactions in
the college bowl market cannot be a function of fixed prices. 9 Consistent with all of the analysis
just described, most of the existing scholarly literature on the law clerk market extols the virtues
of hiring in the beginning of the third year of law school rather than during the second year of
law school (Becker, Breyer and Calabresi 1994:223-24; Oberdorfer and Levy 1992:1100). 10
Counterbalancing the informational loss from early hiring is the benefit that risk-averse
parties may enjoy from resolving uncertainty earlier, thus insuring themselves against the
possibility of facing unfavorable market circumstances down the road (Li and Rosen 1998:37374). The relevant uncertainty is over the size of the market facing a given market participant;11 for
judges, this would be the size of the group of well-qualified applicants, and for applicants, it would
be number of desirable judges for whom to clerk. But while this particular form of uncertainty may
be highly relevant in some contexts, it does not loom large in the law clerk market.
B.

Nature of the Hiring Process
Well-functioning markets are valuable in large part because they bring together many

buyers and sellers and thus allow them to consider a range of possible transactions and
9

The inefficiency results in the economics literature apply both to matching with fixed salaries and to
matching with flexible salaries (e.g., Roth and Xing 1994:1034) (“Unraveling may be ex ante as well as ex
post inefficient, in both the fixed-wage and negotiated-wage models.”), though it is certainly the case that a
high proportion of the markets that have been studied that have tendencies toward very early transactions are
markets in which, as in the law clerk market, salaries or prices cannot freely adjust.
10

Priest (2005:152) points out that it is not entirely clear whether, or why, a particular point later than the
second year of law school but before the end of the third year is the precisely optimal time for hiring law
clerks. It may indeed be difficult to identify the precisely optimal time for hiring to occur, but our suggestion
in the text is simply that, in the judgment of most observers, the gap between the second year of law school
and the start of employment as a law clerk after graduation is too large to be optimal.

11

Note that some of the text in Li and Rosen’s paper sounds more in terms of uncertainty about individual
traits or qualifications than in terms of the aggregate uncertainty that is reflected in their formal model. See, for
example, p. 384 (“In labor markets for young professionals and other situations where information is
imperfect, . . . uncertainty produces anxiety over how participants will make out and to whom they will be
matched . . . . Applicants for jobs and for admission to schools are concerned that their preferred firm or school
might not want them.”).

8

transaction partners (e.g., Roth and Xing 1994:992). Parties are more likely to match well when
they have been able to consider multiple options and select their most preferred alternatives.
When markets are thin, parties must choose from a very small set of alternatives; in some cases,
they may have no choice at all. 12
A clear example of a thin market, unavailable at the time of our prior study, is the market
for gastroenterology fellows. In the early years of this century, the market became one in which
offers had to be acted upon without an opportunity to consider and compare alternatives
(Niederle, Proctor and Roth 2006:218). As a result, the market became less national, with fewer
and fewer applicants changing hospitals, cities, or states to take their positions (Niederle and
Roth 2003:1348-50). Thus many participants’ “markets” effectively shrank to the surrounding
geographic area.
Historically, clerkship applicants have likewise faced thin markets. Indeed, “in many
instances the sellers [of clerkship services] can consider only one possible transaction—the one
with the judge who first makes them an offer” (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:801). In the
absence of a highly reliable premarket sorting mechanism to pair clerkship applicants with their
most favored judge among those interested in them, such thin markets will not maximize the
satisfaction of judges and clerks. Instead they will produce a substantial number of cases in
which judges and applicants not matched to one another would have preferred to be so.
If participants can obtain the information they need to make optimal choices prior to the
interview and offer stage, the cost of thin markets is minimized (Priest 2005:156). While it is an
empirical question—one that our survey data cannot resolve—whether participants in the law clerk
market can perfectly or nearly perfectly sort themselves prior to the first interview, so that there is

12

For a number of examples of this type of dynamic, see Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth (2001:813-29, 851,
853-54).

9

little cost to a quick pairing off at that point, most existing analyses have assumed that there are tight
limits on such presorting because of the highly personal nature of the clerkship relationship. 13
Thin markets can arise either within a largely unregulated market or in response to
market institutions seeking to control the timing or method of transactions. The law clerk market
in the period covered by our prior study, when no judicial rules or policies sought to regulate the
timing or process of hiring, illustrates the first possibility. And the second is illustrated by the
market for clinical psychology interns, in which thin markets arose in significant part as a
consequence of a designated start date for making offers in this market (Roth and Xing
1994:1017).
While thin markets—with the resulting negative effects on market participants’ overall
satisfaction with their matches—can occur in either situation, the second case, in which labor
market institutions seek to control the timing or method of transactions, also frequently produces
situations in which market participants flout, rather than conform to, the market rules. In the
clinical psychology market, between 10 and 25 percent of applicants reported violations of rules
specifying a start date for the offering of positions (Roth and Xing 1994:1017). So participants
faced limited incentives to conform to the rules. Sections III and IV of this paper examine the
extent to which the same is true in the present market for federal judicial law clerks; section II
addresses the other attribute of law clerk hiring—the time of hiring.

13

See, for example, Kozinski (1991:1711) (“[N]othing can take the place of the personal interview. A
thorough, searching interview, conducted with mutual candor, can tell judge and applicant a great deal about
each other.”); Wald (1990:153) (describing the clerkship relationship as “the most intense and mutually
dependent one I know of outside of marriage, parenthood, or a love affair”).

10

II. Evidence on Hiring in the Third Rather Than
the Second Year of Law School
In analyzing the evidence from our surveys about the move from hiring law clerks at the
beginning of the second year of law school to hiring law clerks at the beginning of the third year of
law school, we shall be emphasizing judges’ responses because their status as repeat players makes
them the more natural respondents to questions comparing the present regime for law clerk hiring
to the regime in effect prior to the 2002 moratorium. The appendix provides details about the
content, distribution, and response rates of both the judge surveys and the student surveys; as we
note there, while our surveys were not professionally designed instruments (for example, they
were not pretested on subsamples of respondents), we obtained good response rates and gathered
information consisting mostly of answers to straightforward factual questions. 14
That federal appellate judges prefer hiring in the third year of law school is surprising
neither to us nor to the judges who in the past argued for postponing hiring until the third year
(Becker, Breyer and Calabresi 1994:223-24, Oberdorfer and Levy 1992:1100) 15 —and it is
indeed what our survey responses reveal. One piece of evidence comes from direct questions
on our judge surveys about whether judges preferred the current regime to the regime in effect
prior to the moratorium; in light of their later written comments (described in the next
paragraph), a fair inference is that the judges who preferred the current regime did so at least in
part because of the later time of hiring. In quantitative terms, well over 80 percent of the
judges responding to our comparative question about the two clerk hiring regimes indicated a

14

A small number of questions led to confusion or different interpretations among some respondents, and so
responses to these questions were not used. The full text of all questions the responses to which we use in our
analysis is given below. The questions on the judge and student surveys had many similarities—for instance,
questions we asked on both surveys about the timing of first interviews and first offers—but also, given these
market participants’ differing roles in the market, many differences as well.

15

As discussed above, Priest (2005:157) expresses a contrary view.

11

preference for the current regime (Table 1). 16
TABLE 1: FEDERAL APPELLATE JUDGES’ COMPARISON OF
CURRENT AND PREVIOUS LAW CLERK HIRING REGIMES
Number and percentage of responding judges who
prefer current system

Fall of 2004
95
(85%)

Fall of 2005
70

Number and percentage of responding judges who
prefer previous system

17
(15%)

11
(14%)

(86%)

Total number of responses
112
81
Sources: 2004 and 2005 Judge Surveys. See note 16 for the full text of the survey question.

In terms of the written remarks, a number of responses to the open-ended question, “Is
there anything else that comes to mind about your experience of the clerkship hiring process that
you would like to share with us?,” emphasized a strong preference for the new regime’s later
hiring time, as shown in Table 2.

16

The full text of the question on our 2004 Judge Survey was, “Do you prefer hiring clerks the way it was
done in practice this year (for 2005–2006 clerkships), compared to the system in effect prior to 2003?” The
text of the question on our 2005 Judge Survey was identical except that the year reference was 2006–2007
instead of 2005–2006. A few responses were equivocal about the comparison and so were not counted as either
affirmative or negative answers.

12

TABLE 2: FEDERAL APPELLATE JUDGES’ EXPRESSIONS OF PREFERENCE FOR LATER OVER EARLIER
HIRING TIME
Survey
2004 Survey #8
2004 Survey #50
2004 Survey #64
2004 Survey #75
2004 Survey #85

2004 Survey #92
2005 Survey #56
2005 Survey #99

Comment
We much prefer hiring 3rd yr students.
The present system is working—it is far better than when we were
fighting to hire as soon as law review selections were made.
[T]he system as a whole was improved by a single factor: moving the
interview/hiring year from 2L to 3L.
[M]oving hiring from the 2nd to 3rd year makes [the new process] all
worthwhile.
The new system is much better than the old. I had just sent a memo to
all the judges on my court saying I was going to hire only 3Ls and
graduates when the new rules were proposed.
[T]he plusses of interviewing/hiring in 3d year are substantial and
worth resisting the cheaters and playing by the rules.
We greatly like waiting until 2nd year grades [and] law review
positions are determined.
It is a vast improvement to consider 3rd year applicants.

Sources: 2004 and 2005 Judge Surveys. See the text just before this table for the full text of the
survey question.

Although our judge survey responses provide strong evidence that most judges prefer later
hiring to earlier hiring, there is an ambiguity in “prefer.” In one sense all judges would prefer to
hire late, so that they would have more information about the applicants, but by their behavior
some judges reveal a preference for earlier hiring (by them!) in order to steal a march on other
judges. Some of these judges might be worse off in a system that allowed no opportunities for
strategic timing of the hiring decision. But, as discussed in section I.A, hiring early in applicants’
careers may be inefficient overall even where early hiring is individually rational for some market
participants.

13

III. Adherence to Start Dates
We turn now to the question of just how much adherence versus nonadherence there is
among federal appellate judges to the set of start dates established by the current regime for the
hiring of federal judicial law clerks. We report our empirical findings and also draw lessons from
other markets and economic analysis for understanding the current pattern of adherence versus
nonadherence to those dates.
A.

Historical Experience with Start Dates in the Law Clerk Market and Beyond
Attempts to set start dates in the law clerk market extend back nearly a quarter century. The

previous attempts, summarized by Becker, Breyer and Calabresi (1994:209-16), provide
illuminating context for our discussion below of the experience with start dates in recent years.
In 1983 the Judicial Conference recommended a start date for clerkship applications of
September 15 of the third year of law school—almost identical to the current start date. After
reports of “rampant” defections, however, the recommendation was quickly abandoned. An effort
in 1986 to fix a start date of April 1 of the second year of law school for review of applications was
likewise soon abandoned because, again, many judges did not adhere to it. In 1989, Judges Edward
Becker and Stephen Breyer proposed a March 1 start date for conducting interviews; this, too, was
abandoned after a substantial number of judges indicated that they would not adhere. The
following year, more than two-thirds of the federal appellate judges agreed not to make clerkship
offers before May 1, 1990 (at noon Eastern Daylight Time) of the students’ second year of law
school. (Review of applications and interviewing of candidates could take place at any time.)
This approach elicited broad condemnation for encouraging tacit agreements between judges and
clerks prior to May 1; for penalizing judges who called applicants promptly at noon only to learn
that they had already accepted offers from judges with “fast watches”; and for the effect on
14

judges who failed to demand on-the-spot responses to offers made at or shortly after the noon
starting gate, only to discover that if the offers were declined most of the other desired applicants
would already be committed and so would be unavailable to judges whose initial offers had been
rejected.
The next attempt at a start date came in 1993. The 1993 attempt imposed a March 1 start
date for clerkship interviews and initially appeared more promising than previous efforts. Indeed,
its sponsors stated after its first year of operation that although “[w]e entertain no illusions that
the March 1 Solution is perfect, . . . we respectfully submit that, like democracy with all its
flaws, it is the best system that anyone has conceived thus far” (Becker, Breyer and Calabresi
1994:222). However, with the passage of time, more and more judges interviewed and made
offers prior to the start date, and in 1998 the Judicial Conference abandoned the “March 1
Solution” because it was “not universally followed and, therefore . . . not an accurate reflection
of the practice in the courts.” 17
The law clerk market is far from alone in its historical inability to stick with start dates. In
a large range of diverse markets, such start dates have failed—a point we documented at some
length in our prior study (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:851-55, 862). The basic problem is
that adherence to such start dates is contrary to the self-interest of many market participants even
where—following the economic analysis described in section I.A—widespread adherence is
collectively rational. History suggests that the law clerk market is no exception, but let us see what

17

Reports of the Proceedings of the Judicial Conference of the United States, p. 38 (Sept. 1998). The regime in
effect from 1993–1998 was the last judicially instituted attempt to regulate the law clerk market prior to the
current regime. However, for one year following the Judicial Conference’s abandonment of the March 1 start
date, “some law schools attempted to enforce a February 1 start date for sending application materials,
including faculty recommendations, to judges, but these efforts were largely abandoned the following year (as
well as somewhat ignored in the year in which they were nominally in effect).” Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth
(2001:806).

15

our survey responses reveal about adherence to the new start dates over the last three law clerk
hiring seasons.
B.

Evidence on Adherence to Start Dates in the Present Law Clerk Market
The two most important start dates under the current regime are a date before which

interviews may not be scheduled and a date before which neither interviews nor the making of
offers may occur. While in the 1990 reform effort interviews and offers were separated—with
interviews allowed before the designated date for making offers—the general view was that this
regime strongly encouraged tacit agreements between judges and applicants prior to the
designated offer date (Becker, Breyer and Calabresi 1994:210-11). Thus subsequent reforms,
including the present one, have avoided any gap between the time at which interviews are
permitted to occur and the time at which offers may be made. Table 3 reports the relevant
calendar dates under the law clerk hiring regimes for 2004, 2005, and 2006.
TABLE 3: START DATES FOR LAW CLERK HIRING

Scheduling of interviews

Calendar date
in fall of 2004
Monday, Sept 13

Calendar date
in fall of 2005
Thursday, Sept 15
(noon EDT)
Thursday, Sept 22

Calendar date
in fall of 2006
Thursday, Sept 14
(noon EDT)
Thursday, Sept 21

Conducting of interviews
Monday, Sept 20
and making of offers
Sources: Summary of the Law Clerk Hiring Plan for 2004 (cited in note 2); Federal Judges Law
Clerk Hiring Plan: Fall 2005 & Fall 2006 (cited in note 2).
Tables 4A and 4B report the results of a series of questions on our judge surveys about
judges’ knowledge of adherence or nonadherence to these start dates. 18 For the fall of 2004, 44

18

The full text of the relevant portions of the question on our 2004 Judge Survey was as follows:
Next to each bullet item below from this year’s agreed-upon schedule for law clerk hiring,
please indicate with an “X” your impression of how well that item was adhered to. Please
mark all responses that apply.

16

• Scheduling of Interviews: Judges may contact applicants to schedule interviews beginning
the first Monday after Labor Day (September 13, 2004).
____ I am not aware of any appellate judges who did not adhere
____ To my knowledge almost all appellate judges adhered
____ To my knowledge many appellate judges adhered but a substantial number did not
____ To my knowledge all judges on my circuit adhered
____ At least one judge on my circuit did not adhere
____ Relatively few judges fully adhered
• Interviews and Offers: Judges may conduct interviews and extend offers beginning the
second Monday after Labor Day (September 20, 2004).
____ I am not aware of any appellate judges who did not adhere
____ To my knowledge almost all appellate judges adhered
____ To my knowledge many appellate judges adhered but a substantial number did not
____ To my knowledge all judges on my circuit adhered
____ At least one judge on my circuit did not adhere
____ Relatively few judges fully adhered
The full text of the relevant portions of the question on our 2005 Judge Survey was as follows:
Next to each bullet item below from this year’s agreed-upon schedule for law clerk hiring,
please indicate with an “X” your impression of how well that item was adhered to. Please
mark all responses that apply.
• Scheduling of Interviews: Judges may contact applicants to schedule interviews beginning
at noon (EDT) on the second Thursday after Labor Day (September 15, 2005).
____ I am not aware of any appellate judges who did not adhere
____ To my knowledge almost all appellate judges adhered
____ To my knowledge many appellate judges adhered but a substantial number did not
____ To my knowledge all judges on my circuit adhered
____ At least one judge on my circuit did not adhere
____ Relatively few judges fully adhered
• Interviews and Offers: Judges may conduct interviews and extend offers beginning the third
Thursday after Labor Day (September 22, 2005).
____ I am not aware of any appellate judges who did not adhere
____ To my knowledge almost all appellate judges adhered
____ To my knowledge many appellate judges adhered but a substantial number did not
____ To my knowledge all judges on my circuit adhered
____ At least one judge on my circuit did not adhere
____ Relatively few judges fully adhered
We do not make use of the responses “To my knowledge all judges on my circuit adhered” and “At least one
judge on my circuit did not adhere” from our 2004 and 2005 Judge Surveys because a number of judges did
not select either option but had previously selected “I am not aware of any appellate judges who did not
adhere,” and we were unsure of how to categorize these responses. (“I am not aware of any appellate judges
who did not adhere” could reflect a lower level of confidence or knowledge than the “To my knowledge all
judges on my circuit adhered” formulation.) With respect to the four responses used in our analysis, in a few
cases a judge indicated ambivalence between two responses (for instance, “To my knowledge many appellate
judges adhered but a substantial number did not” and “Relatively few judges fully adhered”), and in such cases

17

percent of responding judges stated either that many appellate judges adhered but a substantial
number did not adhere, or that relatively few appellate judges adhered, to the start date for
conducting interviews and making offers (Table 4A). For the fall of 2005, the corresponding
percentage was 58 percent (Table 4B).
TABLE 4A: FEDERAL APPELLATE JUDGES’ REPORTS OF
ADHERENCE TO START DATES, FALL OF 2004

Start date for
scheduling interviews

Number and cumulative percentage of responding judges
Relatively few
To responding
To responding
Responding
judges adhered
judge’s
judge’s
judge not aware
knowledge,
knowledge,
of any judges
many judges
almost all
who did not
adhered but a
judges adhered
adhere
substantial
number did not
0
34
41
24
(0%)
(34%)
(76%)
(100%)

Start date for
1
42
36
19
conducting
(1%)
(44%)
(81%)
(100%)
interviews and
making offers
Source: 2004 Judge Survey. See note 18 for the full text of the survey question. The total number
of responses to the question about the judges’ impression of adherence to the start date for
scheduling interviews was 99, and the total number of responses to the question about their
impression of adherence to the start date for conducting interviews and making offers was 98 (5
judges chose one of the responses used in our analysis for this question but not the question
about interview scheduling, and 6 judges chose one of the responses used in our analysis for the
question about interview scheduling but not the question about conducting interviews and
making offers).

we used the response suggesting greater reported adherence, so that if anything our results should overstate the
level of reported adherence.

18

TABLE 4B: FEDERAL APPELLATE JUDGES’ REPORTS OF
ADHERENCE TO START DATES, FALL OF 2005
Number and cumulative percentage of responding judges
Relatively few
To responding
To responding
Responding
judges adhered
judge’s
judge’s
judge not aware
knowledge,
knowledge,
of any judges
many judges
almost all
who did not
adhered but a
judges adhered
adhere
substantial
number did not
5
41
32
10
(6%)
(52%)
(89%)
(100%)

Start date for
scheduling
interviews
Start date for
4
45
25
11
conducting
(5%)
(58%)
(87%)
(100%)
interviews and
making offers
Source: 2005 Judge Survey. See note 18 for the full text of the survey question. The total number
of responses to the question about the judges’ impression of adherence to the start date for
scheduling interviews was 88, and the total number of responses to the question about their
impression of adherence to the start date for conducting interviews and making offers was 85 (1
judge chose one of the responses used in our analysis for this question but not the question about
interview scheduling, and 4 judges chose one of the responses used in our analysis for the
question about interview scheduling but not the question about conducting interviews and
making offers).

Two points are important in interpreting the judges’ responses. First, any selection bias in
the judges who chose to respond to our survey—which was anonymous—is unlikely to lead to
an overstatement of reported nonadherence to the start dates. Although some judges may have
been eager to express opposition to the current regime by survey responses indicating that the
regime was not working, such judges cannot be a significant presence in our response pool
because—as discussed in section II above—the overwhelming majority of our judge respondents
spoke positively about the later timing under the current regime. It remains possible that judges
who support the current regime but had observed particularly high levels of nonadherence were
especially likely to respond to our survey and so were overrepresented in our sample, but even if so

19

the numbers (as distinguished from the percentages) in the shaded boxes in Tables 4A and 4B
represent lower bounds on the absolute level of reported nonadherence.
Second, although the reported level of nonadherence was higher in 2005 than in 2004, we
cannot draw a definitive inference that nonadherence increased because our response pools in the two
years may have differed in some systematic way (a possibility that is particularly likely given that our
response rates were different in the two years and given that our surveys were mailed at different
times—December versus February—in the two years). If, however, nonadherence did increase
between the fall of 2004 and the fall of 2005, then the change would be particularly notable because
the degree of constraint upon judges was actually lower in an important respect in the fall of 2005
than in the fall of 2004. The rules for 2004 expressly applied to law school graduates as well as thirdyear law students, and the 2005 rules did not.19 Although our 2004 Judge Survey did not specifically
question judges about their hiring of law school graduates, our 2005 Judge Survey did, and the
responses showed the significance of this path of hiring in the law clerk market.20
Consistent with the evidence from our judge survey responses, our student survey
responses reveal much interviewing for and offering of clerkships before the start dates. As in
our previous study, we focus on responses from students who applied for federal appellate
clerkships because our judge survey data come exclusively from federal appellate judges. 21

19

See Summary of the Law Clerk Hiring Plan for 2004 (cited in note 2); Federal Judges Law Clerk Hiring
Plan: Fall 2005 & Fall 2006 (cited in note 2).

20

Of the 106 responses to the question “In hiring for clerkships for 2006–2007, did you hire any clerks who
had already graduated from law school?” on our 2005 Judge Survey, 64 responses (60 percent) were
affirmative.

21

We received a total of 527 student responses in 2004, a total of 545 student responses in 2005, and a total of
601 student responses in 2006. See the appendix. Of course, many respondents did not apply for federal
judicial clerkships at all. Among those who did apply, most, but not all, applied to at least some federal
appellate clerkships.

20

Tables 5A, 5B, and 5C report the dates on which responding students were first contacted
to schedule interviews, were first interviewed, and first received clerkship offers. 22 The shaded
boxes indicate behavior that is inconsistent with the start dates specified in Table 3. Between 29
and 37 percent of responding students received their first invitations to interview before the start
dates for the scheduling of interviews; between 21 and 31 percent had their first interviews
before the start dates for interviews; and between 11 and 22 percent received their first clerkship
offer before the start dates for offers. 23

22

The full text of the question on the 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys about interview scheduling was,
“If you have received at least one invitation to interview, what was the date at which you received your first
invitation to an interview?” The full text of the question on the 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys about
interviewing was, “What was the date and time of your first interview?” Finally, the full text of the question on
the 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys about applicants’ first offer was, “If you have received at least one
clerkship offer, what was the date and time of your first clerkship offer?”

23

Our results for the scheduling and conducting of “interviews” are vulnerable to a definitional question that is
not presented with respect to “offers.” Our 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys defined “interview” as
“either an in-person interview or a conversation other than an in-person interview if such conversation led to
an offer of a clerkship.” In adopting this formulation, the central case we had in mind was one in which an
applicant was hired after a telephone interview. However, it is conceivable that this question also captured
cases in which students had a conversation other than an in-person interview under a law clerk hiring rule
allowing informal “chat[s]” between judges and law students over the summer if a law student is spending the
summer working in the judge’s geographic area but attends a law school far from that area. See, for example,
Frequently Asked Questions about the Law Clerk Hiring Plan,
http://www.cadc.uscourts.gov/internet/lawclerk.nsf/Content/FAQS?OpenDocument (visited Apr 27, 2007)
(“[T]he Plan does not forbid a law student who, say, is from Virginia and working in Tulsa during the
[s]ummer from talking with a judge who is otherwise available to chat. This has happened in the past and the
judges saw no reason to prohibit it under the new Plan. The main point, however, is that the formal hiring
process will take place in the fall.”). A student hired after such a chat, followed by (say) a phone conversation
during the fall, conceivably could have reported in response to our question that the student’s first “interview”
occurred over the summer, as the summer chat might have been viewed as a “conversation [that] led to an offer
of a clerkship,” even though it did not proximately lead to such an offer. It seems unlikely that this
phenomenon could have a significant effect on our results. But readers concerned about it may wish to focus
on the final row in Tables 5A, 5B, and 5C, as that row reports the date of applicants’ first offers and so is not
affected by the definitional issue with “interview” just described.

21

TABLE 5A: DATE OF STUDENTS’ FIRST SCHEDULING OF INTERVIEWS, FIRST INTERVIEWS, AND
FIRST OFFERS, FALL OF 2004
Number and cumulative percentage of responding students
Before Sept
7

Sept 7–12

Sept 13–19

Sept 20–26

Date of first
scheduling of
interview

8
(5%)

37
(29%)

97
(92%)

8
(97%)

After Sept
26/
Not yet
5
(100%)

Date of first
interview

8
(5%)

7
(10%)

17
(21%)

107
(90%)

16
(100%)

Date of first offer

3
(2%)

3
(4%)

9
(11%)

89
(78%)

30
(100%)

Source: 2004 Student Survey. See note 22 for the full text of the survey questions. The table
reflects responses from students who applied for federal appellate clerkships. The total number
of responses to the question about when the students’ first interview was scheduled and to the
question about when their first interview took place was 155, and the total number of responses
to the question about when they received their first offer was 134 (some students who
interviewed did not receive any offers). The shaded areas in the table reflect behavior that is
inconsistent with the start dates specified in Table 3.

22

TABLE 5B: DATE OF STUDENTS’ FIRST SCHEDULING OF INTERVIEWS, FIRST INTERVIEWS, AND
FIRST OFFERS, FALL OF 2005

Date of first
scheduling of
interview

Number and cumulative percentage of responding students
Before Sept Sept 6–14
Sept 15–21 Sept 22–28
After Sept
6
28/
Not yet
88
1
5
9
33
(7%)
(31%)
(96%)
(96%)
(100%)

Date of first
interview

8
(6%)

10
(13%)

24
(30%)

87
(93%)

9
(100%)

Date of first offer

3
(3%)

7
(8%)

5
(13%)

92
(89%)

13
(100%)

Source: 2005 Student Survey. See note 22 for the full text of the survey questions. The table
reflects responses from students who applied for federal appellate clerkships. The total number
of responses to the question about when the students’ first interview was scheduled was 136; the
total number of responses to the question about when their first interview took place was 138 (3
students answered this question but not the question about interview scheduling, and 1 student
did not answer this question but did answer the question about interview scheduling); and the
total number of responses to the question about when they received their first offer was 120
(some students who interviewed did not receive any offers). The shaded areas in the table reflect
behavior that is inconsistent with the start dates specified in Table 3.

23

TABLE 5C: DATE OF STUDENTS’ FIRST SCHEDULING OF INTERVIEWS, FIRST INTERVIEWS, AND
FIRST OFFERS, FALL OF 2006

Date of first
scheduling of
interview
Date of first
interview
Date of first offer

Number and cumulative percentage of responding students
Before Sept
Sept 5–13
Sept 14–20 Sept 21–27
After Sept
5
27/
Not yet
13
27
66
2
1
(12%)
(37%)
(97%)
(99%)
(100%)
13
(12%)

5
(17%)

16
(31%)

73
(98%)

2
(100%)

11
(11%)

3
(14%)

8
(22%)

65
(88%)

12
(100%)

Source: 2006 Student Survey. See note 22 for the full text of the survey questions. The table
reflects responses from students who applied for federal appellate clerkships. The total number
of responses to the question about when the students’ first interview was scheduled and to the
question about when their first interview took place was 109, and the total number of responses
to the question about when they received their first offer was 99 (some students who interviewed
did not receive any offers). The shaded areas in the table reflect behavior that is inconsistent with
the start dates specified in Table 3.

Now it is possible to imagine ways in which students responding to our surveys—which,
like the judge surveys, were anonymous—could be either more or less likely than the average
student to have had interviews scheduled, interviews conducted, or offers made before the
designated start dates. Students who were successful in obtaining clerkships, especially the most
desired clerkships, might be more likely to respond to a clerkship survey than students who were
less successful, and the most successful students may also have been more likely than the average
ones to receive attention from judges before the start dates. Indeed, even if early attention did not
increase the ultimate level of success, students who received such attention might feel good about
the attention and thus be more likely to respond to a survey in which they would be reporting such
attention. But it is also possible that students who scheduled interviews early, interviewed early, or
received early offers would be less likely than other students to respond to our survey because in
24

responding they would be reporting behavior inconsistent with the start dates. (The quotations at
the start of this paper suggest that many students attach ethical significance to adhering to these
dates.) Whatever one’s view of the likely characteristics of our student response pool, however, the
numbers (as distinguished from the percentages) in the shaded boxes in Tables 5A, 5B, and 5C
represent lower bounds on the absolute level of activity before the start dates among the students at
the schools covered by our student survey.
As with the judge survey results above, one cannot draw a definite inference about
changes in behavior over time from the results in Tables 5A, 5B, and 5C. This is so because
differences across years could reflect changes in the composition of the response pool across
years—in the present case, if, say, activity in advance of the start dates became more accepted
and, thus, more likely to be reported by students choosing to respond to the survey—rather than
changes in behavior in the overall population.
Overall, then, our student responses, like our judge responses, suggest a substantial amount of
activity in advance of the start dates in Table 3.24 These findings mark a clear contrast with the

24

Responses to an additional set of questions on our 2004 Judge Survey further corroborate the conclusion of
substantial activity before the start dates. The full text of these questions was as follows:
When did you conduct your first interview (including any telephonic interviews that led to
offers) for a 2005–2006 clerkship?
Before Sept. 7 ____ Sept. 7–12 ____ Sept. 13–19 ____
Sept. 20–26 ____
After Sept. 26 ____
No interviews yet ____
When did you make your first offer for a 2005–2006 clerkship?
Before Sept. 7 ____ Sept. 7–12 ____ Sept. 13–19 ____
After Sept. 26 ____
No offers yet ____

Sept. 20–26 ____

(In our 2005 Judge Survey, the date ranges specified inadvertently did not correspond fully to the start dates
for the various stages of the law clerk hiring process, so we do not have comparable information from the
responses to the 2005 Judge Survey.)
The table below reports responding judges’ answers to the two questions from the 2004 Judge Survey.
As in Tables 5A, 5B, and 5C in the text, the shaded fields below indicate behavior that is inconsistent with the
start dates specified in Table 3 for the fall of 2004. As the table shows, 35 percent of the judges responding to
the 2004 survey question about when they commenced interviewing reported having commenced their
interviewing prior to the specified September 20 start date for conducting interviews in the fall of 2004. And

25

declaration at the end of 2004 by the judges responsible for the current regime that the “vast majority
of judges complied with the 2004 Plan,” with only “several” judges not adhering to the start dates
(Edwards and Becker 2004:2); in 2004, as well as 2005 and 2006, our survey evidence suggests
substantial activity before the start dates.
C.

Stabilization of the Present Law Clerk Market in a Pattern of Mixed Adherence and
Nonadherence
“How did you go bankrupt?”
“Two ways. Gradually and then suddenly.”
–Ernest Hemingway, The Sun Also Rises
Departures from the start dates specified by the current law clerk hiring regime have

important potential implications for the ability of the law clerk market to preserve the benefits of
hiring in the third rather than the second year of law school. While the good news from 2004,
2005, and 2006 is that departures from the start dates generally involved departing by days or

nearly a quarter of judges (23 percent) responding to the 2004 survey question about when they commenced
making offers reported having commenced making offers prior to the specified September 20 start date for
offers in the fall of 2004. These numbers reflect not only interactions with third-year law students from the
schools covered by our study but also interactions with law school graduates (who were covered by the start
dates in 2004, see note 19 and accompanying text) and third-year law students from schools beyond the four
schools covered by our study; as a result, it is not surprising that these numbers are higher than the numbers in
Table 5A (which reflect only the experiences of third-year law students from the schools covered by our
study). Note also that a rigorous comparison of the two sets of numbers would require one to know, as we do
not, how much correlation there is in the students whom judges interview or to whom they make offers before
the start dates, and also whether judges who move early at all tend to move early on just one student or most or
all of the applicants whom they interview. For all of these reasons, the table below is offered not for purposes
of direct comparison with the numbers in Table 5A but as evidence from a different source pointing in the
same general direction as above—that is, substantial activity in advance of the start dates.
Number and cumulative percentage of responding judges
Before Sept 7
Sept 7–12
Sept 13–19
Sept 20–26
After Sept 26/
Not yet
66
12
Date of first interview
11
8
23
(9%)
(16%)
(35%)
(90%)
(100%)
68
27
Date of first offer
5
9
14
(4%)
(11%)
(23%)
(78%)
(100%)
Source: 2004 Judge Survey. See above for the full text of the survey questions. The total number of responses
to the question about when the judges commenced interviewing was 120, and the total number of responses to
the question about when they commenced making offers was 123 (3 judges responded to this question but not
the question about commencing interviewing).

26

weeks rather than months, the history of the previous failures to reform the timing of the law clerk
market, described in section III.A, must make one wonder what the current level of nonadherence
bodes for the longer-term prospects of the current regime.
In some settings, an initial nontrivial level of nonadherence to a particular regime
precipitates an accelerating cycle in which adherence drops over time. An example of this type of
dynamic is Thomas Schelling’s (1978:92-110) “dying seminar.” A faculty member organizes a
group of twenty-five people to meet regularly, and most show up to the first meeting. But some of
the initial participants seem unwilling to continue attending given that a few of the initial invitees
did not participate. Once these participants stop attending, others may drop out in response, and
soon the seminar may fail to draw anyone. Various specific patterns are possible, as Schelling goes
on to describe, but the central feature of all of the cases is that people’s willingness to participate in
some activity may turn on how many others will participate. That is why when Judges Becker and
Breyer suggested to their judicial colleagues the adoption of a 1989 start date for law clerk
interviews of March 1 of the second year of law school, Becker and Breyer said the proposal
would be adopted only if 85 percent of the judges agreed to it; when only 75 percent agreed, the
proposal was shelved (Becker, Breyer and Calabresi 1994:209). But maybe they were wrong and
many judges are willing to adhere to start dates in the law clerk market despite their awareness
that many of their colleagues are not adhering. As one judge said in response to our 2005 survey,
“The key to success for the system is the realization that 100% (or even 93%) adherence isn’t
necessary” (2005 Judge Survey #16). Below we assess potential ways in which a substantial
level of nonadherence to start dates can be sustainable in a long-run equilibrium.
We assess this prospect as a matter of positive economic analysis, without attempting a
full assessment of the normative desirability of such an equilibrium. An equilibrium with partial

27

adherence would have the virtue that a number of applicants would be hired in the third rather
than the second year of law school but the disadvantage that a substantial number of market
participants would be flouting the market rules—a situation that leads to moral dilemmas of the
sort reflected in the quotations at the beginning of this paper. Normative comparison with regard
to the criterion of market thickness—whether participants have the ability to consider and
compare multiple offers before making their decisions—is even less determinate; our prior study
described the serious limits on market participants’ ability to do this in the premoratorium period
(Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:813-29), while section IV below describes the difficulties
under the present start dates. There are several barriers to direct comparison on this dimension—
most obviously the point, noted in our discussion in section IV.A of exploding offers, that the
sample pools may be different across the two studies. Because we believe the normative
comparison between an equilibrium with mixed adherence to start dates and the premoratorium
law clerk market—bearing in mind the ethical aspects of noncompliance with what are thought
to be market “rules”—is ultimately indeterminate, we focus below on positive economic analysis
of the prospects for an equilibrium with mixed adherence to the start dates.
1. The potential role of psychological breakpoints.
On one view, the extent of nonadherence to the start dates in the law clerk market is
limited by a psychological “breakpoint” associated with the start of the third year of law school.
Perhaps many judges will be reluctant to begin the process of law clerk hiring during the summer
before the third year of law school, as opposed to after the school year begins, even when some
degree of early movement is apparent to many market participants. Indeed, the choice of Labor
Day as the start date for the market tends to make prior actions conspicuous as violations of the
start dates. A hopeful view is that this design might create a breakpoint in timing that helps to
28

stabilize the market. Although selective colleges place considerable emphasis on early
application programs for college admissions, for instance, it is rare for a college to solicit
applications prior to the start of the twelfth grade (Avery, Fairbanks and Zeckhauser 2003:19-70,
187).
But it is easy to overstate the importance of seemingly obvious breakpoints. In the market
for college athletes, for example, competition led to committing college athletic scholarships to
students in the eighth grade (Bikoff 2003), while in the market for medical residents such
competition led to recruiting medical students two years before their medical internships would
begin (Roth 2003:909-10; Roth 1984:994). Similarly, the shift in timing to early in the second
year of law school for the clerkship process in the period prior to the 2002 moratorium surpassed
most reasonable breakpoints previously suggested by observers and participants; most
prominently, Judge Kozinski said in 1991 (p. 1710) that February or March of the second year of
law school was a “natural breakpoint” before which (because of the grades and law review
election results that would become known at that time) judges would not be willing to hire, but
within a few years the market was moving at the beginning of the fall of the second year of law
school, well before this “breakpoint” (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:830-33). In addition, in
the law clerk market the current breakpoint is several months after the latest information (grades
and recommendations from the second semester of the second year of law school) has become
available. For all of these reasons, the case for the existence of a psychological barrier to a
significant subset of market participants moving prior to Labor Day does not seem strong.
2. The potential role of market segmentation.
The present pattern of adherence and nonadherence to the start dates for the law clerk
market could also be sustainable in a long-run equilibrium if the market has become or is
29

becoming segmented, with one segment of the market moving largely prior to the start dates but
the other segments moving after these dates. Some students might focus their attention on one
subset of clerkships in their applications, while others might concentrate their attention on a
different set of clerkships. Once a few judges in the early segment violated the start dates, others
in that same segment would have a powerful incentive to move early as well, but the other
segments could remain largely unaffected and continue to adhere to the start dates. 25
One possibility is that the law clerk market has become segmented, to a degree, by
judges’ political background or philosophy. 26 In our initial study of the law clerk market in
1998–2000, we considered asking judges for the political party of the president who nominated
them, but we ultimately determined that doing so might significantly lower our response rate. We
followed the same approach in our present set of surveys, and so our survey responses provide
no quantitative data relating to political segmentation. Very substantial information about
individual judges (by name, so that political background or philosophy could be ascertained) is
available on a heavily visited clerkship blog site, 27 but, unfortunately, most of the posts do not
specify whether scheduling interviews or making offers on the dates stated on the blog was
undertaken with respect to law school graduates (in compliance with the law clerk hiring regime
after 2004—and the blog was not operating in 2004) or third-year law students (in violation of
the regime). 28 It would not be surprising if politically conservative judges were less apt to

25

See Schelling (1978:109-10) for discussion of this type of segmented outcome.

26

As one student wrote (2005 Student Survey #105), “[I]t seems as if the republican/conservative judges were
more likely to ‘break the rules’ than the democrat/liberal judges.”

27

See http://lawschoolclerkship.blogspot.com (visited Apr 27, 2007).

28

Some might also worry (perhaps without great reason) about the reliability of the blog postings. In contrast
to the questions in our surveys, which ask about judges’ and students’ own personal experiences and opinions,
the blog postings (for example, “Wilkinson is done,” “Hall has finished hiring”) may reflect gossip students
have heard as opposed to events witnessed or experienced by them personally.

30

comply with the start dates, less because conservatives are hostile to “regulation” than because,
since most law students, especially at elite law schools, are liberal, conservative judges may feel
themselves at a disadvantage in the competition for first-rate clerks who share their political
orientation. This is speculation. Still, if there is segmentation along political lines, the market’s
long-run equilibrium could involve limited adherence to the start dates for clerk hiring in one
segment of the market and widespread adherence in the other. Students preferring to work for
conservative judges would apply, and frequently be hired, before the start dates, while students
preferring to work for liberal judges would apply, and generally be hired, in accordance with the
start dates.
Another possibility is segmentation by geographic distance from clusters of elite law
schools. Start dates may advantage judges whose chambers are near such clusters because
applicants can then schedule more interviews within a compressed time frame. 29 The distant
judges might therefore violate the start dates, and the proximate ones adhere to them. But we did
not inquire about city or state on our judge surveys. 30
An extreme form of market segmentation would have the market subdivided a large
number of times; recall that in the market for gastroenterology fellows the principal advantages
of having markets at all were lost because of large-scale segmentation. The sort of segmentation
discussed here, by contrast, potentially involves large enough subsectors of the market to
preserve many of the advantages of markets as an allocation mechanism.
29

As one student noted (2006 Student Survey #488), “[I]t had been made clear to me that several of my judges
would complete their hiring by the late morning of the first day, and it was logistically impossible for me to be
in more than one city at once during that period!”

30

Our judge surveys did ask judges for their circuit. But because of the relatively small number of judges in
each circuit, together with our roughly 50 percent response rate, we cannot reliably determine whether reported
adherence varies by circuit, simply because the (for instance) six judges out of twelve judges who responded
from Circuit A could constitute a sample very different from that represented by the six judges out of twelve
judges who responded from Circuit B.

31

3. The potential role of informal understandings.
A different—and less benign—form of stabilization of the current pattern of reported
adherence and nonadherence would involve increasing departure from the spirit of the start dates
even among those adhering to the letter of those dates. Our surveys did not make reference to
this issue, but nonetheless a number of student respondents accused market participants of
following the start dates formally but not substantively. 31 As Table 6 reveals, some such
violations were blatant. One student respondent (2005 Student Survey #87) remarked that
“[m]any judges will nominally ‘follow the rules’ but will also communicate with applicants
through a ‘back channel’ or will do everything short of ‘officially’ scheduling an interview or
making an offer.” 32

31

As stated in the text, no particular survey question inquired about this issue, so, in contrast to our discussions
of the other tables in this paper, we do not quote from our survey questions.

32

Another student (2005 Student Survey #153) wrote, “I somewhat resented judges who officially adhered to
the hiring plan, but did not do so in fact.”

32

TABLE 6: STUDENT REPORTS OF DEPARTURES FROM THE SPIRIT (THOUGH NOT THE LETTER) OF THE
START DATES
Survey
2004 Survey #59
2004 Survey #296
2004 Survey #299

2004 Survey #533

2005 Survey #1

2005 Survey #87

2005 Survey #9

2005 Survey #140

2005 Survey #154

2006 Survey #569

Comment
I received [an] email on Sept. 9 asking me to call to schedule an
interview on Sept. 13 [the date on which interviews could be offered].
[C]lerks who knew students called “on their own initiative” early, just
to let us know their judge would be in contact.
A number of judges or clerks made or sent “pre-interview” calls or
emails (e.g. “I look forward to scheduling an interview with you next
week”).
[I] received [an] email before Sept. 13 [the date on which interviews
could be offered] notifying me of an intent to offer [an] interview on
Sept. 13.
[S]everal judges called me before [September 15, the date on which
interviews could be offered] to say that they would be calling me on the
15th for a[n] interview.
I technically did not receive any interviews until Thursday, Sept. 15th
(the first “official” day that interview offers could be made). However,
at least 4 judges either emailed me or called me between September 9th
and 13th to say that they were “very interested” in my application, even
though they did not technically offer me an interview yet.
[Judge X] required that I have an “informal conversation” with one of
his clerks around September 9 or so (well before the hiring timeline
permitted contact with chambers) before he would consider inviting me
for an interview. [W]hen I stated that I wished to comply with the
hiring timeline, I lost the opportunity to interview.
[A]n e-mail was sent [to me on September 12] letting me know I would
be getting an invitation to interview on the 15th [the date on which
interviews could be offered].
On Sept. 7, [Judge X’s] clerk responded to me in part as follows:
“[Judge X] has asked me to let you know that he is extremely interested
in interviewing you. He has decided not to depart from the official
hiring schedule, so he won’t call you to schedule until next week, but
he’d like to interview you the first day that the rules allow.”
I rec[eive]d an email on 9/11 indicating that I would receive a call on
9/14 [the date on which interviews could be offered].

Sources: 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys.

Such informal understandings have undermined start dates in other markets. In the case
of college football bowls, for instance, teams and bowls were for many years required by the

33

National Collegiate Athletic Association to wait until a specified day, called “Pick-Em Day,”
before making agreements on who would play whom in the major bowls; however, despite
formal adherence to Pick-Em Day, informal agreements were reached weeks in advance of the
specified date (Roth and Xing 1994:1009-12). Similarly, Japanese university graduates may not
be formally hired far in advance of their graduation dates, but, despite formal adherence to the
designated start dates, informal understandings called naitei are commonly reached well before
graduation (Roth and Xing 1994:1015-16). It is too early to tell whether a similar pattern of
informal clerkship offers (as distinguished from the informal interview offers reflected in Table
6) will ultimately emerge in the law clerk market.
*

*

*

Given the mixed pattern of adherence and nonadherence revealed by our data, the best
hope for avoiding a downward spiral of nonadherence is segmentation in the market. (Again, we
do not offer any independent normative defense of this outcome.) Of course, with an aggressive
system of sanctions for nonadherence, it is certainly possible that higher adherence would be
achieved (although, as suggested by the discussion just above, it might be more in letter than in
spirit). But neither federal appellate judges nor any other actor that might impose official
sanctions has chosen to do so. On the more modest possibility of attaining a stable equilibrium
through segmentation, the evidence from other markets is not necessarily encouraging, but it
remains possible that segmentation—most likely by political orientation or geography—could
avoid a trend of growing nonadherence to the start dates; the fact that, as discussed above, judges
are able to opt out of the adherence-nonadherence dilemma by hiring law school graduates may
increase the likelihood of successful stabilization with meaningful adherence in some segments.
We return to the prospect of market segmentation in section IV. Without such segmentation, the
34

law clerk market is likely either to return to a much earlier point in applicants’ careers or to see
the implementation of some form of centralized matching system. 33
IV. “Exploding Offers” and Compressed Market Timing
I . . . had an [early morning] interview [on September 22, the first day on which
interviews were permitted], which resulted in an exploding offer. The judge wanted
an immediate response. [H]e was my 2nd choice of those judges who invited me to
interview . . . . I was able to convince my 2nd choice judge [to give] me until the
end of the day . . . . Then I rushed to catch a plane to [City X]. I checked into a
seedy hotel long enough to shower and change suits, then headed to a [late
afternoon] interview with the judge I thought was my top choice. . . . This judge
explained that he had wanted to make decisions that first night, but that . . . he had
promised . . . he would not fill his slots before interviewing [two applicants the
following day]. I explained that he was my first choice but that I had an offer that
exploded at the end of the day, and he took my cell number and agreed to make a
decision with his current clerks . . . . I went back to the seedy hotel room to wait for
his call. Meanwhile my 2nd choice judge’s clerk left a message on my home
machine at 6:30pm or so saying that the judge was wondering about my answer. I
continued to wait for the [top choice judge’s] call, all the while worrying that I
would lose the offer with my 2nd choice judge if I didn’t respond soon. By 9pm I
was curled up in the fetal position [on] the motel’s polyester bedspread, completely
panicked.
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #154 34

33

The use of a centralized matching system in the law clerk market has been suggested a number of times. See
Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth (2001:869-84); Epstein (2006:46-48); Norris (1993:791-98); Oberdorfer and
Levy (1992:1099-1108); Wald (1990:160-63). Our own proposal in our prior study was a significantly
modified version of the medical matching system, limited to clerkships that might precede (“feed into”)
Supreme Court clerkships and, most importantly, adapted to some of the distinctive features of the law clerk
market—especially the fact that prematch informal agreements would tend to be highly binding (Avery, Jolls,
Posner and Roth 2001:869-84). Subsequent economic analysis provides some empirical support from
laboratory experiments for the idea that the tendency toward binding early agreements makes successful
centralized matching difficult to implement (Haruvy, Roth and Ünver 2006). Addressing the issue of binding
prematch agreements was critical even in a medical market—the market for gastroenterology fellows—in reestablishing a lapsed match (Niederle, Proctor and Roth 2006:221; Niederle and Roth 2006). It bears noting
that other perceived issues with centralized matching—such as the fact that couples will generally want to
clerk in the same geographic area—can be accommodated in a centralized matching system (Avery, Jolls,
Posner and Roth 2001:868-69, 877-82).
A 2002 antitrust suit (Jung v. Association of American Medical Colleges, 2006 US App LEXIS
14079) challenged the use of a matching system for medical residents. The theory of the suit—whose dismissal
in 2004 was affirmed on appeal two years later—was that a matching system holds down wages for residents.
Bulow and Levin (2006) lends some logical underpinnings to the assertion of downward pressure on wages,
while other economic analysis (Kojima, forthcoming; Niederle, forthcoming) suggests more skepticism about
any downward wage effects in actual markets. Certainly the raw wages of fellows in medical specialties with
and without centralized matching do not differ (Niederle and Roth 2003).

35

I had ten minutes to accept.
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #64
Judge [X] called me to ask if I would be prepared to accept an offer on the spot if
he interviewed me. I honestly replied that I might not be able to do that, and he
cancelled my interview.
−2004 applicant for federal judicial clerkships , Survey #531
[A]t 9:30am on [September 22, the first day on which offers were permitted, Judge
X] said I had until 8:00am the next day. At 3pm on [the same day, Judge X’s]
secretary called and said the [j]udge really needed a response. I negotiated with
the [s]ecretary to get 1 more hour to decide, promising to deliver an answer by
4pm.
−2005 applicant for federal judicial clerkships , Survey #183
I had an offer that I needed to respond to by 2pm the same day and my next
interview was scheduled in NY for 2:30. I [called] the NY judge, g[o]t the
interview moved up, [and] pa[id] $400 to get on an earlier flight from Boston to
NY [to interview with the NY judge].
−2006 applicant for federal judicial clerkships , Survey #111
I asked for [an] hour to consider the offer. The judge agreed; however, thirty
minutes later [the judge] called back and informed me that [the judge] wanted to
rescind my offer.
−2006 applicant for federal judicial clerkships , Survey #297
After interviewing with my top two appellate judges I had an interview with a
district court judge who would only allow me to interview with him at the
beginning of the week. He extended me an offer at the end of my interview and
gave me an hour to decide only after I told him I couldn’t make the decision
without first at least talking to my husband since it would involve a move to a new
city. During that one hour I called the two appellate judges, both of whom
happened to be on the bench at the time. I did not hear back from either appellate
judge, so I felt as though I had no choice but to accept the district judge’s offer
since he was a wonderful man and it was a great position. 30 minutes after I
accepted my first choice appellate judge called back and offered me a position.
−2004 applicant for federal judicial clerkships, Survey #44

34

In the end, the student wrote, “I finally decided to call the top choice judge’s chambers. The judge answered,
explained that they had lost my cell number and were just planning an email, and said it was a ‘No.’” The
student thereupon accepted with the student’s second choice judge.

36

While the current reform has succeeded in delaying the timing of hiring until the third
year of law school for most law students, the prohibition of transactions prior to the start date has
also compressed the process of matching market participants—for those who adhere to the
dates—into an exceedingly short period. Once the starting gun goes off, the whole process is
concluded very quickly for those who had not transacted prior to the start dates. This is a result in
significant part of the practice of “exploding offers,” which (as in the student quotations just
above) require the applicant to respond extremely quickly when offered a clerkship. Indeed, in
some cases, reflected in the third student quotation above, the response is required to be not only
quick but also affirmative. Exploding offers often require applicants to make decisions without
knowing whether an offer from a preferred judge later in the applicant’s interview schedule
would be obtained. (And, as noted in section I.B above, most commentators on the law clerk
market are skeptical of participants’ ability to determine their ideal matches prior to interviews
having been conducted.) A particularly extreme account was given at the start of this paper; a
student checked voice mail after a thirty-five minute flight had landed and found three messages
in quick succession—the first extending an offer, the second wondering about the student’s
response, and the third retracting the offer.
Market compression, in which transactions are concentrated within a very short
timeframe, is characteristic of markets with start dates (e.g., Becker, Breyer and Calabresi
1994:210-11; Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:850-51). With the action delayed by the start
dates, judges worry that if they then give applicants substantial time in which to respond, it will
be difficult to find a replacement if an offer is rejected. Below we present survey evidence both
on the frequency of exploding offers and on the general extent of market compression. Both of
these features of the market suggest that market participants’ ability to consider and compare

37

multiple offers is very limited. But it is at least somewhat reassuring to note that the market did
not necessarily work better in these respects in the premoratorium period and that market
segmentation may, again, help to mitigate (by localizing) the costs of exploding offers and
market compression.
A.

Exploding Offers
Even the judges responsible for the current regime acknowledge the problem of

exploding offers under this regime, but they do not appear unduly concerned because “[f]or all
the years that we have been on the bench, judges have extended exploding offers to law clerk
applicants” (Edwards and Becker 2004:3). But they may not be aware of how common the
practice of exploding offers is under the current regime. As shown in the right-hand column of
Table 7, 34 percent of judges responding to the question, “What was the shortest time you gave
any candidate to accept or reject a clerkship offer?” (asked on both our 2004 and our 2005 Judge
Survey) said twenty-four hours or less. Any selection bias in our judge response pool is likely to
lead to an understatement in Table 7 of the frequency of exploding offers, not only because the
judges responding to our survey were overwhelmingly ones who praised the current regime, but
because a number of judges would be embarrassed to report that they extended exploding offers.
TABLE 7: TIME-LIMITED OFFERS AS REPORTED BY JUDGES
1998–1999 and 1999–2000 Fall of 2004 and fall of 2005
Response required within one day
23%
34%
Response required within two days
36%
42%
Response required within a week
67%
76%
Total number of responses
193
161
Sources: Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth (2001:818); 2004 and 2005 Judge Surveys. See the text
just before this table for the full text of the survey question. Each column reports the combined
results for two years of survey responses, with each survey (rather than each year) weighted
equally.

38

As a point of comparison, Table 7 (left-hand column) shows that when we asked judges
an identical question in our study five years ago, “only” 23 percent of responding judges gave a
day or less. 35 Given the possible variation in practices across judges who chose to respond to our
surveys in the premoratorium period and now, we cannot be sure that the increase among
respondents reflects an underlying increase in the total population of judges. What is clear,
however, is that exploding offers are commonplace in the current “reformed” law clerk market.
The figures in both columns, moreover, are undoubtedly understatements for the important reason
that the data in Table 7 are limited to cases in which the judge places an express time limit on the
offer and do not reflect the fact that many applicants are uncomfortable with any significant delay
in responding to an offer tendered by a federal judge (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:819-20,
824).
Table 8 presents data on exploding offers from our student surveys for 2004, 2005, and
2006. 36 Again, the numbers suggest that exploding offers occur with considerable frequency in the

35

Table 7 in the text is similar to Table 6 in our prior study (Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:818).
However, instead of reporting results separately for the two separate years examined in our prior study (as was
done in Table 6 in our prior study), we aggregate the two years’ worth of data for purposes of Table 7. Table 7
also uses the terminology “within one day” and “within two days” instead of “within 24 hours” and “within 48
hours,” the terminology used in our prior study, because the newer terminology matches more closely with the
phrasing usually employed by the judges themselves in responding to our surveys.

36

The full text of the question on our 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys was as follows:
How much time did the judge who made you your first clerkship offer give you to respond to
the offer?
Immediate response required ____
Response required within an hour ____
Response required the same day ____
Response required the next day ____
Response required within 3–4 days of the interview ____
Response required within 1 week of the interview ____
No deadline set for response ____

39

current law clerk market. 37 As above, potential differences in the response pools mean we do not
seek to draw any inferences from changes across our survey years.
TABLE 8: TIME-LIMITED OFFERS AS REPORTED BY STUDENTS
Fall of 2004
21%

Fall of 2005
30%

Fall of 2006
21%

Response required either the same
day or the next day

48%

48%

38%

Response required within a week

64%

61%

56%

Response required the same day

Total number of responses
129
114
98
Sources: 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys. See note 36 for the full text of the survey
question. The table reflects responses from students who applied for federal appellate clerkships.
B.

Market Compression in General
Even beyond the phenomenon of exploding offers, the general degree of market

compression around the start dates for the law clerk market is notable. In both the fall of 2005
and the fall of 2006, over half of the responding students (54 of 105, or 51 percent, in the fall of
2005 and 45 of 77, or 58 percent, in the fall of 2006) who received their first clerkship offer on
or after the start date for interviewing and making offers received the offer on the start date itself
(Table 9). 38 And the clear majority of these students—nearly two-thirds—accepted their first
clerkship offers the same day (bottom row of Table 9), so for these students the entire process
was concluded on the opening day for interviewing and making offers. 39 As the table shows,

Several students specifically stated that although an explicit deadline was not set, the offering judge implied
that speed in responding was important. Because there is no obvious way to categorize these responses for
purposes of Table 8, we do not include them in the table.
37

Parallel to our discussion in note 24, it is not possible to relate the judge and student figures in Tables 7 and
8 in any precise way without knowing—as we do not—what fraction of judges’ offers were made to applicants
included in our survey pool and whether judges give similar deadlines to all applicants to whom they make
offers or just to a subset of that group.
38
For the text of the question regarding offer timing, see note 22.
39

The full text of the relevant questions on our 2004 Student Survey was as follows:

40

there was also considerable compression in the timing of the market as experienced by student
survey respondents in 2004, though not as much as in 2005 and 2006; once again, we cannot
draw confident conclusions about changes over time from modest differences in answer patterns
across the years of our surveys because of possible differences in the composition of the response
pools (although the notion that compression might increase over time is not surprising in light of
prior experiences with start dates in other markets (e.g., Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth
2001:851)).

When did you respond to your first clerkship offer?
Immediately _____
Within an hour _____
The next day _____
3–4 days after the interview _____
More than 1 week later _____

The same day _____
Within 1 week _____

Did you accept your first clerkship offer?
The full text of these questions on our 2005 and 2006 Student Surveys was as follows:
When did you respond to your first clerkship offer?
Immediately _____
Within an hour _____
The next day _____
Within 3–4 days _____
More than 1 week later _____

The same day _____
Within 1 week _____

Did you accept your first clerkship offer?
The question about the date of the first clerkship offer was the same in all three years and appears in note 22.
The only difference between the questions on the 2005 and 2006 Student Surveys and those on the 2004
Student Survey was that “3–4 days after the interview” (used in 2004, see above) was replaced by “Within 3–4
days,” so that the preprovided categories were comprehensive. Note that our question on time limits imposed
by judges (see note 36) used the formulation “Response required within 3–4 days of the interview” in all three
years. Finally, observe that responses to the questions listed above will slightly understate the overall
likelihood of accepting a clerkship offer on the opening day as a student may have accepted a second (or later)
clerkship offer on the opening day.

41

TABLE 9: MARKET TIMING
Fall of 2004

Fall of 2005

Fall of 2006

First offer received on start date for
40
54
45
interviewing and making offers—number
of responding students
First offer received after start date for
79
51
32
interviewing and
making offers—number of responding
students
First offer received either on or after start
119
105
77
date for interviewing and making
offers—number of responding students
Of first offers received on start date for
41%
65%
64%
interviewing and making offers,
percentage accepted on start date
Sources: 2004, 2005, and 2006 Student Surveys. See notes 22 and 39 for the full text of the survey
questions. The table reflects responses from students who applied for federal appellate clerkships.
Table 9 focuses on activity on and after the start date for interviewing and making offers. Tables
5A, 5B, and 5C provide information on interviewing and extending of offers prior to this start date.

A corollary of the high level of market compression is judges’ intense interest in
determining, before the start date for interviewing and making offers, not only the candidates in
whom they are most interested but how these candidates will respond to an offer. This phenomenon
is familiar from other markets (Roth and Xing 1997:289-91). In the law clerk market, while some
judges content themselves with informal information gathering, through trusted professors or current
(or former) clerks, about candidates’ level of interest, other judges demand explicit assurances from
candidates that they will accept an offer if one is forthcoming, as illustrated by the third student
quotation at the beginning of this section.
One of the most important consequences of the high market compression documented here
is that it creates a strong incentive for market participants to move before the designated start dates
in an effort to avoid the severe congestion. Moving early gives a judge the opportunity to interview
and consider multiple candidates without fear that a candidate will be unavailable if the judge does
42

not issue an offer immediately after the interview. In other markets such dynamics have made start
dates ultimately unsustainable (e.g., Avery, Jolls, Posner and Roth 2001:853-54). In the present law
clerk market, however, market segmentation as discussed in section III.C above may make the start
dates sustainable. Compression—like nonadherence to start dates—may be higher in some
segments than in others. A segment that has lower compression than the average levels reflected in
Table 9—perhaps because of norms against exploding offers that cause rapid transactions (Niederle
and Roth 2006)—might also have greater adherence to the start dates for hiring law clerks.
V. Conclusion
Our analysis conveys a mixed message about the current market for federal judicial law
clerks. The time of hiring has moved back considerably, a positive development, but large
departures from the start dates for hiring law clerks—as well as exploding offers, high market
compression, and the moral dilemmas highlighted in the introduction—are apparent. The good
news about the time of hiring makes it critical to address the problems that threaten to undermine
the value of hiring later in students’ law school careers. The need is especially great because the
current problems are the very ones that have thwarted the many past attempts at start dates in
both the law clerk market and other markets that have suffered from problems of early hiring.

43

Appendix
This appendix describes our survey approach. As in our previous study, we surveyed both
the federal appellate bench and law students from a few elite schools. 40 As noted in the text, our
surveys were not professionally designed instruments; at the same time, we obtained good
response rates and gathered information consisting mostly of answers to straightforward factual
questions.
On the judge side, a survey was sent by United States mail in December of 2004
(regarding hiring in the fall of 2004) and in February of 2006 (regarding hiring in the fall of
2005) to each active and senior member of the federal appellate bench, with a stamped,
preaddressed envelope for return of the completed survey. 41 The judge author of this paper sent
the surveys with an accompanying cover letter, but responding judges were asked to send their
responses to another of us (Jolls) rather than to the judge author because of confidentiality issues.
As detailed in Table A1, we received responses to the 2004 Judge Survey from just over one half
of the federal appellate judges, similar to our response rate in our previous study, and we
received responses to the 2005 Judge Survey from 48 percent of the federal appellate judges.
Because we encountered somewhat more difficulty obtaining responses to the 2005 Judge
Survey, and because the only issue addressed in our analysis with respect to which we are
entirely dependent upon information from our judge survey responses is an issue on which the

40

See Avery, Jolls, Posner, and Roth (2001:807–10) for discussion of the reasons for choosing these pools of
judges and students to survey.

41

For both surveys we used the Harvard Law School Career Service Office’s database of federal judges to
obtain a comprehensive list of names and addresses for the federal appellate judiciary. As in our previous
study, senior court of appeals judges from the Seventh Circuit who were identified by the sender of the survey
(Posner), a judge on that Circuit, as no longer hiring law clerks did not receive surveys. A complete listing of
the judges mailed surveys is on file with the authors.

44

data are unequivocal—the judges’ view of later hiring, discussed in section II above—we
determined not to attempt a survey of federal appellate judges in the fall of 2006.
TABLE A1: JUDGE SURVEY RESPONSE RATES OVERALL AND BY CIRCUIT

All judges

Number surveyed
2004
2005
264
253

Number responding
2004
2005
137
122

Response rate
2004
2005
52%
48%

1st Circuit

10

10

7

6

70%

60%

2d Circuit

24

23

9

8

38%

35%

3d Circuit

22

20

16

9

73%

45%

4th Circuit

15

14

4

5

27%

36%

5th Circuit

19

18

12

11

63%

61%

6th Circuit

24

24

15

12

63%

50%

7th Circuit

16

14

7

7

44%

50%

8th Circuit

21

20

12

14

57%

70%

9th Circuit

47

47

28

22

60%

47%

10th Circuit

20

19

8

12

40%

63%

11th Circuit

18

17

8

6

44%

35%

D.C. Circuit

12

12

5

6

42%

50%

Federal Circuit

16

15

6

4

38%

27%

Sources: 2004 and 2005 Judge Surveys (number of responses overall and by circuit). See note 41
for information on the number surveyed overall and by circuit.

For students, surveys were distributed in the fall of 2004, the fall of 2005, and the fall of
2006 to all third-year law students at four schools—Harvard, Stanford, the University of
Chicago, and Yale—both in hard copy to student mailboxes, with stamped, preaddressed return

45

envelopes, and electronically to student email accounts with the option to respond to the survey
electronically. Our response rate was approximately 50 percent in each year (Table A2). 42
TABLE A2: STUDENT SURVEY RESPONSE RATES
Total number of third-year law Number responding
Response rate
students at Harvard, Stanford,
the University of Chicago, and
Yale Law Schools
527
2004
1119
47%
545
2005
1149
47%
601
2006
1124
53%
Sources: National Association for Law Placement, Inc., Directory of Law Schools 2005–2006
(number of third-year law students at the surveyed schools in the fall of 2004); National
Association of Law Placement, Inc., Directory of Law Schools 2006–2007 (number of third-year
law students at the surveyed schools in the fall of 2005); http://www.nalplawschoolsonline.org/
(visited Apr 27, 2007) (number of third-year law students at the surveyed schools in the fall of
2006).

Parallel to our prior study, our student survey starts by asking whether the responding
student applied for federal court clerkships, and only students who had done so were directed to
fill out the body of the survey. Nonetheless, some of the responses by students in the body of the
survey may relate to state court applications, even though those were not embraced in the
opening question, because the students may have applied for those positions in addition to
federal court clerkships. In addition, some of the responses may relate to federal district court
rather than federal appellate clerkships. As in our previous study, we did not choose to limit
subsequent questions (such as “What was the date and time of your first interview?,” “What was
the date and time of your first offer of a clerkship?,” and “Did you receive other clerkship offers

42

One law school, the University of Chicago Law School, initially sent the electronic version of the 2005
Student Survey to a list that included some law school graduates in addition to the third-year class. We learned
of this when we received several inquiries from University of Chicago Law School graduates asking whether
their participation was intended given that the cover letter accompanying the survey said “Dear Third-Year
Student at the University of Chicago Law School.” A couple of completed surveys that appeared to be from
University of Chicago Law School graduates were excluded from our sample.

46

before you rejected your first offer?”) to the federal appellate clerkships on which we focus, as this
could have produced misleading or incomplete answers because state court or federal district court
opportunities might have affected the student’s situation in the market for federal appellate
clerkships. However, the implication of our approach is that the data described in the main text,
while only for students who applied for federal appellate clerkships, may reflect events in other
markets as well.43
All surveys returned to us, both by judges and by students, were assigned numbers, which
are used to identify the responses in our analysis in the main text.

43

In a few cases, respondents specifically indicated that a particular answer related to a state court judge, and
in those cases we opted to exclude the answer in question from our analysis.

47

References
Avery, Christopher, Andrew Fairbanks and Richard Zeckhauser. 2003. The Early Admissions
Game. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Avery, Christopher, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner and Alvin E. Roth. 2001. The Market for
Federal Judicial Law Clerks. University of Chicago Law Review 68:793-902.
Becker, Edward R., Stephen G. Breyer and Guido Calabresi. 1994. The Federal Judicial Law
Clerk Hiring Problem and the Modest March 1 Solution. Yale Law Journal 104:207-225.
Becker, Edward and Harry T. Edwards. 2002. Law Clerk Hiring by Federal Appellate Judges.
http://www.ca9.uscourts.gov/ca9/Documents.nsf/174376a6245fda7888256ce5007d5470/
19d8ec075abb8c8588256b9100006a3a/$FILE/agreement.pdf.
Bikoff, Ken. 2003. QB Should Be Able to Avoid High Expectations—For Now.
http://espn.go.com/nfl/s/2002/1218/1479044.html.
Bulow, Jeremy and Jonathan Levin. 2006. Matching and Price Competition. American Economic
Review 96:652-668.
Clark, Annette E. 1995. On Comparing Apples and Oranges: The Judicial Clerk Selection
Process and the Medical Matching Model. Georgetown Law Journal 83:1749-1797.
Edwards, Harry T. and Edward R. Becker. 2004. Assessment of the 2004 Law Clerk Hiring Plan
and Suggestions for the Future (Memorandum).
Epstein, Richard A. 2006. Ending the Mad Scramble: An Experimental Matching Plan for
Federal Clerkships. Green Bag 10:37-48.
Fréchette, Guillaume R., Alvin E. Roth and M. Utke Ünver. Forthcoming. Unraveling Yields
Inefficient Marchings: Evidence from Post-Season College Football Bowls. Rand
Journal of Economics.
Haruvy, Ernan, Alvin E. Roth and M. Utku Unver. 2006. The Dynamics of Law Clerk Matching:
An Experimental and Computational Investigation of Proposals for Reform of the
Market. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30:457-486.
Kojima, Fuhito. Forthcoming. Matching and Price Competition When Firms Can Hire More
Than One Worker. American Economic Review.
Kozinski, Alex. 1991. Confessions of a Bad Apple. Yale Law Journal 100:1707-1730.
Li, Hao and Sherwin Rosen. 1998. Unraveling in Matching Markets. American Economic Review
88:371-387.
48

Mikva, Abner J. 1986. Judicial Clerkships: A Judge’s View. Journal of Legal Education 36:150154.
Niederle, Muriel. Forthcoming. Competitive Wages in a Match with Ordered Contracts.
American Economic Review.
Niederle, Muriel , Deborah D. Proctor and Alvin E. Roth. 2006. What Will Be Needed for the
New Gastroenterology Fellowship Match To Succeed? Gastroenterology 130:218-224.
Niederle, Muriel and Alvin E. Roth. 2003. Relationship Between Wages and Presence of a
Match in Medical Fellowships. Journal of the American Medical Association 290:11531154.
-----. 2003. Unraveling Reduces Mobility in a Labor Market: Gastroenterology with and without
a Centralized Match. Journal of Political Economy 111:1342-1352.
-----. 2006. Making Markets Thick: How Norms Governing Exploding Offers Affect Market
Performance (working paper).
Norris, Trenton H. 1993. The Judicial Clerkship Selection Process: An Applicant’s Perspective
on Bad Apples, Sour Grapes, and Fruitful Reform. California Law Review 81:765-800.
Oberdorfer Louis F. and Michael N. Levy. 1992. On Clerkship Selection: A Reply to the Bad
Apple. Yale Law Journal 101:1097-1108.
Priest, George L. 2005. Reexamining the Market for Judicial Clerks and Other Assortative
Matching Markets. Yale Journal on Regulation 22:123-204.
Roth, Alvin E. 2003. The Origins, History and Design of the Resident Match. Journal of the
American Medical Association 289:909-912.
-----. 1984. The Evolution of the Labor Market for Medical Interns and Residents: A Case Study
in Game Theory. Journal of Political Economy 92:991-1016.
Roth, Alvin E. and Xiaolin Xing. 1997. Turnaround Time and Bottlenecks in Market Clearing:
Decentralized Matching in the Market for Clinical Psychologists. Journal of Political
Economy 105:284-329.
-----. 1994. Jumping the Gun: Imperfections and Institutions Related to the Timing of Market
Transactions. American Economic Review 84:992-1044.
Schelling, Thomas. 1978. Micromotives and Macrobehavior. New York: W.W. Norton.
Wald, Patricia M. 1990. Selecting Law Clerks. Michigan Law Review 89:152-163.

49

