                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              TRADE POLICY, INCOME, AND EMPLOYMENT


                       Robert E. Baldwin


                     Working Paper No. 1321




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MP 02138
                           April 19814




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Econon). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #1321
                                            April 1984



                Trade Policy, Income, and Employment

                                ABSTRACT



     Disappointing recent growth rates, the emergence of structurally

unfavorable income and employment conditions, and important institutional

changes in the international trading environment have caused policy

officials in the advanced industrial nations to reconsider the proper mix

of reactive versus active trade policy in easing adjustment to labor market

disruptions and dealing with structural changes. This paper first examines

the implications of traditional trade theory as well as the new theoretical

developments emphasizing imperfect markets for this policy reevaluation.

Alternative policy options are then considered within a framework that

recognizes the imperfect real world conditions within which trade policies

must operate.




                                            Robert E. Baldwin
                                            Department of Economics
                                            University of Wisconsin
                                            Madison, WI 53706
                      TRADE POLICY, INCOME, AND EMPLOYIIENT

                               Robert E. Baldwin
                         University of Wisconsin—Madison

Contents

I.    Active Versus Reactive Trade Policies

II.   Shifts in the Structure of International Trade

III. Changes in the Institutional Setting for Trade

IV.   Trade Theory: Policy Implications and New Developments

      (i)    The Policy Implications of Traditional Trade Theory
      (ii)   New Analytical Developments
      (iii) Conclusions from Theory

V.    The Ineffectiveness of Trade Policies

      (1)    Offsetting Supply and Demand Responses
      (ii)   Uncertain Indirect Effects
      (iii) Conclusions on the Effectiveness of Trade Policy

VI.   Foreign Policy Considerations

VII. Trade Policy Options in a World of Structural Change

      (i)    Reactive Trade Policy Options

             (a)   Import Restrictions
             (b)   Subsidies
             (c)   Adjustment Assistance
             Cd)   Offsetting Foreign Subsidies and Dumping
             (e)   Conclusions

      (ii) An Activist Trade Policy Approach

             (a) Industrial Policy
             (b) Strategic Behavior

      (iii) International Cooperation
                     TRADE POLICY, INCOME AND EMPLOYMENT

                              Robert E. Baldwin
                       University of Wisconsin—Madison


                   I. Active Versus Reactive Trade Policy


      Trade policy can be used in both an active and reactive manner in

promoting income and employment.1 Reactive trade policy is aimed at miti-

gating the negative income and employment effects of external shock9 on output

and labor markets. The introduction of restrictive import measures in

response to increased imports that cause or threaten serious injury to

domestic producers and workers is an example of using trade policy in this

sense. Providing adjustment assistance to workers or subsidies to producers

under the same set of import circumstances further illustrates the utilization

of trade measures to ease the adverse economic effects of trade—related struc-

tural changes. Still another important type of reactive policy is the imposi-

tion of antidumping or countervailing duties to offset foreign dumping or

subsidization that materially injures domestic producers and workers.

      Active trade policy, in contrast, seeks to generate new jobs and higher

income levels by pursuing a positivist approach to changing international eco-

nomic conditions. Encouraging infant industries through import protection or

production subsidies is the classic example of active trade policy. More

generally, the various positive trade measures associated with the term

"industrial policy" fit this classification. Other examples of an activist

approach to trade policies are introducing import duties or export subsidies

to take advantage of international market power and engaging in foreign

dumping.

     Controversy over the proper use of trade policy in both its active and

reactive senses is presently as intense as at any time since the beginning
                                     2



of the post—World War II international trading regime. This paper examines

the factors giving rise to the controversy and then on the basis of this

analysis considers alternative trade policy options aimed at the goals of

easing the adjustment to labor market disruptions and dealing with structural

changes in a positive manner. An effort is made to consider conceptual

arguments as well as specific policy measures in a framework that recognizes

the real world institutional environment in which international trade takes

place and the actual mariner In which economic agents react to various incen-

tives and penalties.

     Like most important economic controversies, the debate over trade

policy has been touched off by a combination of circumstances. Three fac-

tors are especially important: (1) the emergence of structurally unfavor-

able income and employment conditions that do not seem responsive to

traditional free—market policy prescriptions; (2) a general recognition that

major Institutional changes have taken place in the international trading

environment that may call for the use of new policies; and (3) the develop-

ment of new economic analyses in international economics that provide better

insights into the appropriateness of alternative policies.

     The following three sections review the evidence and arguments

relating to each of these three factors. Particular attention Is given to

the policy implications of both traditional trade theory and recent analyses

based on more realistic assumptions. The fifth section appraises the effec-

tiveness of alternative trade policies In increasing employment under actual

real world conditions and motivations, whereas the sixth places trade policy

within the foreign policy context in which most trade—related decisions are

made. Drawing upon the discussion of the preceding sections, the final sec—
                                     3


tiori then sets forth various policy options based on reactive and activist

approaches to trade policy as well as on international cooperation.


II. SHIFTS IN THE STRUCTURE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE

      The poor recent record of income growth and employment creation in

OECD countries has been well documented in previous OECD studies and will only

be briefly summarized here.2   These studies indicate clearly that the period

since the first oil shock in 1973—74 represents a new, less satisfactory eco-

nomic era for OECD countries. In contrast to the 1960s and early 1970s when

real growth rates for these countries averaged 5 per cent annually and the

average unemployment rate was only 2.8 per cent, the period since 1974 has been

characterized by a significant slackening in growth and a sharp rise In

unemployment. Specifically, from 1974 through 1982 real GNP grew at an

average annual rate of only 2 per cent, while unemployment averaged 6.6 per

cent. Closely related to these declines was a fall in the real growth rate of

world trade from 8.5 per cent from 1963—73 to 3.5 per cent from 1973—81. In

addition, consumer prices rose at an average annual rate of over 10 per cent

from 1973 to 1982 in contrast to less than 4 per cent between 1960 and 1973.

      A particularly disturbing feature of the slowdown in economic activity is

its uneven geographic, industry and demographic impact. For example, in unlike

the United States where employment growth recovered quickly after the first

oil shock, employment in Europe has remained flat over the last several years.

Similarly, while growth in such sectors as telecommunication equipment, com-

puters, and certain chemicals has been strong, employment has declined in

most OECD countries in textiles, the basic iron and steel industries, and

shipbuilding and repairing. Young people and women have also borne a dis—
                                      4


proportionate share of the unemployment. Thus, there is abundant evidence

indicating that the problem is not simply a macroeconomic one. There are

serious structural elements in the unfavorable economic performance of OECD

countries.

      The shocks that have played a major role in creating these economic

problems have come from many sources: the introduction of new technology,

shifts in demand, changes in energy conditions, labor supply developments

such as the increase in the proportion of women entering the labor market,

new government economic and socIal policies, shifts in the structure of

international trade, etc. It is this last disturbance source that is of

special relevance for the theme of this session, since trade policies are

usually introduced to deal with economic problems allegedly arising from the

international sector.

      Among the significant changes in the pattern of international trade

that OECD countries have had to cope with in recent years is the emergence

of the developing countries as important industrial competitors. As the

1979 report by the Secretary—General, The Impact of the Newly Industrializing

Countries on Production and Trade in Manufactures, pointed out, the 1970s

were characterized by a marked acceleration in the share of newly industra—

lizing countries' (NICs) share of OECD imports of manufactures. This share

rose from 1.6 per cent in 1963 to 8.1 per cent by 1977. As would be expected

on the basis of trade theory, the export increases from the NICs have been

concentrated in industries based on mature technologies and utilizing high

proportions of relatively unskilled labor. They include textiles, clothing,

leather and footwear, woodworking, certain types of electrical machinery,
                                      5



rubber manufactures, some manufactures of metal, and miscellaneous finished

manufactures.

    A number of these industries were already faced with unemployment problems

in OECD countries due to such factors as import increases from other developed

countries, sluggish demand growth, and the introduction of labor—saving

technology. Consequently, there has been much concern about the additional

unfavorable employment impact associated with the rapid rise in the NIC's

market share in these product lines. As Professors Sapir and Schumacher report

in their paper,3 Schumacher has estimated that some 600,000 jobs (40 percent

of which were in the textile, clothing and leather sectors) were lost in the

EEC between 1970 and 1977 as a result of increased imports of manufactures.

This equals .6 percent of total manufacturing employment in 1977.

    The other side of the picture is that industrial exports from OECD members

to the developing countries have also grown rapidly and that OECD countries

have a substantial trade surplus in these products with the developing

countries. The exports have consisted essentially of investment goods.

Thus, as a consequence of these relationships, Schumacher estimates that

between 1970 and 1977 1.8 million new jobs were created through OECD exports

to developing countries. In other words, while the growing importance of

these nations as industrial trades has created significant adjustment

problems for certain labor—intensive sectors, on balance this development

has been an important net contributor to employment.

    Another important shift in international competitiveness that has stim-

ulated debate over the proper use of trade policy is the sharp rise since

1973 in the deficit of most OECD countries with Japan. For example, the

U.S. and EEC trade deficits with Japan rose from $2.2 and $1.6 billion,
                                     6


respectively, in 1973 to $18.3 and $12.5 billion, respectively, in 1981.

However, this rise in net Japanese exports of manufactured goods to other

industrial countries has been largely offset by a net increase in primary—

product imports from the developing nations and certain developed countries.

Nevertheless, the rapid growth in Japanese exports of motor vehicles and

other transport equipment, machinery, iron and steel, and household

appliances has exerted considerable adjustment pressure on labor and manage-

ment in most OECD countries and has led both to the adoption of numerous

trade—restricting measures and the call for further export—promoting

activities.

      As Sapir and Schumacher document in their paper, broad shifts in the

composition of the trade of OECD countries have been another source of

structural adjustment pressures in these countries. One of the most impor-

tant of these shifts is the more rapid growth in services trade than in com-

modity trade. Although the statistics on the extent of services trade are

imperfect, these authors estimate than trade in services is growing about 00

faster than trade in goods. One consequence is a shift in the demand for

occupational skills. Services require relatively high proportions of pro-

fessionals and managers as well as sales and clerical workers, whereas manu-

factured goods use comparatively large numbers of operatives and craftmen.

However, the labor coefficient for services that enter international trade

is only slightly lower than for manufactured commodities and the average

educational requirements are only moderately higher in the traded services

sector.

    Shifts in the composition of trade in manufactured goods have also led

to structural adjustment pressures in OECD countries. As the developing
                                     7


countries have gained competitively in labor—intensive manufactures, the

export share of textiles, clothing, and leather has declined while the

import share has risen. Non—electrical machinery has declined slightly in

relative importance on both the export and import side, but this decline has

been more than offset by a market rise of electrical machinery and motor

vehicles. Chemicals have also become relatively more important as a traded

good but more so on the import than export side. Finally, there has been a

sharp fall, especially in imports, in the share of primary metal products.

      Obviously, as Schumpeter pointed out long ago,4 economic growth is

never likely to be a smooth process that affects all parts of an economy in

the same way. Instead, as in the past, it is likely to be a discontinuous,

disruptive process that both creates new economic sectors and groups and

destroys old ones. Consequently, the various international and other struc-

tural shocks described above might be considered as simply typical of the

development process. However, what seems unique in the experience of OECD

countries over the last decade or so is the suddenness and Intensity of some

of the shocks coupled with a growing degree of resource inflexibility that

makes it increasingly difficult to adjust to exogenous economic events. Doing

little more than providing income maintenance support in order to give

markets time to adjust in the textbook manner does not seem to be a politi—

cally or economically viable option for many governments. Consequently, as

in other fields, there are more frequent calls in the international area for

the more aggressive use of active and reactive trade policy as a means of

coping better with shocks from the international sector.
                                     8




III. CHANCES IN THE INSTITUTIONAL SETTING FOR TRADE

      Both traditional trade theory and the rules of the major international

organization established for the purpose of maintaining a liberal inter-

national trading regime, namely, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

(CATT), are based on a set of institutional assumptions that are very dif-

ferent from actual conditions. Trade theory, for example, has typically

assumed that each industry in each country consists of a large number of

competitive firms producing homogeneous products. Factor markets are also

taken to be competitive with productive factors moving freely among domestic

industries and not at all internationally. Governments are assumed not to

participate in the production process.

      The GATT is also based on a simplified view of the institutional frame-

work within which international trade takes place, although its recently

approved set of new non—tariff codesdoes improve the situation to a con-

siderable extent. For example, there are no rules dealing with restrictive

business practices or international investment. State trading enterprises

are recognized, but the article dealing with them is concerned mainly with

trading organizations established for revenue purpose rather than with pro-

ducing organizations owned by the government and pursuing development or

adjustment goals. Until recently, even the practice of government sub-

sidization of privately owned firms received only modest attention in the

GATT and the rules are still very general.

      In the last 20 years the institutional framework within which inter-

national trade takes place has changed dramatically from that visualized by
                                      9


 either the classical trade theorists or the framers of the GATT. Two

changes are particularly important: the greatly increased importance of

multinational corporations in world trade and the increased intervention of

the state in international trade through various forms of subsidization,

nontariff import restrictions, and the ownership of production facilities.

      By the middle of the 1970s, multinational corporations (firms that

engage in foreign direct investment) accounted for one—fifth of the world's

output. Their production has been growing for some years at 10—12 per cent

annually, a rate almost twice as high •as world output. Furthermore, the

intrafirm trade of these corporations accounts for 25 per cent of all trade

in manufactures. Since multinationals are characterized by significant

size, considerable product and geographic diversity, and an emphasis on R&D

as well as product differentiation, their rapid growth has produced an

imperfectly competitive international market structure quite different from

the static, purely competitive one envisioned in traditional trade theory.

The ability of multinationals to shift technology, capital, and managerial

skills quickly from one country to another to take advantage of differences

in relative costs has also greatly increased the possibilities for disrup-

tive structural shifts in trading patterns.

      The greatly increased role of the government in economic affairs has

brought about another significant change in the institutional nature of the

trading environment. The traditional view confines government interven-

tion in the trade field mainly to tariff protection and the occasional impo-

sition of anti—dumping and countervailing duties. However, in many

countri-es governments are now important, active participants in inter—
                                     10



national trade. They play a key role in determining which industries will

expand and which will contract by means of direct and indirect planning, by

supplying low—cost funds for research and investment purposes, by

encouraging particular production patterns among firms within an industry,

by facilitating access to capital markets, by providing various tax and

other production subsidies, etc. Furthermore, more and more governments in

the industrial countries are becoming owners of manufacturing and service—

oriented firms that are important international suppliers.

      The implications that many policymakers, who are trying to cope with

sluggish growth and serious structural problems, draw from these two develop-

ments are obvious. Instead of viewing the commodity and geographic patterns

of trade as being based on an allocation of world resources that is consistent

with the basic principles of comparative advantage, they regard a large part

of actual trade as being based on private monopoly power and government aids

that artifically create comparative advantage in particular product lines.

Consequently, when these policy leaders observe industries in their own econo-

mies being disrupted by rapid increases in imports or losing exports in third

markets to heavily subsidized firms in other countries, they find it hard to

accept the advice that they should not adopt an aggressive active or reactive

trade policy stance themselves because somehow the existing state of affairs

corresponds to basic resource endowment patterns. To them, the real trading

world is so far removed from the world of trade theory that to follow tradi-

tional policy prescriptions is to risk being exploited by other countries and

to fall behind in international competitiveness.
                                     11




IV.   TRADE THEORY: POLICY IMPLICATIONS AND NEW DEVELOPMENTS

      The durability of the liberal policy prescriptions derived from tradi-
tional trade theory seems to demonstrate the truth of Lord Keynes' obser-
vation that .. . the ideas of economists and political scientists, both when

they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly

understood.'5 Given the unsatisfactory economic conditions in many OECD

countries and the wide acceptance of the view that actual institutional con-

ditions diverge significantly from those posited under classical trade

theory, one might have expected both this theory and its policy implications

to be widely discredited. However, traditional trade theory and especially

its policy prescriptions continue to be remarkably influential at the

highest government levels in most developed nations as well as within the

international economic organizations that these countries dominate.

      There are several possible reasons for this. It may, for example, be

the case that the principles and policies being criticized represent an

overly simplified version of traditional trade analysis and that a complete

statement of the theory is not open to these criticisms. The fact that the

assumptions of traditional trade theory do not closely fit real world con-

ditions also may not be a relevant criticism. Theory often abstracts from

reality in order to bring basic relationships out more clearly. Introducing

all the complexities of reality may not change the essential policy implica-

tions of the theory. Finally, a theory may continue to influence policy

thinking even though everyone is aware of its shortcomings simply because a

satisfactory alternative analysis of the matter under consideration does not

exist. Both scholars and policymakers are reluctant to give up a well—
                                     12



established theory that provides clear—cut policy prescriptions in favor of

an incomplete set of alternative relationships whose implications have not

been fully explored in a rigorous manner.


      (1) The Policy Implications of Traditional Trade Theory

           The basic welfare proposition of traditional trade theory is

simply that some trade is better than no trade for any country. In other

words, given the usual assumptions about perfect competition, internal fac-

tor mobility, and the absence of domestic distortions, it can be shown that

a country can raise its real income level by engaging in international trade

rather than by producing all the goods it wishes to consume itself. However,

if one also assumes that the country is "small" in the sense that the size

of its international purchases and sales has no effect on the prices of

traded goods, a much stronger conclusion can be derived. It then follows

that a policy of free trade will maximize the country's real income level.

      Being able to demonstrate under the above conditions that free trade

maximizes a nation's real income is not the same ——   it should be emphasized
—— as showing that every group, e.g., labor, actually ends up better off

under free trade than with no trade or some particular level of import pro-

tection. The maximization statement is a short—hand way of saying that

under a general policy of free trade (given fixed terms of trade and the

other assumptions), it is potentially possible to make everyone better off

within the country no matter what the initial distribution of income,

provided there are no costs of identifying who should be compensated and

redistributing income. In moving from (say) a no—trade position to a par-

ticular market—determined 'free trade position, productive factors used
                                     13


intensively in the production of exported goods tend to gain (since the

demand for their services tends to rise) while those involved heavily In

import—competing goods tend to lose in real income terms. Thus, since

income—compensating arrangements for trade policy changes do not exist in

most countries (and those that are in operation generally do not completely

offset losses), and redistribution costs could more than exhaust the aggre-

gate gains from free trade, it is necessary to be very cautious in drawing

practical policy statements from the statement about free trade maximizing a

nations real income.

      What if buyers and sellers of a country represent a sufficiently large

part of world markets that by acting collectively they can influence inter-

national prices, at least for some commodities? Quite obviously, buyers and

sellers in large industrial countries fit this description, and even in many

developing countries sellers possess some monopoly power in the markets for

their primary product exports. Under these conditions, as trade theorists

have pointed out for over a hundred years, a country can raise its real income

compared to the free trade level by imposing optimal import or export taxes.6

Obviously, when sellers or buyers can affect prices, i.e., their terms of

trade, when acting together, they can improve their collective economic posi-

tion at the expense of other countries by exercising this monopolistic or

monopsonistic power. However, this conclusion depends upon the assumption

that trading partners either do not also possess this power or do not engage

in similar actions. When retaliation by other countries can occur, a wide

range of outcomes is possible, depending upon such factors as each country's

relative size, its tastes and cost conditions, and how each nation expects
                                     14


others to react to. its trade actions. For example, in a simple two—country

model one outcome is that both countries end up worse off then under free

trade. However, it has also been shown that it is possible for one of the

countries to end up being better off than under free trade. If each country

recognizes its interdependence with the other, still another possible

equilibrium position is free trade, even in the absence of cooperation.

Another key policy implication of standard trade theory is that free trade

maximizes world production and thus world economic efficiency. More specifi-

cally, if it were possible to redistribute income among countries in a

costless, non—distorting manner, it would be possible to make every country

better off than it would be under any particular non—free trade arrangement.

Of course, since governments are primarily interested in the welfare of their

own people, this conclusion does not have much practical relevance, even if

the fact that redistributional efforts are costly is ignored.

     Besides the terms—of—trade argument for trade taxes, classical trade

writers set forth another important reason for government intervention in

the international sector, namely, the infant industry case for protection.

This is an argument for temporary protection based on the failure of private

markets to allocate resources efficiently for some reason. The existence of

technological externalities associated, for example, with knowledge acquisi-

tion, imperfect capital markets, imperfect private information, etc., can

justify the introduction of temporary production subsidies or possibly

tariffs. Such intervention can raise a country's real income over time

without lowering that of other countries.
                                     15


      In the last 20 years the basic idea underlying the infant industry

case, namely, the existence of some divergence between private and social

cost or valuation such that the private market mechanism does not maximize

real income, has been extended to cover many other reasons for intervention

by the government in international markets. Factor market distortions, pro-

duction externalities, and consumption divergences, whether institutional or

technologically determined, all give rise to reasons for trade policy inter—

ventions by the goverrunent.8 For example, if unemployment prevails because

wages are rigid in a downward direction for some reason, a tariff or export

subsidies may increase employment and welfare in a country without reducing

employment and welfare in other countries. However, in all of these cases

where the divergence (or distortion) exists in domestic markets, interven-

tion through trade taxes or subsidies is second—best in the sense that some

combination of taxes and subsidies not just confined to traded goods can

increase welfare even more. But, when differences in the actual costs of

administering such interventionist policies as wage subsidies, production

subsidies, export subsidies, etc. are taken into account, it is possible

that in some cases trade measures are the best interventionist means.

      Trade economists have also long recognized that productive factors,

especially capital, move across national borders and that this has inter-

national economic policy implications. For example, many developing

countries have discovered that protecting certain industries leads to an

inflow of foreign investment and thus increases in domestic employment.

There are also good arguments for interfering with the free international

flow of capital. If the foreign supply curve of capital is upward—sloping,

a country can raise its welfare by exploiting this monopsonistic power
                                        16



through a tax on foreign capital. Similarly, if a capital—supplying country

is sufficiently large to affect the rate of return on capital abroad, it can

increase its real income by limiting the outflow of capital through taxes or

other means. Again, these conclusions are based upon the assumption that other

countries do not retaliate.

    The preceding summary of the main policy implications of traditional trade

theory, as this theory has evolved to the present time, hardly represents a

               c.rt- rf fr.   r Nrr-          ii- hp    -.--——'--'-   cnr11v   iir—

porting   protectionism and other government interventions in international

markets. Instead, the analysis indicates that arriving at appropriate national

trade policy decisions is a difficult and complex matter, even at a theoretical

level. Detailed knowledge is required concerning such matters as economic con-

ditions in the sectors seeking government assistance, the economic consequences

not only of alternative trade policies but of alternative domestic measures, the

likely reaction of foreign producers and governments, etc. However, there are

also many instances when the argument for protection or subsidization can be

easily rejected on general analytical grounds. These cases usually do not try

to show in a serious way that a nation's real income can be raised by government

intervention, but instead basically involve the request of a particular group to

benefit at the expense of the nation as a whole.


(ii) New Analytical Developments

   As noted earlier, trade theory has been severely criticized for generally

assuming that there are large numbers of suppliers of each product. In fact,

however, competition is often imperfect in the sense that there are only a rela-

tively small number of producers in each country who supply similar but not
                                        17



 identical products. A major analytical development in recent years has been to

 introduce imperfect competition explicitly into trade models and explore its

 implications for trade policy.9 As some of the critics of traditional trade

theory had maintained, the result of this analysis has been to qualify further

the national case for free trade.

    To see why a tariff may increase real income in a country when it faces

imperfectly competitive market conditions, consider the case where the foreign

supplier of a particular product is a monopolist and there are no producers of

the item domestically. By charging cons*ers in the importing country a price

that maximizes his profits, the monopolist will earn pure profits. A tariff

imposed by the importing country can capture some of these profits. While the

monopolist will respond to the cost increase due to the tariff by reducing

output and raising foreign price under usual demand conditions, the revenue

increase to the tariff—imposing government will more than offset the loss to

its consumers due to the higher price. However, under some demand conditions

an import subsidy will be the appropriate response since price will fall more

than the subsidy.

    If a domestic firm also produces the item and the rivalry between the two

producers is resolved as a Cournot duopoly, a tariff (or subsidy) will not only

increase domestic real income but also domestic employment. Furthermore,

these results generalize to situations in which there are not just two firms

(duopoly) in each market but several firms that recognize their interdepen-

dence (oligopoly). However, more theoretical analysis is needed to determine

whether other policies can achieve the same benefits for a country more effi-

ciently.
                                       18


    As in the terms—of—trade case discussed earlier, it is important to recognize

that other countries are likely to retaliate by introducing tariffs (or

subsidies) themselves. When this occurs, it can be shown that the combined

welfare of the countries involved ends up below the maximum level that is

achievable. However, when transport costs are so high that unrestricted intra—

industry trade is welfare—reducing, this maximum level will involve some posi-

tive level of tariffs.

    One interesting application of the new imperfectly competitive framework

for trade theory helps in understanding why governments adopt export—promoting

policies such as export credit subsidies and R&D subsidies. Suppose, for

example, that a domestic and foreign firm compete in a third market. In the

absence of government Intervention they are assumed to be in a Cournot

equilibrium situation in which they share a certain level of pure profits. If

the government of one of the countries provides export subsidies or R&D sub-

sidies to Its domestic firm, this producer may be able to capture a larger

share of the world market and increase Its profits net of the subsidy. Thus,

the country could gain in income and employment terms. The reason for this

outcome is that the government's action is credible to the foreign competitor

and this foreign firm reduces its output in view of the lower costs of its

competitor. If one of the two firms announced It was going to subsidize

itself, such a statement would not be treated as sustainable by the other and

this other firm would not retrench.

   As in the case discussed above, retaliation in the form of subsidies by the

foreign government must be expected. This will lead to a noncooperative solu-

tion where both countries engage in subsidization and where the joint welfare of

the producing countries could be increased by cooperative behavior that reduced
                                       19



 the level of subsidies.

    The trade model formulated by the Cambridge Economic Policy Group, a

research group in the Department of Applied Economics at the University of

Cambridge, represents another analytical development that is especially relevant

 for the theme of this conference. The policy prescription emerging from this

model is that industrial countries experiencing high unemployment levels should

introduce general import protection as part of an expansionary government

program aImed at increasIng employment)0 The purpose of the Import restric-

tions is not to protect particular industries or to achieve a

Theggar—thy—neighbor" balance—of—trade surplus but rather to prevent a worsening

in the trade deficit as aggregate demand increases.

    Unlike the classical trade model, the Cambridge group postulates an

industrial economy in which there is unemployed labor and excess capital capa-

city. Bargaining by trade unions sets wages at a level that maintains the

purchasing power of workers' take—home pay, while management sets the prices of

domestic goods on the basis of a fixed mark—up over normal unit costs.

Consequently, there is no automatic mechanism that tends to produce full

employment and balance—of—payments equilibrium. Indeed, the Cambridge group

contends that international price and quality trends are tending to push most

industrial countries progressively below their full—employment potential.

    Given this highly unfavorable structural unemployment situation, the

Cambridge economists advocate expansionary government fiscal and monetary poli-

cies coupled with either uniform tariffs on imports of services and manufactures

(food and raw materials would be excepted) or quantitative import restrictions.

These trade policies are preferred to the conventional policy of currency
                                       20

depreciation for two main reasons. With tariffs or quotas a country can take

advantage of its monopsonistic power and improve Its terms of trade by forcing

foreign suppliers to bear part of the tariff, i.e., foreigners lower the price

(in terms of their own currency) of their exports as the demand for these goods

by the tariff—imposing country declines due to the tariff. Devaluation has this

effect on the import side but, in addition, it lowers the foreign currency price

of the devaluating country's exports. Whether the foreign price of the

country's exports falls more or less than the foreign price of its imports

depends upon the demand and supply elasticities of the commodities involved,

but the Cambridge group's econometric model for the United Kingdom indicates

that devaluation, in contrast to a uniform tariff, will worsen the U.K.

trading terms.

   The second reason for preferring tariffs over devaluation is that the latter

policy raises export profits and thus redistributes income away from workers.

Both this effect and the terms—of—trade determination cause workers to press for

higher nominal wages to restore their real wage and thus set off strong infla-

tionary pressures that tends to frustrate the effort to expand employment.

However, according to the Cambridge economists, by employing tariffs or quan-

titative restrictions to prevent an increased trade deficit and by returning the

tariff revenue (or its equivalent) to the workers, inflationary pressures will

be much less and the expansionary government policies will be successful in

raising employment significantly.

   Critics argue that the Cambridge model reaches Its conclusions about

employment by not giving sufficient weight to certain medium—term and long—run

economic relationships that are likely to hold. For example, a general

increase In protection by one industrial country Is likely to lead to

retafliatory tariff Increases by its trading partners (especially when their
                                          21

terms of trade worsen) that offset any favorable terms—of—trade effect.

Furthermore, in contrast to devaluation, the imposition of tariffs tends to

reduce real income because of the distortion in product prices. If the

country's terms of trade do not improve because, for example, foreigners reta— —

hate,   this real Income loss to workers will tend to touch off a wage—price

spiral. When exporters raise their prices In response to higher wages and

imported input costs, the resulting decline In their sales and employment

levels tends to offset the employment gains In the import—competing sector due

to the tariff increases.

    The inflationary effects of domestic 'fiscal expansion also cannot be

ignored. The rigidities and inflexibilities that account for the structural

unemployment in the first place may cause, first, selective and then general,

cost and price rises that frustrate the entire employment—generating effort.

It may be necessary to deal directly with these rigidities in order to solve

the unemployment problem.

    According to its critics, the Cambridge group also does not pay sufficient

attention to the adverse long—run effects of reducing profits by raising

import prices. By reducing the effective rate of return to saving, this may

decrease long—run investment and the rate of employment growth. In other

words, short—run employment gains may     occur   at the cost of greater

unemployment in the future.

    (iii) Conclusions from Theory

           The trade policy implications of the recent efforts to Incorporate

more fully Imperfect competition and the existence of structural unemployment

into trade models reinforce those previously reached after considering tradi—

tional trade theory ——   not   in the stereotyped form that it is sometimes pre-

sented but in the way it is currently used by trade economists.
                                      22


           There are a variety of conditions in which the introduction of

trade—restricting or trade—promoting policies by a government can increase the

country's income and employment level. It is useful to divide these con-

ditions into two groups: those where the reason for this possibility is due

to the nature of international markets and those where the reason is based on

the existence of particular domestic market circumstances. The first category

covers both the case where a country's producers are operating in competitive

domestic and international markets but the government, through trade policy,

can, in effect, get these producers to act collectively in international markets

as a monopolist, and the case where domestic and international markets are

imperfectly competitive and the country's producers, as well as those of other

countries, are behaving accordingly. In both of these situations government

actions that raise income and employment in a country do so at the expense of

income and employment in other countries. It also follows that if all govern-

ments undertake efforts to raise their income and employment levels at the

expense of others, the final noncooperative equilibrium is a position that is

not optimal for the countries collectively. In other words, by cooperative

efforts to lower tariffs from the levels reached in a noncooperative

equilibrium, it is possible to make all the countries better off in income and

employment terms. However, in certain cases this might have to be coupled

with some international redistribution of income.

         In the second category of circumstances (where domestic distortions

are the reason why a country can gain by interventionist trade policies), a

country can raise its income and employment level without necessarily reducing

income and employment in other countries. For example, when demonstrating how

a tariff or export subsidy can raise a country's income, the theoretical
                                      23

literature on domestic distortions usually assumes that the country faces

fixed terms of trade. This means that other countries do not suffer any

losses because of this trade policy action. However, as noted previously, a

key result of this analysis is that a domestic policy, e.g., a production

subsidy/tax or a factor subsidy/tax, can raise the country's income even more.

In other words, using trade policy to correct a domestic distortion is a

second—best solution.

    For most OECD countries a significant part of their trade takes place in

Imperfect markets and their government can affect their terms of trade. Trade

policies aimed at offsetting a domestic distortion thus can adversely affect

other countries and lead to a retaliating sequence which hurts everyone on

balance. Similarly, cooperative tariff—reducing efforts among countries may

have adverse (or favorable) effects because of the existence of domestic

distortions.

    The optimal policy mix from a world welfare viewpoint is to utilize

domestic policies to offset the unfavorable income and employment effects of

domestic distortions and follow a cooperative international approach as far as

trade policy is concerned. But difficult choices still arise for individual

countries and the international community as a whole, even under this policy

mix. For example, while offsetting a domestic distortion with a domestic

policy will increase potential world income more than if an international

measure is used, the trading terms of other countries may decline because of

these domestic policies and they may (and are entitled to under GATT rules)

initiate a retaliatory sequence that hurts all countries. Similarly, what if

it is not feasible politically for a country to offset a domestic distortion

with a domestic policy measure? Others are very likely to retaliate against

this second—best policy, even though potential world income might still be
                                      24


increased. What if an international transfer of income to a country is

necessary for it to be worthwhile for this country to engage in a multilateral

tariff—reducing exercise that raises collective income and employment?

Compensatory international income transfers are rare and usually politically

infeasible.


IV. The Ineffectiveness of Trade Policies

     Trade theorists have rightly been criticized for making unrealistic

assumptions that lead to very smpl1stc polIcy conclusIons. However, a

similar criticism can be made about analyses of the effectiveness of trade

(or domestic) policies. Discussions of these matters usually take place in an

overly simplified analytical framework based on assumptions that insure that

the policies accomplish their intended purpose. Yet these assumptions are

often unrealistic and lead to incorrect conclusions about the effectiveness of

a particular policy.

    This section explores some of the reasons why actual trade policies often

fail to accomplish what the government intends)2 Furthermore, in many cases

It is not economically or politically feasible for governments to take steps

to offset the factors that cause the ineffectiveness of some trade policies.

    Trade policies operate directly upon the relative prices and quantities of

imported or exported goods and, by affecting the domestic prices of traded

goods, indirectly influence levels of production, employment, factor rewards,

and consumption in domestic industries producing similar goods. Sometimes the

primary reason for utilizing trade policies is to affect the volume or prices

of traded goods, but more frequently the objective is to influence one of the

variables that is only indirectly affected by trade measures, such as produc-

tion or income.
                                         25



    There are three general ways in which a trade policy can be ineffective in

attaining its stated purpose. First, domestic prices change in the predicted

direction but not by as much as policy—makers expect because of offsetting

supply and demand responses. Secondly, domestic prices move in the direction

and to the extent desired, but the new prices fail to produce the indirect

effects expected. The reason is the failure of the price effect to stimulate

the particular response in the private sector that is desired. Finally,
                                     —--— _______11__ _____
uumesLJ.c   piics Ut 1WULLS   UI eApvLL.s  dLUd1I WUVt .LU    Lile uppuie   ulleeLLULI

to that intended. This paradoxical outcome seems more of a theoretical

curiosity than a real world problem and will not be considered further here.

    (i) Offsetting Supply and Demand Responses.

        There are a variety of both legal and illegal ways in which trade

policies can be rendered less effective than expected due to offsetting supply

and demand responses. Legal means include: (1) importing or exporting the

product in either more or less processed forms that are not covered by the

trade measure; (2) changing the quality mix of a traded product; (3) shifting

to a substitute product; (4) varying the country or domestic—customer distri-

bution of imports or exports; (5) shifting the country distribution of

production; and (6) retaliating with another trade policy measure. Furthermore,

trade policies can have offsetting macro effects. Illegal ways of avoiding

the restraining or promoting effects of a trade measure include:        (1)

smuggling; (2) transshipments through third countries; (3) incorrect

invoicing; and (4) bribing customs officials. Several actual examples of

these various legal and illegal responses are given below. They come from

U.S. experiences but can easily be duplicated in other countries.

   Avoiding an import restriction by exporting the product in less processed
                                      26

form is illustrated by the experience with shipments of small trucks to the

United States. The U.S. tariff rate on assembled trucks had been raised

earlier, but the rate on unassembled trucks was left at 4 per cent. The dif-

ference between the duty—inclusive prices of assembled and unassembled small

trucks exceeded the cost of assembling "knocked—down" trucks in the United

States. Therefore, small trucks were shipped unassembled, and integrated

domestic producers of trucks did not receive the degree of protection intended

from the tariff on fully assembled trucks.

    This technique of avoiding high import duties is frequently followed in

the apparel trade. One case involves costs with removable sleeves. By

importing sleeves unattached, the rest of the coat comes in as a vest at a

lower duty than if the sleeves were attached.

    Using substitute components is another common way of avoiding import

restrictions. The quotas on imports of sugar into the United States apply

only to pure sugar, defined as a 100 per cent sucrose. Importers are avoiding

the quotas by importing sugar products consisting mainly of sucrose but con-

taining some sugar substitute, e.g., dextrose. Importers of running shoes

also get around the high tariff on rubber footwear by using leather for most

of the upper portion of the shoes, thereby qualifying for duty treatment as

leather footwear.

   The response of Japanese automobile suppliers to their government's

agreement to limit voluntarily exports of autos to the United States

illustrates how the restrictiveness of quotas can be offset in part by a shift

in the quality mix of a product. The introduction of a quantitative restric-

tion in contrast to an ad valorem tariff will in most circumstances lead to a

shift in the composition of the protected product from less expensive to more

expensive varieties. Such was the result in the auto case (as it had been
                                          27


 earlier when quotas on textile products and on shoes were put into effect).

 Thus, though the quantity of automobiles imported was reduced, the value of

 these imports (after correcting for general inflation) increased significantly

 as Japanese exporters responded to the excess demand for their cars by

 shifting to their higher quality models. Since the value of imports fell less

than expected, employment in the U.S. auto industry increased correspondingly

less.

    The auto case also illustrates the manner in which shifts in supply sources

can offset some of the intended effects of protection. It has been estimated

that European suppliers took up one—third of the "slack" created by the quotas

on Japanese cars. Furthermore, while the increased production of Japanese cars

within the United States ——   but   outside of the Detroit area ——helped overall

U.S. employment, it hurt employment in the region suffering most from the auto

slump, namely, Detroit. The shift in production facilities to Singapore in

response to voluntary export restraints by Japanese for TV sets is another

example of this response.

    Illegal actions designed to avoid the effects of protection are not a

major problem in most industrial countries but do significantly affect effec-

tive rates of protection in many developing countries where customs officials

are not as well trained and equipped and official levels of protection are

very high.


(ii) Uncertain Indirect Effects

   As previously noted, a trade policy may not accomplish the desired objective

even when it produces the expected effects on domestic prices and trade. This

is because trade policies are often used to change economic variables that are

only indirectly related to the prices and quantities of traded goods. For
                                      28


example, an industry faced with a surge of injurious imports frequently seeks

temporary protection, arguing that protection will give the industry the time

and resources needed to introduce new and more productive equipment and tech-

niques. The modernization will supposedly eliminate the need for protection

after a few years.

    Standard economic analysis does not suggest this outcome. If an industry

can be profitable with new equipment once protection is removed, why can't the

industry enter the capital market to obtain the necessary funds to purchase the

equipment? The answer often given is that an improved short—term profit perfor-

mance is necessary both as a source of of capital funds and as an encouragement

to other investors. However, a rational investor may attribute the better

short—run profit performance to the higher import protection and thus base his

judgment about long—term investment upon profit prospects in the absence of pro-

tection or else on the likelihood that protection will continue. Furthermore,

profits generated by protection may be used by the industry to invest In com-

pletely different activities. Workers in the U.S. steel industry have expressed

concern that the industry is using its profits ——   part   of which are attributable

to the import protection secured with the help of the workers —— to invest in

other industries. Protected producers may also find that, from their

viewpoint, the best way for them to use the extra profits is to lobby for con-

tinued protection. This may provide employment for some individuals outside

of the injured industry but it does not add to the economy's real income.

    Similar problems arise when the aim is to help selected groups in an

industry or to overcome particular domestic distortions. For example, raising

farm prices by means of trade measures in order to encourage family farming

may, in fact, increase the relative importance of corporate farming, since
                                      29


corporate farms are likely to have easier access to capital markets and there—

f ore be able to exploit new profit opportunities more rapidly. Similarly,

temporary protection is sometimes justified as a means of overcoming domestic

externalities associated with the acquisition of knowledge and on—the—job

training. But, in fact, the protection may lead merely to expansion using

existing productive techniques and skill mixes. Protection is such a crude

and blunt policy tool that It cannot be counted upon to produce many of the

Indirect effects it is called upon to do.


(iii) Conclusions on the Effectiveness of Trade Policy

    In many instances the supply or demand responses making a trade policy inef-

fective are eventually blocked or a new policy instrument is selected to stimu-

late some indirect effect. However, often the delay In providing the intended

assistance to a sector is so long that much of the unemployment and losses the

protection is designed to prevent has already occurred.

    The motivations of both industry representatives seeking protection and

government officials help to account for this result. Firms injured by imports

usually seek to define the industry as narrowly as possible. In this way they

have a better chance of proving serious injury. They also like to focus atten-

tion on just the exporters who are currently causing the import problem, since

this prevents opposition from developing on the part of other exporters.

Government officials also like this approach, since it avoids political

pressures from other countries supplying the same or similar products. However,

what may be gained in securing protection more quickly tends to be lost by its

ineffectiveness. Furthermore, while government officials may realize that some

simple supply response will undermine a particular protective action, the law
                                      30

may not permit the new product or source from also being restricted until the

supply shift actually occurs.

    The policy conclusion to be drawn is simply that government officials and

others should become more realistic about what trade measures can accomplish.

Generally they are not the panacea for an industry's trade problems that

discussions about the proposed measures would lead one to believe, and they

often produce unfavorable side effects. Furthermore, it can be shown that

those trade policies that are growing most rapidly in popularity, namely,

discriminatory measures such as orderly marketing agreements, voluntary export

restraints, and selective embargoes, are the very ones likely to be least

effective.


VI. FOREIGN POLICY CONSIDERATIONS

    As Richard Cooper once pointed out in the title of one of his papers, "Trade

Policy is Foreign Policy."13 Not to appreciate this is to fail to understand

some of the key trade policy decisions of national political leaders who bear

the main foreign policy and national security responsibilities for their

nations. These leaders realize that economic relations can significantly

affect political relations, and they take this into account in making their

decisions. It may, for example, be possible through government trade inter-

ventions to gain economically at the expense of another country. However,

this other country may react by taking such actions as discriminating against

investors of the country gaining this advantage, failing to support the

country in various international political forums, or rejecting cooperative

security arrangements. Political leaders must rightfully take into account

such interrelationships between trade policy and the many other elements that

affect foreign policy.
                                      31


     They are especially concerned about preventing economic confrontations that

may escalate to the point where they endanger not only basic trade and invest-

ment relations but political relations as well. Consequently, these leaders

sometimes justify certain economic actions on economic grounds when they really

are taking into account both economic and political factors. Trade economists

have also not always been careful in distinguishing between the economic and

political arguments for particular trade policies. It is partly for this reason

that many business and labor leaders believe that modern economists conclude

that free trade is always the policy that maximizes a country's economic

welfare.


VII. TRADE POLICY OPTIONS IN A WORLD OF STRUCTURAL CHANGE

    As noted at the beginning of the paper, trade measures can usefully be divi—

ded Into those that are introduced in reaction to disruptive external shocks and

those put into effect in anticipation of dynamic international changes. The

purpose of the reactive measures is to mitigate the adverse employment and

income consequences of the external shocks. In contrast, the aim of an activist

trade policy approach is to anticipate dynamic international changes and thereby

minimize their negative and maximize their positive income and employment

effects. A third option can be termed the cooperative international approach.

Whereas the activist and reactive approaches can be pursued independently by any

country, the cooperative approach requires consensus among countries concerning

what constitutes "good" International trade policy behavior as well as how to

resolve any disputes that arise in interpreting "good" behavior. This last sec-

tion of the paper considers various policy options within these three

approaches. It should be emphasized that these three options are not mutually

exclusive; all can be followed at the same time.
                                      32




(i) Reactive Trade Policy Options

    There are essentially three different types of policies for offsetting the

injurious effects of structural changes emanating from the international trading

sector, namely, import restrictions, subsidization, and adjustment assistance.

Not only must governments decide upon the proper mix of these policies but there

are numerous decisions to be made concerning the particular form each of the

different policies will take. For example, if import restrictions are used,

should they take the form of tariffs or quantitative restrictions? Should the

restrictions be directed at the country or countries from which the disruptive

imports are coming or should all exporting countries bear part of the burden of

the cutback? Still other issues to be decided are whether the restrictions

should be temporary or permanent and selective or general.

    Since subsidization can take many forms, there are also numerous matters to

be settled if this policy is followed. For example, should the subsidies be

directed only on that portion of an industry's output that is exported or at all

production? What form should the subsidization take? —— subsidization of sales?

investment subsidies? wage subsidies? Government assistance directed at helping

workers and firms to adjust to new activities raises similar questions. How

much aid should go to workers and how much to capitalists? How should the aid

to workers be divided among unemployment payments, retraining benefits,

job—search payments, migration assistance, etc2

    Two other matters that have been raised in recent discussions and that

affect all three policies are, first, whether aid to an industry should be con-

tingent upon the industry agreeing upon and carrying Out a specific economic

plan for adaptation to the changed international circumstances, and second,
                                          33


whether the tariff revenue (or its equivalent) generated by protection should be

earmarked for assistance to the injured industry.


(a) Import Restrictions

    Article 19 of the GATT specifically permits countries to introduce import

restrictions if a product is being imported in such increased quantities as to

cause or threaten to cause serious injury to domestic producers, and this provi-

sion has been utilized many times. However, studies of industries which have

received protection generally indicate rather disappointing results. Rather

than returning to prosperous conditions after a short term of protection, most

assisted sectors have continued to decline in employment terms with even the

reduced work force being faced with periodic episodes of unemployment. The

reason is that ——   unlike   the drafters of Article 19 seemed to think ——   injurious
increases in imports usually have been manifestations of long—run structural

changes and not temporary economic shifts. Consequently, domestic producers

have been confronted with a continuous lowering of foreign costs relative to

'their own. Tariffs sufficient to offset the desired fraction of today's rela-

tive cost advantage for foreign producers are insufficient to deal with their

cost advantage tomorrow. Quantitative restrictions have been tried to over-

come this problem but the resulting shifts in the composition of exports have

significantly undermined the effectiveness of this means of import control.

    Workers in the injured industries have obviously been helped in the short

run by import restrictions but some of the longer—run effects have been unfavor-

able. Management in the affected industries usually concludes that the only

chance of remaining competitive is by introducing more modern equipment, much of

which is highly labor—saving. Thus, more and more workers are displaced, not

by imports, but by labor—saving equipment introduced in response to the
                                      34


increased imports. Retaliatory actions by other countries also reduced

employment in other sectors.

    One way in which countries have tried to minimize retaliatory action is by

restricting imports only from those countries from which most of the increased

imports have come. Voluntary export restraints and orderly marketing agreements

have been used for this purpose. As previously noted, however, shifts in supply

to Third World countries can undermine these arrangements. They are also incon-

sistent with existing GATT rules. The developing countries still strongly

oppose any changes in GATT safeguard procedures that would permit "selectivity,"

i.e., discriminatory treatment of imports from different sources.

    Extending protection to more and more sectors faced with structural adjust-

ment problems also begins to create macro difficulties in increasing employment.

As noted earlier, the reduction in the real purchasing power of a given money

wage due to the price increase in imports and domestic substitutes causes

workers to demand (and receive) higher money wages. This, in turn, tends to

decrease employment in the export sector as foreigners shift to suppliers in

other countries. Even if imports decline more than exports, the net beneficial

employment effect will tend to be offset by a currency appreciation under the

existing flexible exchange—rate system.

    In short, experience and economic analysis seem to suggest that, while pro-

tection can play an important short—run role in mitigating the employment

effects of increased imports, it is not an effective long—run answer to struc-

tural employment problems emanating from the international sector.


(b) Subsidies

   Subsidization has the appeal of being a more selective method of providing

assistance to structurally depressed sectors than tariffs. The aid can be
                                        35


directed at particular firms, at only the output exported or at particular

 factors of productior, such as labor. Furthermore, the assistance is more

closely tied to economic performance.

    Wage subsidies are an especially effective means of maximizing the

employment impact of industrial assistance. Moreover, in some cases they can be

justified on economic efficiency grounds because they offset an economic distor-

tion. For example, in certain industries characterized by imperfect product and

factor markets, wages have risen to levels considerably above the national

average for workers with comparable skills. This has the effect of keeping

employment in these industries below what it would be under a more competitive

market structure. If it is impossible to change the market structure directly,

the distortion can be offset by a wage subsidy. Depending upon the feasible

alternatives for dealing with the output—reducing effects of the imperfection in

product markets, a production subsidy may also be appropriate, assuming that

other countries do not retaliate.

    A problem with wage and production subsidies, however, is that they do not

directly stimulate the increased efficiency needed before the industry can com-

pete successfully without government assistance. Investment subsidies are more

appropriate for this objective.

    GATT rules permit other countries to impose countervailing duties in

response to domestic subsidies (most export subsidies are banned outright), pro-

vided they cause material injury. Moreover, as the use of subsidies increases,

there is a tendency for countries to enforce their countervailing duty laws more

vigorously. Thus, even when subsidies can be justified on economic grounds,

they ay prove ineffective because of retaliatory actions.

   Another argument sometimes put forth in comparing subsidies and tariffs is
                                      36


that the existence of budgetary costs in the case of subsidies introduces

political pressures tending to prevent the subsidies from becoming permanent.

However, actual experience with subsidies does not seem to indicate that sub-

sidies are likely to be kept in place for shorter periods than tariffs. As in

the tariff case, those who benefit from subsidies tend to organize readily into

political pressure groups, whereas those who pay for the subsidies do not come

together into an effective countervailing pressure group. The pressures from

foreign governments during multilateral trade negotiations to reduce tariffs

sometimes seem more effective than the domestic interests who bear the budge-

tary costs of subsidies.


(c) Adjustment Assistance

    Adjustment assistance programs are designed mainly to help displaced workers

move to new jobs and injured firms develop new product lines. In other words,

rather than being based on the assumption that assistance to the industry in the

form of import protection or subsidies will enable the industry to regain its

ability to compete internationally, the adjustment assistance approach accepts

the premise that the industry must decline to some extent and tries to facili-

tate the shift of labor and capital to new productive employment.

    The joint paper submitted by the American and Canadian governments reviews

existing trade adjustment assistance programs in detail. The record on their

effectiveness is a mixed one. They have clearly provided much needed income

support for displaced workers while they were looking for alternative

employment. Furthermore, the programs have probably served in some cases to

prevent extreme forms of import protection. However, there is also evidence

suggesting that workers delay taking new jobs because of the income payments.

Moreover, the results from the retraining and relocation components of the
                                      37




programs have been disappointing.

    Various forms of wage subsidization to encourage employers in other sectors

to hire the displaced workers have been suggested as a means of avoiding the

problem of income payments acting to prolong unemployment. For example, one

proposal involves issuing vouchers to displaced workers who then search for

suitable education or training and use the vouchers to pay for the costs of

training at various schools or employer on—the—job training.


(d) Offsetting Foreign Subsidies and Dumping

    One type of injurious shock that receives special reactive treatment is the

"unfair" disruptions caused by government subsidization and certain private

practices, such as dumping. Countries are permitted under GATT rules to impose

special duties equal to the degree of subsidization and the dumping margin in

order to offset the injurious effects of these practices. As the extent and

forms of subsidization have increased significantly among the industrial

countries, the governments of those nations that have not subsidized their

industries as much as most have begun to react more vigorously to the sub-

sidizing activities of others. Some officials and private sector leaders, in

these countries argue that the major cause of the severity of their adjustment

problems is not shifts in comparative costs brought about by changes in basic

resource and demand conditions, but subsidization by other governments that

artificially creates sudden changes in comparative advantage.


(e) Conclusions

   There is no single reactive trade policy option that meets all of a

government's goals in trying to mitigate the adverse effects of structural

changes coming from the international trading sector. Most governments seem to
                                       38



think that a mixture of the different options is optimal.

    One recent suggestion for helping to decide upon the proper mix is to

require that major industries receiving assistance in one form or another

should, as a condition for receiving the assistance, develop fairly detailed

economic plans for correcting their unfavorable economic condition. If, for

example, the industry contends that temporary protection will- enable firms to

meet competition through modernization, they would be required to support their

belief by tentative commitments from investors or economic projections appraised

by neutral industry experts. To the extent that some shifting of labor and

capital to different sectors appears necessary, the plans would provide details

on plant closing and layoffs over time. The planning process would also

involve setting forth alternative scenarios depending upon the extent and length

of government assistance.

    Many governments already undertake this type of planning as part of their

assistance programs to industries. There are also some examples of cooperative

planning among nations. Those who are skeptical about this approach point to

the poor record of planners in trying to predict market developments and argue

that the planning process is likely to become highly politicized. They also

note that foreign producers may take advantage of the greater certainty in the

country's behavior to capture an even larger share of world markets.

    Another recent proposal aimed at reducing the resistance to using government

funds for assistance purposes is to finance the costs from the tariff revenues

generated by a temporary increase in protection.14 This arrangement has appeal

on equity grounds, since domestic consumers who benefit from the cheaper imports

would be asked to give up a part of these benefits to finance the costs of

adjusting to these imports. Under the current practice of restricting imports
                                         39



 quantitatively by means of voluntary export restraints (VERs) or orderly

 marketing agreements (OMAs), domestic consumers already give up these benefits

 because the foreign supply price increases by the tariff—equivalent rate.

 Consequently, domestic consumers are indifferent between tariffs (or an arrange-

ment whereby the quota rights are given to importers or auctioned off by the

government) and VERs or OMAs. However, in the tariff case the government

obtains revenue with which to finance adjustment assistance.

    It is, of course, foreign suppliers who fare better under the VERs than

under tariffs, since they reap a windfall gain equivalent to the tariff revenue.

However, foreign suppliers also may benefit in the long run with the tariff,

since when the tariff revenue is used to finance adjustment, the adjustment pro-

cess Is likely to take place more rapidly and the level of protection may be

lowered sooner. However, this latter outcome may not occur. By earmarking

tariff revenues for adjustment assistance rather than relying on general reve-

nues for this purpose, it may be more difficult to phase out the tariffs because

of the organized resistance of the firms and workers who receive the assistance.


(ii) An Activist Trade Policy Approach

    As a result of the generally disappointing experience with reactive trade

policies, there are an increasing number of calls for an activist approach to

trade policy. A country should not ——    It   is argued ——   passively   wait until it

is confronted with a structural unemployment problem caused by international

shocks but, instead, anticipate and take advantage of dynamic changes in the

structure of trade. Such an approach supposedly would ease the problems of

short—run adjustment both by facilitating the gradual shift of workers out of

structurally weak sectors before they are displaced in large numbers and by
                                       40


opening up new employment opportunities for these workers. Those who favor a

vigorous industrial policy on the part of the government as well as aggressive

strategic government behavior in trade matters are usually associated with this

activist approach.


(a) Industrial Policy

    There are some government economic interventions aimed at stimulating long—

run income and employment growth in every OECD country. Countries relying

primarily on the private market mechanism to allocate resources over time tend

to restrict their interventions to such measures as accelerated depreciation

allowances, subsidies for pure reseaich and higher education, infrastructure

subsidies, and active anti—trust enforcement. However, other countries are also

prepared to target particular industries and geographic areas for growth and to

provide these sectors with investment subsidies, assistance for applied research

and specific labor training allowances. Some governments futher believe that

public ownership of certain industries is necessary both to take full advantage

of expansionary opportunities and to carry Out long—run adjustment policy

effectively.

    Because of the dismal structural unemployment outlook in many OECD countries

and the fact that in principle most forms of intervention can be justified as

means of offsetting various economic distortions and market imperfections, there

are strong domestic pressures in these countries for extending government

interventions. Options with important trade implications include greatly

increased government subsidies for applied research, training, investment, and

information activities in industries where export opportunities are expanding

more rapidly. Similar assistance is also urged by some for declining import—
                                       41



 competing sectors in order to revitalize them. Alternatively, the government

 might use its authority to force a faster pace of adjustment in these latter

 sectors than will occur under imperfect market conditions. Generous early

 retirement allowances and buy—out payments for unprofitable firms, tax

allowance penalties for hiring young mobile workers, and expanded retraining

and resettlement allowances would be the type of policies utilized to facili-

tate resource shifts out of declining sectors.

    A key element In the actIvIst approach Is better coordInatIon, not only

between different government programs and policies, but among government, labor,

and business. This could involve reorganizing government agencies dealing with

industry, labor, and trade so that they work together more effectively and pro-

vide clearer signals to labor and business on the intent of government policy.

However, It could also entail detailed government planning with respect to the

future Industrial structure of the economy and explicit agreements with labor

concerning wages, job security, retraining, etc., and with business concerning

investment, product, and profit levels. Obviously, there are also many    possible
intermediate levels of coordination.

    Industrial policy has a mixed record of accomplishment. In France during

the early postwar period, as well as in Japan, well—defined industrial policy

appears to have played an important role in stimulating employment and growth.

In contrast, there also seem to be numerous examples where this approach has

served to slow down adjustment and growth. Unfortunately, we do not as yet

understand why the outcome varies so much among countries and over time and

whether success in one country can be replicated in another.
                                       42




(b) Strategic Behavior

    Another form of an activist trade policy approach that is receiving

increasing attention is strategic behavior aimed at increasing a country's

market share (and thus employment level) or terms of trade at the expense of

other trading nations. Since international competition among private producers

tn many industrial markets is highly imperfect, some argue that a country's

government should use its subsidy and tax powers to help shift part of the

excess profits existing in such markets toward its own citizens, because other

governments will try to do the same regardless of what their own government

does. This type of behavior is also justified, especially in third markets, on

the grounds that the market position of their competitors is often based on

"unfair" government subsidies of one form or another. Still another justifica-

tion expressed for this type of behavior is that it will force one's competitors

to conform more closely to existing international rules of good behavior, or

induce them to negotiate new ones when current rules are inadequate.


(iii) International Cooperation

    There are valid national reasons why countries may wish to introduce

industrial policies or to behave strategically in competing for international

markets. However, in the absence of well—defined international rules con-

cerning just what constitutes acceptable international behavior under these

policies and setting forth workable dispute settlement mechanisms, there are

also dangers with an activist trade policy approach. When each country

aggressively pursues this approach and retaliates against others who do so, it

is possible that all trading nations end with lower employment and income

levels than otherwise as the sequence of actions results in a negative sum
                                         43


game. Furthermore, when some countries do end up better off, objections can

be raised on international equity grounds, since these countries tend to be the

ones that are already the economically most powerful and their gain is usually

at the expense of the poorest nations.

    One response to these dangers is to seek to enhance international coopera-

tion in areas where nationally—oriented active and reactive trade policies can

bring about an outcome in which all countries lose, or else in which only those

countries that are already comparatively well—off gain. The goal would be to

achieve the advantages from an activist approach in helping to solve the

structural income and employment problems of OECD countries without jeopar-

dizing the great economic benefits of interdependence. This is, of course, the

approach being followed in GATT, OECD, UNCTAD, and other international organi-

zations dealing with trade issues.

    The cooperative international approach worked quite well for many years

after World War II. However, fundamental changes in the distribution of econo-

mic power among countries, coupled with differences among countries in the extent

to which they have aggressively pursued active and reactive trade policies, have

served to lessen the effectiveness of the rules under which the postwar trading

regime has operated. As previously noted, some governments have actively

assisted the private sector in trying to develop new product lines, as well as

to ease the adjustment problems in older product lines. They maintain that

this development assistance has been necessary to offset the size and initial

technological advantages of certain other countries. However, as these latter

countries have been faced both with appreciable reductions in their shares of

world product markets and significant foreign penetration of their own markets,

they have become less willing to adopt a passive attitude to extensive
                                       44


government intervention by the first group of countries. There is, for example,

a definite policy shift toward a more vigorous enforcement of countervailing

duty, antidumping and other so—called 'unfair trade" laws by these countries.

Furthermore, they are increasing pressures for their governments also to adopt a

more extensive set of activist trade policies.

    The present international situation is thus one of disequilibrium in terms

of trade policy behavior. Those countries that have been intervening most

extensively in the trade field are not prepared to change their policies,

whereas those in which the intervention has been the least are now beginning

to intervene more themselves. The possibility for a sequence of trade policy

actions and reactions in which income and employment end up at lower levels is

thus a very real one. Perhaps, as some argue, such a scenario is necessary to

bring the governments involved to the negotiating table to hammer out a set of

international rules that better fit the realities of the new distribution of

international economic power. Countries may have to test their power in

today's imperfect markets before they are prepared to agree upon cooperative

solutions to today's world trading problems.

    Any successful cooperative approach that emerges is likely to require

agreements on several key elements of trade policy. One of the most important

of these concerns the types of government intervention, especially public sub-

sidization, that should and should not be countered with offsetting actions by

other governments. Present GATT rules and practices are not sufficiently pre-

cise in this area. National laws on countervailing are also too simplistic to

deal with modern conditions. In particular, there is insufficient recognition

of the role for activist trade policies. By no means are all such policies

aimed at gaining at the expense of others. Some can bring gains to all trading
                                        45



 parties. Yet these are not sufficiently delineated in either GATT or national

 rules nor are the procedures for settling disputes in this area sufficiently

 effective.

     Greater agreement among the industrial countries concerning temporary

 assistance to sectors faced with severe adjustment problems is also needed.

Countries claiming that their subsidies are strictly for adjustment purposes

sometimes find their adjustment problems made worse by countervailing duties

imposed by others. The need for a new safeguards code has also been recognized

for several years.

    Multilateral agreements relating to competition policy seem necessary. When

international markets are imperfect, the abnormal profits that are available are

tempting targets of government trade policies. However, if international

understandings can be developed that discourage cartel—like behavior, abuse of

dominant market positions, and attempts to monopolize, much of the incentive for

such aggressive trade policies will be eliminated. It is unlikely that com-

petition policy can be dealt with adequately without also strengthening existing

agreements relating to foreign direct investment. Greater international

cooperation is also needed in the areas of exchange rate, monetary, and fiscal

policies. Many countries claim that independent actions by some nations in

these policy areas create serious income and employment problems that affect

both their trading and non—trade sectors. They argue that without cooperative

efforts to mitigate these problems, agreements in such areas as subsidization

will not be meaningful or effective.
                                      46

                                   Footnotes

 1. OECD Secretariat, Manpower and Social Affairs Committee, Conference
     on Employment Growth in the Context of Structural Change — Preliminary
     Proposals and Rationale, 8 June 1983, pp. 2—3.

 2. For example, OECD Secretariat, The Challenge of Unemployment — A Report
     to Labour Ministers. Paris: Organization for Economic Co—operation and
     Development, 1982.

 3. A. Sapir and D. Schumacher,


 4. J. A. Schumpeter, The Theory of Economic Development, tr. by R. Opie,
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1934.

 5. J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
     New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1936, p. 383.

 6. The terms—of—trade argument for protection is usually attributed to
     J. S. Mill.

 7. See, for example, H. G. Johnson, "Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation,"
     The Review of Economic Studies, XXI(2), no. 55, 1953—54, pp. 142—53.

 8. See, for example, J. Bhagwati, "The Generalized Theory of Distortions
     and Welfare" in J. Bhagwati, R. W. Jones, R. A. Mundell and J. Vanek
     (eds.), Trade Balance of Payments, and Growth, New York: Aiierican
     Elsevier Publishing Co., 1971.

 9. Two examples of the work in this area are: P. Krugman, "Import
     Protection and Export Promotion: International Competition in the
     Presence of Oligopoly and Economies of Scale" in H. Kierzkowski
     (ed.), Monopolistic Competition in International Trade, Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, forthcoming, and B. J. Spencer and J. A.
     Brander, lnternational R&D Rivalry and Industry Strategy," Review of
     Economic Studies, forthcoming.

10. See, for example, F. Cripps and W. Godley, "Control of Imports as
     Means to Full Employment and Expansion of World Trade: the UK's
     Case," Cambridge Journal of Economics, September 1978.

11. See, for example, C. Collyns, Can Protection Cure Unemployment, Thames
     Essay No. 31, London: Trade Policy Research Centre, 1982.

12. For a more detailed analysis, see R. Baldwin, The Inefficacy of
     Trade Policy, Essays in International Finance, No. 150, Princeton:
     International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton
     University, December 1982.

13. R. N. Cooper, "Trade Policy is Foreign Policy," Foreign Policy, 5, 1973.

14. This suggestion is made by, for example, G. C. Hufbauer and H. Rosen
     in Managing Comparative Advantage," unpublished paper.
