NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MENTAL HEALTH IN CHILDHOOD AND HUMAN CAPITAL
Janet Currie
Mark Stabile
Working Paper 13217
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13217

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

This research was funded by the Annie E. Casey Foundation and Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada. We thank them for their support but acknowledge that the findings and conclusions
presented in this report are those of the author(s) alone, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions
of the Foundation.We thank Joshua Goodman and Yeefei Chia for excellent research assistance and
Kelly Bedard, Jon Gruber, and Jane Waldfogel for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2007 by Janet Currie and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Mental Health in Childhood and Human Capital
Janet Currie and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 13217
July 2007
JEL No. I1,I2
ABSTRACT
Although mental disorders are common among children, we know little about their long term effects
on child outcomes. This paper examines U.S. and Canadian children with symptoms of Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), depression, conduct disorders, and other behavioral problems.
Our work offers a number of innovations. First we use large nationally representative samples of
children from both countries. Second, we focus on "screeners" that were administered to all children
in our sample, rather than on diagnosed cases. Third, we address omitted variables bias by estimating
sibling-fixed effects models. Fourth, we examine a range of outcomes. Fifth, we ask how the effects
of mental health conditions are mediated by family income and maternal education. We find that mental
health conditions, and especially ADHD, have large negative effects on future test scores and schooling
attainment, regardless of family income and maternal education.
Janet Currie
International Affairs Building
Department of Economics
Columbia University - Mail code 3308
420 W 118th Street
New York, NY, 10027
and NBER
jc2663@columbia.edu
Mark Stabile
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7 CANADA
and NBER
mark.stabile@utoronto.ca

The prevalence and importance of child mental health problems have been increasingly
recognized in recent years. The MECA Study cited in the 1999 U.S. Surgeon General’s Report
on Mental Health states that approximately one in five children and adolescents in the U.S.
exhibit suffer some impairment from a mental or behavioral disorders, 11 percent have
significant functional impairments, and 5 percent suffer extreme functional impairment. (Shaffer
et al., 1996; U.S. DHHS, 1999).1 These are very large numbers of children.
It is surprising then that there is relatively little longitudinal research documenting the
long-term effects of children’s mental health problems, and virtually no research attempting to
identify the types of mental health problems that are most deleterious to children’s future
prospects. Instead, most studies assume that childhood mental health problems will have
negative effects and work to document the prevalence of these conditions, examine the efficacy
of specific interventions (usually in small and non-experimental settings), or examine the factors
that might be related to the development of mental health conditions.
Our work aims to fill this gap in the literature by examining the relationship between
several common mental health conditions and future outcomes using large samples of children
from the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY), and the
American National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY).

The most common mental health

disorders of childhood are anxiety and mood disorders such as depression, and what the Surgeon
general’s report refers to as “disruptive disorders”. ADHD is the largest single diagnosis within
the second category followed by aggression or conduct disorders. Hence, we examine indicators

1

MECA stands for “Methodology for Epidemiology of Mental Disorders in Children and Adolescents”.
Similarly, Offord et al. (1987) report that in the Canadian province of Ontario, 18% of children have moderate to
severe emotional or behavioral problems.

3

for these three types of disorders (depression/anxiety, ADHD, and conduct disorders) in addition
to a more general index of behavior problems.
Our work makes several contributions to the existing literature. First, we use “screener”
questions that were asked of all children. It is problematic to rely on diagnosed cases, because
mental illness may be either over-diagnosed (if for example parents seek to justify their child’s
poor outcomes, or schools have incentives to get low achieving children into special education,
Cullen (2003)) or under-diagnosed (given stigma) relevance to its true prevalence. Screener
questions focus on specific behaviors that are not linked to any specific mental condition in the
questionnaires, and hence are less likely to yield biased responses.2 While a high score on a
screening questionnaire is not equivalent to a clinical diagnosis, in most cases the first step in
diagnosing a mental illness would be to administer such a screener to the parents of the troubled
child.
Second, existing longitudinal studies that examine the effects of mental health conditions
on child outcomes suggest that they are associated with significantly worse outcomes. But it is
possible that poorer outcomes reflect other problems suffered by children with these conditions
(or possibly even the effects of other problems which contributed to their poor mental health).

2

One of the difficulties in diagnosing mental health problems in children is that there are no “objective” criteria that
a third party can observe, and often the child themselves cannot accurately report their symptoms. Therefore,
mental health problems in children are typically diagnosed by independently asking a child’s parents and teachers a
series of questions about their behaviors. For example, for ADHD, a parent would be asked 9 questions about
inattention (including whether the child “often has trouble keeping attention on tasks or play activities” or “often
does not seem to listen when spoken to directly”), and 9 questions about hyperactivity/impulsivity (such as “often
fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat” and “often has trouble waiting ones turn”). For a diagnosis, the
parent would have to answer yes to six or more questions in each category, and the practitioner would have to decide
that the behavior was inappropriate for the child’s developmental level. In addition, the behavior must have
persisted for at least 6 months, started before the child was 7 years old, and be causing them impairment in two or
more settings. This diagnostic process raises the problem that parents whose children are having difficulties in
school may be more likely to focus on their child’s behavior and answer yes to screener questions. This would lead
us to overstate the relationship between mental health problems and outcomes. To the extent that anxious parents
apply the same level of scrutiny to both children, sibling fixed effects models may help to control for differences in
parental reporting propensities.

4

For example, in the U.S., the estimated prevalence of ADHD is almost twice as high in families
with income less than $20,000 compared to families of higher income (Cuffe et al. 2003).3 The
Surgeon General’s report concludes that the risk of developing a mental health disorder is higher
for children who are prenatally exposed to drugs, alcohol or tobacco, low birth weight children,
and those who suffer from abuse or exposure to traumatic events. All of these circumstances are
more likely in poor families and may have independent effects on child outcomes. Hence, we
use sibling comparisons in order to try to control for omitted factors that might be correlated with
both poorer outcomes and mental health conditions.
Third, poor children with mental health conditions may also receive less effective
treatment than other children, and thus be at “double jeopardy” for ill effects. Hence, we ask
whether the effects of mental health conditions differ by family income, or by mother’s
education.
We find that behavior problems have a large negative effect on future educational
outcomes. The most consistent effects across the two countries are found for ADHD. In
models that include sibling fixed effects, anxiety/depression is found to increase grade repetition
but has no effect on the other outcomes we examine (such as test scores), suggesting that
depression acts through a mechanism other than decreasing cognitive performance. Conduct
disorders are also found to have broadly negative effects in the U.S., while in Canada, they
reduce the probability that 16-19 year old youths are in school but do not have significant effects
on other outcomes. We find little evidence that these effects are modified by family income or
maternal education.

3

Other studies that find a relationship between income and ADHD prevalence include: Korenman, Miller
and Sjaastad (1995), McLeod and Shanahan (1993) Dooley et al., (1998), Dooley and Stewart (2003), Phipps and
Curtis (2003), and Lipman et al. (1994).

5

Our results are robust to controlling for other diagnosed learning disabilities or birth
weight or excluding children with other diagnosed learning disabilities, and to different ways of
handling treated children. We also find that the effects of mental health conditions on test
scores are large relative to those of other chronic conditions of childhood (though both mental
health conditions and chronic physical conditions increase the probability of grade repetition).
Finally, when we control both for past and current mental health problems, we find that past
mental health problems have significant negative effects on test scores, suggesting that the
effects of persistent mental health problems in children are cumulative.
II. Background
Three strands of the previous literature are relevant to our study. First, and perhaps most
similar to our work, are studies that look at the longer term consequences of behavior problems
in relatively large samples. Kessler et al. (1995) uses data from the U.S. National Comorbidity
Study which surveyed 8,098 respondents 15 to 54 years old from 1990 to 1992 and assessed their
current psychiatric health as well as collecting information about past diagnoses of mental
problems. Using retrospective questions about onset, they find that those with early onset
psychiatric problems were less likely to have graduated from high school or attended college.
Farmer (1993, 1995) uses data from the British National Child Development Survey (the
NCDS) which follows the cohort of all British children born in a single week in March 1958, to
examine the consequences of childhood “externalizing” behavioral problems on men’s outcomes
at age 23. She finds that children who fell into the top decile of an aggregate behavior problems
score at ages 7, 11, or 16 had lower educational attainment, earnings and probabilities of

6

employment at age 23.4 Gregg and Machin (1998) also use the NCDS data and find that
behavioral problems at age 7 are related to poorer educational attainment at age 16, which in turn
is associated with poor labor market outcomes at ages 23 and 33.
A similar study of a cohort of all New Zealand children born between 1971 and 1973 in
Dunedin found that those with behavior problems at age 7 to 9 were more likely to be
unemployed at age 15 to 21 (Caspi et al., 1998). Miech et al. (1999) examine adolescents from
this cohort who met diagnostic criteria for four types of disorders: anxiety, depression,
hyperactivity, and conduct disorders when they were evaluated at age 15, and who were followed
up to age 20. They find that youths with hyperactivity and conduct disorders obtained
significantly less schooling, while anxiety and depression had little effect on schooling levels.
More recently, McLeod and Kaiser (2004) use the NLSY data to show that children who
had behavior problems at ages 6 to 8 are less likely to graduate from high school or to attend
college, even after conditioning on maternal characteristics. Like Miech et al. they find that in
models that included both “internalizing” and “externalizing” behavior problems, only the latter
were significant predictors of future outcomes. One limitation of this study is that it focuses on
a relatively small number of children who, given the design of the NLSY, were born primarily to
young mothers.
Several studies focus on particular “externalizing” mental health conditions. Mannuzza
and Klein (2000) review three studies of the long-term outcomes of children with ADHD. In one
study, children diagnosed with ADHD were matched to controls from the same school who had
never exhibited any behavior problems and had never failed a grade; in a second study, controls

4

Her regressions control for parent’s aspirations for the child, the type of school attended, the ability group
of the child, and whether they are in special education. Hence, her analysis attempts to measure the effects of
externalizing behavior over and above its effects on these determinants of educational attainment.

7

were recruited at the 9-year follow up from non-psychiatric patients in the same medical center
who had never had behavior problems; and in a third study, ADHD children sampled from a
range of San Francisco schools were compared to non-ADHD children from the same group of
schools.
These comparisons consistently show that the ADHD children had worse outcomes in
adolescence and young adulthood than control children. For example, they had completed less
schooling and were more likely to have continuing mental health problems. However, by
excluding children with any behavior problems from the control groups, the studies might
overstate the effects of ADHD. Also, the studies do not address the possibility that the negative
outcomes might be caused by other factors related to a diagnosis of ADHD, such as poverty, the
presence of other learning disabilities, or the fact that many people diagnosed with ADHD end
up in special education.5
Currie and Stabile (2006) address these problems by examining the effects of ADHD in
sibling fixed effects models. This study builds on the previous one by considering a broader
range of mental health problems that might be correlated with ADHD (and so might have
contributed to the estimated effects of ADHD in our previous paper).
Perhaps the most widely known studies of the long-term effects of aggression or conduct
disorders are associated with Richard Tremblay who tracked a group of 1037 boys from
Kindergarten to age 15 in Montreal, Canada. He found that boys that were highly aggressive in
Kindergarten were much more likely to be persistently aggressive, and that this was most true of
children of young or less educated mothers (c.f. Nagin and Tremblay, 1999). Campbell et al.
5

These studies do not address the question of whether outcomes were better for ADHD children who were
treated—in fact, there appears to be virtually no research examining the longer-term effects of treatment on
achievement (Wigal et al., 1999).

8

(2006) use data from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development to track
children from 24 months to 12 years of age, and find that children who persist in moderate or
high levels of physical aggression past Kindergarten have higher levels of externalizing problems
as pre-teens.
A third strand of related research examines the importance of “non-cognitive skills”. For
example, Blanden, Gregg, and Macmillan (2006) ask whether rising returns to non-cognitive
skills can explain growing income inequality. In their analysis of the 1958 and 1970 British birth
cohort data sets, they include characteristics such as “hyper” and “anxious” as well as measures
such as “self esteem” and “extrovert” as measures of non-cognitive skills and find that rising
returns to positive mental characteristics does indeed account for some of the increase in
inequality between the two cohorts. However, Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006)
conceptualize non-cognitive skills as innate traits (similar to native ability) and measure them
using the Rotter Locus of Control Scale and the Rosenberg Self Esteem Scale. They conclude
that such non-cognitive skills are important determinants of academic and economic success. It
seems clear that these measures of non-cognitive skills are likely to capture some aspects of
mental health as well as innate character traits. In this paper, we focus on identifiable mental
health problems, and their long-term impacts.
Our work differs from previous work using longitudinal data sets by emphasizing sibling
fixed-effects models to control for omitted variables bias, and by examining interactions between
parental SES and the impact of mental health conditions. Fixed effects methods offer a powerful
way to control for unobserved or imperfectly measured characteristics of households that might
be associated with both with a higher probability of both mental health problems and with

9

outcomes. We also investigate outcomes in a more recent cohort of children than many of the
previous studies, and offer a comparison between the U.S. and Canada.
The comparison between the U.S. and Canada is interesting because one might expect the
underlying propensities to have mental health conditions to be similar in the U.S. and Canada
although the reported incidence of diagnosed mental health conditions is lower in Canada and
children are less likely to be treated for mental health conditions in Canada than in the United
States.6 Hence, it is of interest to see whether these conditions have similar effects on the
prospects of children in the two countries. Moreover, the conditions we focus on are measured
slightly differently in the two countries, so the comparison also offers a way to determine
whether the results are sensitive to slight differences in the screener questions used.

3. Data
We use data from the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth
(NLSCY) and from the American NLSY. The NLSCY is a national longitudinal data set which
surveyed 22,831 children ages 0 to 11 and their families beginning in 1994. Follow up surveys
were conducted biannually up to 2002. We restrict our sample to those children between the
ages of 4 and 11 in 1994, since only parents of children in this age range completed the ADHD
6

Currie and Stabile (2006) report that both the NLSY and the NLSCY have information about drug and
psychiatric treatment for mental health conditions. In 1994, only 1.4 percent of the Canadian children reported drug
treatment compared to 3.3 percent of the American children. The NLSCY asks specifically about Ritalin,
tranquillizers and nerve pills, whereas the NLSY asks a more general question about medications used to control
activity levels or behavior. The Canadian children were also less likely to have seen a psychiatrist, resulting in
overall treatment rates of 4.7 percent compared to 9.6 percent for the American children. These differences in mean
rates of treatment are surprising in view of differences in the insurance regimes in the two countries: In Canada,
psychiatric treatment is covered under public health insurance, and all of the provinces have drug plans for lowincome families. In the U.S., many private insurance plans severely restrict the coverage of mental health treatment,
and Medicaid (the public system of health insurance for low income children) offers only limited coverage of
psychiatric treatment. The low treatment rates in Canada may reflect greater stigma attached to mental illness, less
faith in the efficacy of treatment, or both.

10

screener. This restriction yields 5604 children. For analyses that use Canadian math test scores
we have a smaller sample of approximately 2293. 7 We use the NLSCY data to ask how mental
health screener scores in 1994 affect outcomes in 2002.
The NLSY began in 1979 with a survey of approximately 6,000 young men and 6,000
young women between the ages of 14 and 21. These young people have been followed up every
year up to the present. In 1986, the NLSY began assessing the children of the female NLSY
respondents at two year intervals. Given the differences in the design of the two studies, and the
large amounts of missing data in the NLSY, we use the NLSY data to see how the average
hyperactivity score measured over the 1990 to 1994 period affects the average outcomes of
children in the 1998 to 2004 waves.8 This procedure yields a maximum sample of 3,758
children. We restrict the age range of the NLSY children to be greater than 4 and less than 12
years of age in 1994. This makes the Canadian and U.S. samples comparable, and it has the
additional benefit of making the NLSY sample more representative. The mothers of the NLSY
children represented a nationally representative cohort of 14 to 21 year old women in 1978. But
since women of lower socioeconomic status tend to have children at younger ages, the NLSY
sample of children is disadvantaged relative to a nationally representative cross section of
children, and this problem is more pronounced when the oldest children (who were born to the
youngest mothers on average) are included.

7

In cycle 5 the response rate for the mathematics test was 81%. Currie and Stabile (2006) discuss an analysis of the
non-responses to the NLSCY math tests for previous cycles performed by Statistics Canada which reports little
difference between responders and non-responders at that time. In the cycle 5 codebook, Statistics Canada notes that
the response rate is lower in higher grades, and higher among students who performed well on previous cycle math
tests.
8
We also tried using the average for 2000 to 2004, but found that this reduced the sample size by at least half.

11

The measurement of mental health conditions is key for our analysis. The diagnostic
criterion for the mental health conditions we examine are laid out in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (American Psychiatric Association,
1994). In order to be diagnosed, a child must exhibit several symptoms over some period of
time, and must suffer impairment from those symptoms. The measures available in our surveys,
as in most surveys, are questions that are asked to parents about symptoms. These questions are
subsets of the questions that appear in the DSM-IV for each disorder.
We do not have information whether the symptoms are causing impairments, but given
the way that mental health conditions are diagnosed, it is likely that children who are having
problems in school are more likely to be judged to be “impaired” by their symptoms in the
school setting than those who are not. Hence, whatever the underlying symptoms, there is
likely to be a spurious relationship between schooling achievement and mental health problems,
particularly those “externalizing” problems that are likely to be disruptive in a school setting.
Given this problem, it is useful to focus on answers to screeners that are administered to all
children rather than on diagnosed cases. The administration of parental questionnaires that are
similar (though more detailed) than the screeners we use here is almost always the first step in
the diagnosis of child mental health conditions.
In the NLSCY data, the parents of all children aged 4 through 11 in 1994 were asked a
series of questions about the child’s behavior (we list the questions in the data appendix). The
responses to these questions are categorized by disorder, and then added together to determine a
hyperactivity score (8 questions), an emotional behavior score (8 questions), and an aggressive
behavior score (6 questions) for the child. We use these three measures separately, as well as
creating a combined Behavior Problems Index based on the three measures above plus an
12

indirect aggression score, a prosocial behavior score and a property offense score. This measure
is meant to be similar to the overall Behavior Problems Index in the NLSY.9
The NLSY Behavior Problems Index is asked to parents of children 4 to 14. There are 26
questions asked to all children, and 2 questions asked only to children who have been to school.
Five of the questions can be used to create a hyperactivity subscale, six can be used to form a
conduct disorder subscale, and 5 can be used to form an anxiety/depression subscale. These
scores are standardized by the child’s age. We convert this standardized score to one that has
the same range as the scores in the Canadian data. In addition to the specific subscales, we also
estimate models using the overall behaviour problems index. More information about how these
scores are computed in both samples is available in the data appendix.
In the NLSY, parents were also asked whether their children had any conditions that
limited their normal activities. If they answered in the affirmative, parents were asked to identify
the limitation. This suite of questions was used to identify children who had been diagnosed
with a “learning disability”. In the Canadian NLSCY, we use a question on whether the child
has been diagnosed with a learning disability that is asked in the series of questions on chronic
conditions. Below, we examine the effects of mental health problems in a sample of children
that excludes those with diagnosed learning disabilities, in an effort to isolate the effects of
particular mental health conditions themselves. We also estimate models that include both
behaviour problems and other learning disabilities in order to assess the comparative magnitude

9

Children in the NLSCY are asked different questions related to the same mental health conditions depending on
their age. To avoid complications in combining scores across ages we focus on children 4-11 in 1994 who are all
asked the identical set of questions. Questions also vary slightly across cycles and as a result we take scores for all
children from the same cycle. Each score is measures on a scale of either 1 through 16 or 1 through 12 depending on
the number of underlying questions and the combined behavioral problems index is then simply the added total of
these scores reflecting the number of total symptoms the child exhibits across health conditions.

13

of the effects. Using the Canadian data on chronic conditions, we also compare the effects of
behaviour problems to those of chronic physical conditions.
We focus on a set of outcomes that are intended to capture the child’s human capital
accumulation, broadly defined. These include: Grade repetition, mathematics scores, reading
scores, and special education. We also examine delinquency, which one might think of as a
measure of “negative human capital” since children who are delinquent might be viewed as
building capital in anti-social or criminal activities. Further details about the construction of
these variables are available in the data appendix, but some general discussion is warranted here.
Grade repetition is an important outcome, in that it is predictive of eventual schooling
attainment. Since whether or not someone has ever repeated a grade is a cumulative measure,
we ask whether the child repeated a grade between 1994 (when hyperactivity is measured) and
2004. Mathematics and reading scores are two more immediate measures of schooling
achievement. The NLSY assesses children using the Peabody Individual Achievement Tests
(PIATs) for mathematics and reading recognition. These tests are administered in the home. In
the NLSCY, mathematics tests were administered in schools to children in grades two through
ten and are based on the Canadian Achievement Tests. The NLSCY began collecting a reading
test score in its first three cycles but dropped this measure in subsequent cycles. Therefore, we
are only able to include a math test score from the Canadian data for the 2002 cycle. We convert
all of the test scores to Z-scores.
The special education variable is available only in the NLSY and not the NLSCY for the
years used in this study. Special education is an important variable to consider, because special
education children tend to lag behind their peers throughout their schooling and are more likely
to drop out.
14

The measure of delinquency that we construct using NLSY data corresponds closely to
that used by the U.S. Department of Justice (DIJ) for this age group. The DIJ definition includes
illegal drug use or sales, “destroyed property”, “stolen something worth more than $50”,
“committed assault”, and whether they have ever been arrested (Puzzanchera, 2000). The
NLSCY measure is slightly broader in that it also includes questions about whether children have
been questioned by police, or have run away from home. Questions about drug use and
delinquency are answered by the child in both surveys. Because the questions pertaining to
different age groups of children are somewhat different, we estimated models separately for 10
to 14 year olds and 15 and older children in the NLSY, and for children less than 16 and 16 to 19
in the NLSCY. For simplicity we present delinquency results only for children 16-19 years old.
Results for younger children were similar.
We use total permanent household income as our measure of income. This variable is
constructed by taking the mean income for all available waves in the NLSCY, and for waves
from 1990 to 2004 in the NLSY. We average income over all waves for two reasons. First,
child outcomes are likely to be more strongly affected by permanent than by transitory income.
Second, the impact of random measurement error in income will be attenuated by averaging.10
Means of all of our measures are shown for all children with non-missing mental health
scores are shown in columns 1 and 4 of Table 1. Columns 2 and 5 show means for the sample of
children with siblings, who will be the focus in our fixed effects models. In the NLSY, all
siblings in sampled households are interviewed, whereas in the NLSCY, one randomly chosen

10

In cases where the household income is not reported, the NLSCY imputes it. We include a dummy variable for
the imputation of household income in all of our analyses. We also re-estimated all our analyses omitting individuals
for whom income had been imputed in order to be sure that there was nothing peculiar about the income imputation
process. Our analyses are robust to these checks.

15

sibling of the target child is interviewed. Columns 3 and 6 show the number of siblings with a
within-family difference in the variable in question, since these are the children who will identify
the effects of hyperactivity in our models.
This table suggests that the sibling sample is quite similar to the “full” sample of
children, and that there are sufficient numbers of siblings with differences in outcomes to pursue
a fixed effects strategy for most of our outcomes. The table highlights similarities and
differences between the U.S. and Canadian samples. The U.S. children are slightly older and
born to somewhat younger mothers on average, as one would expect. They are also more likely
to have mothers who are depressed or who have an activity limitation. All of these differences
as well as differences in other observable variables in the two data sets are controlled for in our
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) models, and many of them will be absorbed by family fixed
effects in the fixed effects models.
A comparison of the distributions of NLSCY and NLSY scores are shown in Table 2.
Across all measures the children in the NLSCY sample are more likely have scores in the lowest
part of the distribution. For the BPI, for example, approximately 30% of the Canadian sample
has a score of 0 through 2, whereas approximately 11 % of the US sample falls in this range.
While the ninetieth percentile of the hyperactivity distribution is similar across the two samples
(9 out of 16 for NLSCY and 10/16 for the NLSY) the ninetieth percentile for the
conduct/aggression scores and the depression/emotional scores are lower in Canada. This is also
reflected in the BPI score distribution, which include these scores as component parts. While the
measures are reasonably correlated with one another, there does appear to be unique information
about the child in each measure. The correlations between hyperactivity, conduct disorder, and

16

depression are all approximately 0.5. The correlations between the BPI, which includes these
measures, and any one measure are considerably higher, between 0.7 and 0.8. It is interesting
that correlations between the various types of behaviour problems and other learning disabilities
are rather low. The strongest correlation is between other learning disabilities and ADHD, at
.18.
An important question is whether we expect the effect of mental health symptoms to be
roughly linear, or whether scores above some threshold have much more deleterious effects?
People often think about illness in terms of thresholds—only people with blood pressure above a
set cut off are diagnosed with high blood pressure, and only people whose insulin function is
subject to a certain degree of impairment are diagnosed with diabetes. However, in both of these
examples, recent research has shown that persons with readings below the relevant thresholds for
diagnosis still suffer from negative effects. This could also be the case with mental health
problems.
Figure 1 shows non-parametric Lowess plots of outcomes against our behavior scores for
the U.S. and Canada. There are two striking things about these pictures. First, for grade
repetition, math score, and delinquent behavior they are remarkably similar for the U.S. and
Canada despite differences in samples, educational systems, variable definitions and so on.
Second, all of the outcomes except delinquency and remaining in school change approximately
linearly with mental health scores. This observation suggests that even children with scores low
enough that they would never be diagnosed with a problem may nevertheless suffer ill effects of
certain behaviours. Hence, in what follows, we focus on the linear scores.

4. Methods
17

We begin by estimating OLS models of the relationship between our behavioral scores in
1994 and future outcomes, controlling for a wide range of other potentially confounding
variables, including permanent income; maternal health status, education and family structure (in
1994); child age (single year of age dummies), whether the child is first born, and sex. These
models have the following form:

(1)outcome = α + βMENTAL94 + λX 94 + ε
i
i
i
i

where outcome is one of the outcomes described above, MENTAL94 is a vector of the three child
mental health scores and X is the vector of covariates described above. If high scores on the
screener are positively correlated with other factors that have a negative effect on child
outcomes, then these estimates will overstate the true effect of poor mental health.
We next attempt to control for unobserved heterogeneity by estimating family fixed
effects models:
(2)outcome = α + βMENTAL94 + λZ 94 + μ f + ε
if
if
if
if

In these models, the Z vector is similar to X but omits factors common to both siblings,
and the f subscript indexes families. A comparison of (1) and (2) will indicate whether OLS
estimates are driven by omitted variables at the family level. Evidently, there may be individuallevel factors that are important and which will not be captured by family fixed effects.11
However, it is impractical to estimate models with child fixed effects because externalizing

11

Because of the way that the NLSY sample was constructed, it is possible for children to have been measured some
years apart. We have also re-estimated the models shown in Table 3 keeping only siblings who are within three
years of age. This reduces our sample size by about 2/3, but has remarkable little effect on the estimated
coefficients. The coefficients corresponding to Table 3 are: .017 (delinquency), .009 (grade repetition), -.004 (in
school), .027 (math), .033 (reading), .013 (special education). In the NLSCY all children, both between and within
families, are measured at the same point in time and so there is no difference in family structure between siblings at
the time the mental health questions are asked.

18

mental health problems like ADHD and conduct disorder often manifest themselves before the
child’s 7th birthday and exhibit considerable stability over time.12 Given the crudeness of our
measures, changes in these scores over time for the same child could easily reflect measurement
error, rather than true changes in mental health status.
If a high mental health problem score for one sibling has negative effects on the
achievement of other siblings in the household, then the difference between the two siblings will
provide an under-estimate of the effects of the deleterious effects of mental health problems.
Estimates of (2) may also be biased downwards by random measurement error in the mental
health scores. Measurement error is a potentially important problem in this and all of the past
studies relying on parental reports of children’s mental health disorders (c.f. Offord et al., 1988;
Garrett, 1996; Glied et al, 1997).
One way to judge the importance of measurement error is to compare the OLS and fixed
effects estimates. If we believe that mental health status is likely to be similar between siblings,
then the measured within family variation may be more “noisy” than the between family
variation. In this case we might expect increased attenuation bias in the fixed effects estimates.
However, as we show below, where they are statistically significant, the OLS and fixed effects
estimates are generally similar so that measurement error (or potential spillover effects, as noted
above) may not be such an important problem.
A third potential problem is that a small number of children in our samples are being
treated for behaviour problems, but it is difficult to tell using our data exactly what they are
being treated for. To the extent that treatment is effective in altering behavior, children who are
12

For a diagnosis of ADHD, symptoms have to have been manifest before the child was 7 years old. While conduct
disorder is often diagnosed later, Kim-Cohen et al. (2005) use the DSM-IV guidelines to assess conduct disorder in a

19

being treated will have lower behaviour problem scores than they otherwise would have. But if
treatment has no consistent impact on cognitive outcomes such as test scores (as the Surgeon
General’s report concludes, and see also Wigal et al. (1999)) then failing to account for treatment
will bias our estimates. For example, if all ADHD children were treated, it might appear that
even low ADHD scores were associated with significantly poorer outcomes, and our results
would be biased upwards.
It would be extremely interesting to be able to conduct our own analysis of the impact of
treatment on outcomes. However, the very small number of children who are treated (especially
in Canada) and the endogenous nature of treatment decisions (along with the lack of plausible
instruments for treatment) make this difficult. Instead, we take two alternative approaches to the
problem of treated children. First, we simply exclude the treated children. If treatment were
applied randomly to the population of children, then these estimates would provide an unbiased
estimate of the effects of untreated mental health problems on outcomes. Second, in models that
use the overall behaviour problem index, we impute the 90th percentile BPI score to all of the
treated children. This is equivalent to assuming that only children with high scores are treated.
As we will show, neither alternative has much impact on our estimates, given the small numbers
of children being treated.
Finally, we turn to an investigation of the extent to which the effects of mental health
problems are mediated by income. The OLS models we estimate have the following form:

(3) outcomei = α + β (income)i + φincomei * MENTAL94i + χMENTAL94i + λX 94i + ε i

large sample of 41/2 to 5 year olds and find that those who had 3 or more symptoms at age 5 (about 6.6 percent of
the sample) were significantly more likely than other children to also have conduct disorder at age 7.

20

where now income has been broken out of the X vector, and interacted with a mental health
score. A positive coefficient on the interaction term (in the case of a positive outcome) would
suggest that the negative effects of mental health problems were mitigated in high income
children. In addition to including interactions with linear income, we also use interactions
between the mental health scores and having a mother who is a high school dropout, and
between the mental health scores and being in poverty.

5. Results
Table 3 presents our baseline OLS estimates of the effects of mental health problems on
child outcomes in the U.S. and Canada along with the corresponding fixed effects estimates. We
present both OLS and FE estimates for the combined BPI index, and for each of the three
individual scores.
Table 3 indicates that children with higher hyperactivity scores have worse academic
outcomes, though perhaps surprisingly, there is little effect on delinquency once household fixed
effects are included in the model. In Canada, this appears to be because the standard error rises
in the fixed effects models, but in the U.S., the coefficient also falls substantially. A one unit
change in the hyperactivity score increases the probability of grade repetition by very similar
amounts in Canada and the U.S. (0.8 to 1 percentage point) and reduces math scores by 4 to 7
percent of a standard deviation. Where they can be compared, the estimates in the U.S. and
Canada are quite similar. The U.S. estimates also show that hyperactivity increases the
probability that the child is in special education by about 1 percentage point, and reduces
standardized reading scores. The similarity between the OLS and fixed effects estimates
21

suggests that measurement error is not driving the estimates, as discussed above.13 In fact, the
fixed effects estimates often exceed the OLS ones.
One way to think about the size of these effects is to compare them with the effect of
income, which has consistently significant effects,. Appendix Table 1 shows all of the
coefficient estimates for OLS models that included the overall behavior problem index. They
show that each $100,000 increase in permanent income would decrease the probability of grade
repetition by 1.9 percentage points, which is only slightly larger than the effect of reducing the
hyperactivity score by one point, according to our estimates. On the other hand, the estimated
effect of having a mother with greater than a high school education is consistently larger than
$100,000 in permanent income. At the mean BPI score of 6.8, the effect is much larger than the
effect of either education or income.
In Canada, each $100,000 worth of permanent income is associated with a 7 percentage
point decrease in the probability that a child repeats a grade between 1994 and 2002. Having a
mother with more than a high school education is associated with a decrease in the probability of
repeating a grade of approximately 5 percentage points. But a Canadian child with a score of
only 4 out of 16 on the BPI index (around the mean) would be 8 percentage points more likely to
have repeated a grade. Thus, in both the American and Canadian samples, the effect of behavior
problems is large relative to the effect of income or mother’s education.
The next two panels of Table 3 show results for conduct disorder.

In OLS models,

conduct disorders have negative effects across the board. In models using sibling fixed effects,

13

Random measurement error would be expected to reduce the size of the fixed effects estimates relative to the
OLS estimates. Correlated errors (for example, if the mother tended to consistently exaggerate reports of a
particular behavior for both children) would lead to much larger fixed effects estimates. If, on the other hand,
parents exaggerate differences between siblings, the fixed effects estimates could theoretically be smaller than the
OLS estimates.

22

the effects remain statistically significant for delinquency, grade repetition, and test scores in the
U.S. In Canada, the “aggression” measure is marginally significant (at the 10 percent level) for
grade repetition, and is significant at conventional levels for the probability that a youth 16-19 is
in school. Since conduct disorder covers a broader spectrum of behaviors than “aggression” it is
possible that this accounts for the different results.
The next section of Table 3 examines the effects of anxiety/depression. High depression
scores increase the probability of grade repetition in both the U.S. and Canada although since
there is no effect on test scores, this appears to be through some mechanism other than impairing
a child’s cognitive functioning.
The last panel of Table 3 shows estimates from models that include all of the mental
health scores. This specification demands a lot of the data, but allows for the fact that the
incidence of different mental health problems tends to be correlated across individuals. The
fixed effects coefficients are less precisely estimated, but are broadly consistent with the
estimates discussed above. In the U.S., hyperactivity is estimated to reduce test scores and
increase special education. In Canada, hyperactivity also reduces test scores, and increases the
probability of grade repetition. In the U.S., conduct disorder appears to have little effect once the
other measures are included, while in Canada, aggression increases the probability of
delinquency and reduces the probability that a 16-19 year old child is in school. Finally, in the
U.S., the depression score predicts grade repetition (although it is only marginally significant
even at the 10 percent level). The total behavior problem index is not statistically significant in
these models, suggesting that the overall effect of behavior problems is accounted for by the
information in the three included subscales, especially hyperactivity.

23

The analysis in Table 3 suggests that if our aim was only to identify young children who
were at risk of future problems because of mental health conditions, then the overall behavior
problems index would be a sensible initial indicator. Hence, in the remainder of the paper we
focus on this measure.
An important question about the interpretation of the results in Table 3 concerns whether
we think that early mental health conditions matter because they predict later mental health
conditions, or whether they have effects independent of a child’s future mental health status?
Table 3a shows models that include both the overall score for 90 to 94, and the score for 98 to
2004. These models are estimated only for the U.S., because the Canadian sample had two few
children with scores available for both periods. The estimates suggest that for schooling
attainment, early mental health problems matter mostly because they predict later mental health
problems. However, for cognitive test scores, early mental health problems have large
significant effects even controlling for later problems. Hence, these estimates indicate that early
mental health problems have significant and lasting effects on children’s cognitive achievements,
even if they do not lead to grade repetition and special education.
Table 3b shows that the results are unchanged if we also control for the presence of other
learning disabilities (even though these disabilities have large independent effects, especially on
test scores). We have estimated similar models (not shown) that include for birth weight, and
this also has little effect on the estimated effect of mental health problems. Table 3c compares
the effects of mental health conditions to those of chronic physical health problems. This
analysis is conducted only with the Canadian data, since the U.S. data does not ask every child
about the presence of chronic conditions. The estimated effects of mental health conditions are

24

almost exactly the same as those in Table 3. Chronic physical conditions have a large effect on
grade repetition, but no effect on test scores.
Table 4 shows several specification checks. First, we try excluding children with other
diagnosed learning disabilities. Second, we exclude treated children. Third, we impute a high
(90th percentile) BPI score to treated children. For the most part, these alternative ways of
handling the treated children produce estimates that are very similar to those shown in Table 3.
The main exception is that excluding treated children results in an insignificant coefficient on
BPI in the equation for grade repetition in the NLSY, suggesting that, at least in the U.S., the
children who are treated are also the most likely to have repeated a grade.
Table 5 reports estimates of equation (3), which includes interactions between BPI scores
and income. Given that we are using permanent income, the interaction terms in these fixed
effects models are identified by the fact that BPI scores vary within families. What the
interaction term tells us is whether the difference between the high and low BPI score children
within a family is bigger in a low income household than in a high income household. That is, if
the high income household is able to do a better job assisting the high BPI score child than the
low income household, then the interaction will be significant.
Panel 1 shows that in OLS models using the NLSY, the interactions with income are of
the expected sign (that is, higher income appears to mitigate the effects of behavior problems in
the equations for grade repetition, reading scores, and special education). However, in the fixed
effects models none of the interactions are statistically significant.
Interactions between mental health scores and whether the mother is a high school
dropout are also insignificant in the fixed effects models. Curiously, the last panel shows that if
we use poverty rather than a continuous income measure, the interaction terms for U.S. math and
25

reading scores are positive. That is, higher mental health problem scores appear to have little
effect on poor U.S. children—the positive interaction offsets the negative “main” effect of a high
screener score. It is possible that this result reflects the fact that poor children have the lowest
socres on these tests to begin with. In any case, there is little evidence that maternal education or
family income mitigate the negative effects of childhood mental health conditions, in sharp
contrast to the large literature suggesting that higher income does mitigate the negative effects of
physical health conditions.

6. Discussion and Conclusions
Children with mental health problems suffer large negative consequences in terms of
their achievement test scores and schooling attainment. Hyperactivity appears to have the
broadest, and most consistently negative effects, followed by conduct disorders. A one unit
change in the hyperactivity score increases the probability of grade repetition by very similar
amounts in Canada and the U.S. (0.8 to 1 percentage point) and reduces math scores by 4 to 7
percent of a standard deviation. Conduct disorders have effects of roughly half this size. These
effects are large relative to the effects of family income, which is known to be an important
predictor of child outcomes. Effects of mental health conditions are also large relative to those
of chronic physical health conditions.
These results are consistent with previous research suggesting that “externalizing”
behavior problems are more likely to lead to negative outcomes than “internalizing problems”.
We do however find that anxiety/depression increases the probability of grade repetition by as
much as 1 percentage point, which is again a large effect. Since, however, depression does not

26

appear to affect math and reading test scores, it is possible that depression affects academic
outcomes via a different mechanism.
While it is interesting to examine the impact of specific problems, our results also suggest
that if one merely wanted to identify children at risk of bad outcomes because of their mental
health problems, then an index such as the overall Behavior Problems Index would be as good if
not better than the individual subscales.
Our estimates also indicate that mental health conditions in early childhood are predictive
of future outcomes both because mental health conditions are likely to persist, and because early
mental health problems have independent and persistent negative effects on children’s future test
scores. Our results are very robust and hold when we include indicators for other learning
disabilities in our models, when we exclude children with other learning disabilities, when we
include birth weight, and whether we excluded children who are treated for mental health
problems, or impute a “pre-treatment” mental health score to these children.
Finally, we find surprisingly little evidence that higher income protects against the
negative effects of mental health conditions. This is surprising in that one might expect richer
children to have access to superior treatment as well as other advantages. This result may speak
to the fact that treatment for most childhood mental health problems is in its infancy, so that it is
not at all clear that richer parents are able to identify, let alone purchase, the most effective
treatments.

27

References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
Ed. 1994.
Blanden, Jo, Paul Gregg, and Lindsey Macmillan. “Explaining Intergenerational Income
Persistence: Non-Cognitive Skills, Ability, and Education,” CMPO Working Paper #06/146,
Dept. of Economics, University of Bristol, April 2006.
Baillargeon, R., Tremblay, R., Willms, J.D., “The Prevalence of Physical Aggression in
Canadian Children: A Multi-Group Latent Class Analysis of Data from the First Collection
Cycle (1994-1995) of the NLSCY,” Human Resources Development Canada, Applied Research
Branch, December 1999.
Campell, Susan, Susan Spieker, Margaret Burchinal, Michele Poe, and the NICHD Early Child
Care Research Network, “Trajectories of Aggression from Toddlerhood to Age 9 Predict
Academic and Social Functioning Through Age 12,” Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 47, August 2006, page 791-.
Cuffe, Steven, Charity Moore, and Robert McKeown. “ADHD Symptoms in the National Health
Inverview Survey: Prevalence, Correlates, and the Use of Services and Medication,” poster
presented at the 50th Anniversary Meeting of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Miami Beach FL, October 15, 2003.
Caspi, Avshalom, Bradley Wright, Terrie Moffitt, and Phil Silva. “Early Failure in the Labor
Market: Childhood and Adolescent Predictors of Unemployment in the Transition to
Adulthood,” American Sociological Review, 63, 1998, 424-451.
Cuellar, Alison, Sara Markowitz, Anne Libby. “The Relationships Between Mental Health and
Substance Abuse Treatment and Juvenile Crime,” NBER Working Paper #9952, Sept. 2003.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation: The
Case of ADHD,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming, 2006.
Dooley, Martin, and Stewart, J. “Family Income, Parenting Styles and Child BehaviouralEmotional Outcomes,” mimeo, McMaster University, 2003.
Dooley, Martin, Curtis, Lori, Lipman, Ellen, and Feeny, David, “Child Psychiatric Disorders,
Poor School Performance and Social Problems: The Roles of Family Structure and LowIncome,” in Labour Markets, Social Institutions, and the Future of Canada’s Children, ed. M.
Corak, 1998, Statistics Canada: Ottawa, Canada.
Farmer, Elizabeth. “Externalizing Behavior in the Life Course: The Transition from School to
Work,” Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 1, 1993, 179-188.

28

Farmer, Elizabeth. “Extremity of Externalizing Behavior and Young Adult Outcomes,” Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 1995, 617-632.
Garrett, A.B., Essays in the Economics of Child Mental Health, Columbia University Ph.D.
Thesis, 1996.
Glied, S., Garrett. A.B., Hoven, C., Rubio-Stipec, M., Regier, D., Moore, R., Goodman, Sh., Wu,
P., and Bird, H., “Child Outpatient Mental Health Service Use: Why Doesn’t Insurance Matter?”
The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 1198, 1, pp.173-187.
Glied, S., Hoven, C., Garrett, A.B., Moore, R., Leaf,. P, Bird, H., Goodman, S., Regier, D.,
Alegria, M., “Measuring Child Mental Health Status for Services Research,” Journal of Child
and Family Studies,, 1997, 6(2), pp.177-190.
Gregg, Paul and Steven Machin. “Child Development and Success or Failure in the Youth
Labour Market,” Center for Economic Performance, London School of Economics Discussion
Paper 0397, July 1998.
Heckman, James, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” NBER Working Paper #12006,
January 2006.
Kessler, Ronald, Cindy Foster, William Saunders, and Paul Stang. “Social Consequences of
Psychiatric Disorders, I: Educational Attainment,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1995,
1026-32.
Kim-Cohen, Julia, Louise Arseneiault, Avshalom Caspi, Monica Tomas, Alan Taylor, Terrie
Moffitt. “Validity of DSM-IV Conduct Disorder in 41/2-5-year-Old Children: A Longitudinal
Epidemiological Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 2005, 162: 1008-1117.
Lipman, Ellen D.R. Offord and M.H. Boyle. “Economic Disadvantage and Child Psycho-social
Morbidity,” Canadian Medical Association Journal, 151, 1994, 431-37.
Mannuzza, Salvatore and Rachel Klein. “Long-Term Prognosis in AttentionDeficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,” Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, v9
#3, July 2000, 711-726.
McLeod, J.D. and M.J. Shanahan. Poverty, Parenting and Children’s Mental Health,” American
Sociological Review, 58 #3, 1993, 351-366.
McLeod, Jane D. and Karen Kaiser. “Childhood Emotional and Behavioral Problems and
Educational Attainment,” American Sociological Review, 69, October 2004, 636-658.
Merrell, C. And P.B. Tymms. “Inattention, Hyperactivity and Impulsiveness: Their Impact on
Academic Achievement and Progress,” British Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 2001, 4356.
29

Miech, Richard, Avshalom Caspi, Terrie Moffitt, Bradley Entner Wright, and Phil Silva. “Low
Socioeconomic Status and Mental Disorders: A Longitudinal Study of Selection and Causation
During Young Adulthood,” American Journal of Sociology, 104, 1999, 1096-1131.
Nagin, Daniel and Richard E. Tremblay. “Trajectories of Boys’ Physical Aggression,
Opposition, and Hypoeractivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Nonviolent Juvenile
Delinquency,” Child Development, 70, 1999, 1181-1196.
Offord, D., M. Boyle, P. Szatmari, N.I. Rae-Grant, P.S. Links, D.T. Cadman, J.A. Byles, J.W.
Crawford, H.M. Blum, C. Byrne, H. Thomas, and C.A. Woodward. “Ontario Child Health Study:
II. Six-month Prevalence of Disorder and Rates of Service Utilization,” Archives of General
Psychiatry, 1987, 44: 832-36.
Offord, D., M. Boyle, Y. Racine. “Ontario Child Health Study: Correlates of Disorder,” Journal
of the American Academy of Child Adolescence and Psychiatry, 1989, 28, pp.856-860.
Puzzanchera, Charles. “Self-Reported Delinquency by 12-Year-Olds, 1997,” Office of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention, U.S. Department of Justice, Fact Sheet #3, February 2000.
Romano, Elisa, Raymond Baillargeon and Richard Tremblay. “Prevalence of HyperactivityImpulsivity and Inattention Among Canadian Children: Findings from the First Data Collection
Cycle (1994-1995) of the National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth,”
(Ottawa, Canada: Applied Research Branch Strategic Policy, Human Resources Development
Canada) Final Report SP-561-01-03E, June 2002.
Sgro, M., Roberts, W., Grossman, S., Barozzino, T., “School Board Survey of Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: Prevalence of Diagnosis and Stimulant Medication Therapy,”
Paediatrics and Child Health, 2000, 5(1), pp.19-23.
Shaffer, D., P. Fisher, M.K. Dulcan, M. Davies, J. Piacentini et al. “The NIMH Diagnostic
Interview Schedule for Children Version 2.3 (DISC-2.3): Description, acceptability, prevalence
rates, and performance in the MECA Study. Methods for the Epidemiology of Child and
Adolescent Mental Disorders Study,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1996, 865-877.
Stage, Scott and David Quiroz. “A Meta-Analysis of Interventions to Decrease Disruptive
Classroom Behavior in Public Education Settings,” School Psychology Review, 1997, 26 #3,
333-368.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Mental Health: A Report to the Surgeon
General (Rockville: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services) 1999.
Wigal, Tim, James Swanson, Roland Regino, Marc Lerner, Ihab Soliman, Ken Steinhoff, Suresh
Gurbani, and Sharon Wigal. “Stimulant Medications for the Treatment of ADHD: Efficacy and
30

Limitations,” Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 5, 1999,
215-224.
Willms, J.D., editor, Vunerable Children, University of Alberta Press: Edmonton, Alberta, 2002.

31

0

Grade Repetition (post−94)
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25

.3

Grade Repetition − U.S.

0

5
BPI: Hyperactivity
BPI: Anxious/Depressed

10

15
BPI: Antisocial
BPI: Total
fi

0

Grade Repetition 2002
.1
.2
.3

.4

Grade Repetition-Canada

0

5
Combined Mental Score
Emotional Disorder

10

15
Hyperactivity
Aggression

.65

.7

In School (98−04)
.75
.8
.85

.9

.95

In School − U.S.

0

5
BPI: Hyperactivity
BPI: Anxious/Depressed

10

15
BPI: Antisocial
BPI: Total
fi

.4

In School Dummy 2002
.5
.6
.7
.8

.9

In School 16 to 19 Year Olds-Canada

0

5
Combined Mental Score
Emotional Disorder

10

15
Hyperactivity
Aggression

PIAT Math (98−04, Z scores)
−1 −.8 −.6 −.4 −.2 0
.2 .4

.6

Math − U.S.

0

5
BPI: Hyperactivity
BPI: Anxious/Depressed

10

15
BPI: Antisocial
BPI: Total
fi

-.6

Standardized Math Score 2002
-.4
-.2
0
.2

.4

Math-Canada

0

5
Combined Mental Score
Emotional Disorder

10

15
Hyperactivity
Aggression

PIAT Reading (98−04, Z scores)
−1 −.8 −.6 −.4 −.2 0
.2 .4

.6

Reading − U.S.

0

5
BPI: Hyperactivity
BPI: Anxious/Depressed

10

15
BPI: Antisocial
BPI: Total
fi

0

Special Education (98−04)
.05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3

.35

Special Education − U.S.

0

5
BPI: Hyperactivity
BPI: Anxious/Depressed

10

15
BPI: Antisocial
BPI: Total
fi

.3

Young Adult Delinquency (98−04)
.4
.5
.6

.7

Delinquency − U.S.

0

5
BPI: Hyperactivity
BPI: Anxious/Depressed

10

15
BPI: Antisocial
BPI: Total
fi

.3

Delinquency 2002
.4
.5

.6

Delinquency 16 to 19 Year Olds-Canada

0

5
Combined Mental Score
Emotional Disorder

10

15
Hyperactivity
Aggression

Table 1
Means Table for Sample of Children with All Behaviorial Scores Non-Missing
U.S.
Canada
Complete
Sibling
Sibling
Complete
Sibling
Sample
Sample Differences Sample
Sample
U.S./Canada Behavioral Scores (1994)
Total/Combined
6.837
6.833
2340
3.862
3.845
Hyperactivity
5.150
5.023
2300
4.648
4.404
Antisocial/Aggression
4.865
4.943
2291
1.439
1.504
Depressed/Emotional Disorder
4.529
4.553
2316
2.562
2.419
Outcomes
Young Adult Delinquency
0.462
0.459
888
0.368
0.359
Grade Repetition
0.081
0.083
348
0.096
0.082
In School
0.833
0.835
322
0.818
0.834
Standardized Math Score
0.034
0.007
1346
0.195
0.258
Standardized Reading Score
0.213
0.156
1340
Enrolled in Special Education
0.085
0.087
200
Robustness Covariates (1994)
Child Undergoing Any Treatment
0.093
0.094
337
0.045
0.042
Child Has Learning Disability
0.025
0.026
122
0.025
0.026
Other Covariates (1994)
Age of Child
8.114
8.129
7.310
7.273
Male Child
0.514
0.514
0.494
0.495
First Born Child
0.385
0.297
0.456
0.362
Permanent Income (/$100,000)
0.522
0.523
0.651
0.686
Mother Has Less than High School Education
0.223
0.225
0.211
0.186
Ln(Family Size)
1.434
1.525
1.429
1.495
Mother Teen at Child's Birth
0.039
0.044
0.042
0.027
Mother's Age at Child's Birth
24.854
24.762
27.476
27.551
Mother Depressed or Has Activity Limitation
0.232
0.223
0.156
0.146
Mother Is Immigrant
0.080
0.085
0.074
0.075
Two Parent Household
0.830
0.847
0.878
0.912
Number of children in sample
3758
2358
5604
2374

Sibling
Differences
2260
2040
1546
1820
152
280
106
412

176
116

We measure all behavioral scores, robustness covariates and other covariates in 1994 for Canadian data and over the
1990-1994 interval for U.S. data. Outcomes are measured in 2002 for Canadian data and over the 1998-2004 interval
for U.S. data (except for permanent income, which is averaged for both countries over all available years). For further
details on the definitions and constructions of these variables, see the Data Appendix.

Score
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 to 16

Table 2a
Distribution of Behavioral Scores (% of Children with Each Score)
Total/Combined
Hyperactivity
Antisocial/Aggression
Depressed/Emot. Dis.
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
0.93
1.00
11.63
10.30
8.30
43.18
17.03
24.52
2.34
8.12
6.17
11.71
13.84
22.84
4.34
18.72
3.19
14.10
7.13
11.22
8.14
12.92
7.53
15.95
5.06
24.18
9.90
10.76
7.45
7.74
7.00
11.92
8.46
21.32
10.40
9.92
12.59
4.93
18.65
8.74
11.12
13.95
6.95
8.64
8.99
3.48
9.50
6.28
15.43
7.48
13.60
9.08
7.82
2.44
7.69
5.30
15.22
4.84
7.08
7.73
11.07
1.09
11.20
3.23
11.26
2.57
11.15
6.51
5.96
0.59
5.30
2.57
10.24
0.00
4.60
4.39
4.39
0.32
4.15
1.20
6.17
1.34
4.28
3.14
4.66
0.20
3.62
0.64
4.63
0.50
3.17
2.11
2.63
0.15
1.57
0.29
2.90
0.36
1.92
1.28
1.57
0.12
1.57
0.37
1.17
0.16
1.30
1.23
1.68
0.00
0.48
0.18
1.86
0.09
0.72
1.98
0.91
0.00
0.37
0.10

Canadian children are assigned integer scores from 0 to 16. American children's scores have been scaled to fit in
this range, then rounded to the nearest integer for purposes of this table. For further details, see the Data Appendix.

Table 2b
Correlations between Behavioral Scores and Learning Disability in U.S. Sample
Learning
Total
Hyperactivity Antisocial Depressed
Disability
1.00
Total
0.80
1.00
Hyperactivity
0.78
0.57
1.00
Antisocial
0.77
0.52
0.49
1.00
Depressed
0.16
0.18
0.11
0.10
1.00
Learning Disability

Table 3
The Effects of Behavioral Scores on Various Outcomes: OLS vs. Fixed Effects
Young Adult
Standardized
Delinquency
Grade Repetition
In School
Math Score
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
OLS
Total/Combined Score
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Total/Combined Score
R2
N
OLS
Hyperactivity Score
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Hyperactivity Score

Standardized Special Ed.
Reading Score Education
U.S.
U.S.

0.016***
[4.88]
0.09
3204

0.023***
[4.13]
0.08
2185

0.007***
[3.97]
0.06
3566

0.019***
[7.86]
0.07
5594

-0.005**
[1.97]
0.12
2467

-0.007*
[1.78]
0.20
2493

-0.028***
[4.69]
0.22
2559

-0.019*
[1.66]
0.09
2293

-0.045***
[6.68]
0.19
2559

0.013***
[5.95]
0.06
2715

0.007
[0.88]
0.75
3226

0.019
[0.96]
0.93
2185

0.013***
[3.15]
0.69
3592

0.016***
[3.47]
0.86
5594

-0.005
[0.69]
0.80
2484

-0.008
[0.64]
0.95
2493

-0.047***
[3.59]
0.86
2577

-0.078**
[2.07]
0.94
2293

-0.047***
[3.22]
0.86
2577

0.013***
[2.76]
0.79
2736

0.010***
[3.85]
0.08
3204

0.010***
[3.34]
0.08
2278

0.005***
[3.43]
0.06
3566

0.013***
[9.95]
0.08
5822

-0.004
[1.56]
0.11
2468

-0.005**
[2.55]
0.20
2599

-0.032*** -0.024***
[6.26]
[3.91]
0.23
0.09
2558
2380

-0.044***
[7.72]
0.20
2558

0.012***
[6.20]
0.06
2716

0.006
[1.08]
0.75
3226

0.008
[0.79]
0.93
2278

0.008***
[2.67]
0.70
3591

0.010***
[4.69]
0.86
5822

-0.009
[1.60]
0.80
2485

-0.005
[0.88]
0.95
2599

-0.041*** -0.073***
[4.51]
[4.11]
0.86
0.94
2575
2380

-0.038***
[3.69]
0.86
2575

0.013***
[3.93]
0.79
2736

0.024***
[3.90]
0.08
2278

0.006***
[4.03]
0.06
3559

0.008***
[3.38]
0.06
5816

-0.005**
[2.09]
0.12
2465

-0.021**
[1.96]
0.09
2377

-0.031***
[5.38]
0.19
2554

0.008***
[4.46]
0.05
2709

0.034
[1.40]
0.93
2278

0.008***
[2.60]
0.70
3586

0.008
[1.79]
0.86
5816

-0.007
[1.20]
0.80
2482

-0.047
[1.40]
0.94
2377

-0.026**
[2.50]
0.86
2573

0.005
[1.37]
0.78
2731

R2
N
OLS
Antisocial/Aggression Score 0.015***
[5.52]
R2
0.09
N
3197
Fixed Effects
Antisocial/Aggression Score 0.010*
[1.73]
R2
0.75
N
3220

-0.014*** -0.018***
[3.21]
[3.43]
0.20
0.22
2598
2554
-0.034*
[2.35]
0.95
2598

-0.023**
[2.52]
0.86
2573

OLS
Depressed/Emot. Dis. Score 0.008***
[3.03]
2
R
0.08
N
3207
Fixed Effects
Depressed/Emot. Dis. Score -0.002
[0.27]
R2
0.75
N
3230
OLS
Total/Combined Score
0.004
[0.38]
Hyperactivity Score
0.002
[0.52]
Antisocial/Aggression Score 0.012**
[2.58]
Depressed/Emot. Dis. Score -0.001
[0.31]
R2
0.09
N
3181
Fixed Effects
Total/Combined Score
-0.010
[0.53]
Hyperactivity Score
0.007
[0.80]
Antisocial/Aggression Score
0.011
[1.39]
Depressed/Emot. Dis. Score -0.001
[0.15]
R2
0.75
N
3203

0.007*
[1.72]
0.07
2281

0.005***
[3.58]
0.06
3571

0.009***
[5.16]
0.06
5831

-0.004
[1.56]
0.12
2469

0.000
[0.06]
0.20
2603

-0.017***
[3.16]
0.22
2562

0.001
[0.10]
0.09
2386

-0.028***
[4.67]
0.19
2562

0.007***
[3.41]
0.05
2719

0.006
[0.41]
0.93
2281

0.008***
[2.64]
0.70
3598

0.006
[1.87]
0.86
5831

0.002
[0.41]
0.80
2486

-0.001
[0.12]
0.95
2603

-0.014
[1.37]
0.86
2581

0.039
[1.33]
0.94
2386

-0.017
[1.48]
0.86
2581

0.002
[0.40]
0.78
2741

0.016
[1.31]
0.004
[0.92]
0.014
[1.59]
-0.007
[1.39]
0.08
2185

-0.004
[0.79]
0.003
[1.08]
0.006**
[2.40]
0.004*
[1.65]
0.06
3540

0.010**
[2.12]
0.010***
[5.25]
-0.008**
[2.39]
0.001
[0.35]
0.08
5594

-0.002
[0.28]
0.000
[0.04]
-0.003
[0.83]
0.000
[0.02]
0.12
2459

0.004
[0.50]
-0.006*
[1.92]
-0.014**
[2.27]
0.006
[1.55]
0.20
2493

0.019
0.050**
[1.03]
[2.23]
-0.038*** -0.040***
[4.32]
[4.43]
-0.007
-0.029**
[0.82]
[1.98]
-0.006
0.008
[0.65]
[0.66]
0.23
0.10
2537
2293

0.020
[0.95]
-0.044***
[4.34]
-0.016*
[1.70]
-0.011
[1.06]
0.20
2537

0.009
[1.47]
0.007**
[2.38]
0.001
[0.24]
-0.004
[1.31]
0.06
2693

-0.063
[1.76]
0.012
[0.93]
0.065**
[2.50]
0.011
[0.83]
0.93
2625

-0.006
[0.62]
0.005
[1.26]
0.005
[1.29]
0.007
[1.64]
0.70
3565

0.003
[0.33]
0.009**
[2.44]
-0.003
[0.45]
0.001
[0.25]
0.86
5594

0.010
[0.53]
-0.012
[1.49]
-0.007
[0.90]
0.004
[0.46]
0.80
2476

0.033
[1.08]
-0.007
[0.70]
-0.047**
[2.01]
-0.004
[0.31]
0.95
2494

-0.012
[0.37]
-0.034**
[2.35]
-0.007
[0.53]
0.004
[0.27]
0.86
2554

-0.004
[0.10]
-0.032**
[1.98]
-0.010
[0.67]
-0.003
[0.17]
0.86
2554

0.008
[0.74]
0.012**
[2.18]
-0.002
[0.44]
-0.006
[1.08]
0.78
2713

0.051
[0.66]
-0.089***
[3.08]
-0.039
[0.82]
0.053
[1.57]
0.94
2293

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The absolute value of each t-statistic (clustered at the household level for OLS) is in brackets. Covariates included in
these regressions are the same as those in the OLS regressions shown in the Appendix.

Table 3a
The Persistence of Behavioral Scores: OLS vs. Fixed Effects
Young Adult
Standardized Standardized
Special
Delinquency Grade Repetition In School Math Score Reading Score Education
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
OLS
Total/Combined Score (90-94)
Total/Combined Score (98-04)
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Total/Combined Score (90-94)
Total/Combined Score (98-04)
R2
N

-0.002
[0.34]
0.024***
[5.47]
0.10
2337

0.000
[0.17]
0.011***
[4.22]
0.07
2662

0.011***
[2.71]
-0.023***
[5.67]
0.13
1743

-0.007
[0.94]
-0.040***
[5.26]
0.23
2485

-0.022***
[2.58]
-0.043***
[4.82]
0.20
2485

0.003
[0.88]
0.018***
[6.20]
0.08
2673

-0.004
[0.37]
0.01
[1.39]
0.81
2349

0.008
[1.44]
0.013***
[2.63]
0.76
2680

0.011
[1.15]
-0.023***
[2.62]
0.86
1754

-0.029**
[2.09]
-0.044***
[3.39]
0.86
2502

-0.036**
[2.30]
-0.030**
[2.06]
0.86
2502

0.004
[0.83]
0.023***
[4.85]
0.80
2692

Correlation between 1990-94 BPI scores
and 1998-2004 BPI scores
Total score
0.625
Hyperactivity
0.547
Antisocial
0.522
Anxious/Depressed
0.475

Table 3b
Behavioral Scores vs. Learning Disabilities
Young Adult
Delinquency
U.S.
Canada
OLS
Learning Disability
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Learning Disability
R2
N
OLS
Total/Combined Score
Learning Disability
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Total/Combined Score
Learning Disability
R2
N

Grade Repetition
U.S.
Canada

In School
U.S.
Canada

Standardized
Special
Standardized
Reading Score Education
Math Score
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
U.S.

-0.038
[0.70]
0.09
3203

0.005
[0.08]
0.07
2185

0.024
[0.64]
0.06
3565

0.158***
[4.12]
0.07
5594

0.028
[0.57]
0.12
2467

-0.10**
[2.30]
0.20
2493

-1.088***
[7.00]
0.25
2558

-0.83***
[5.12]
0.09
2293

-0.970***
[6.70]
0.21
2558

0.539***
[7.93]
0.13
2714

0.009
[0.11]
0.75
3225

-0.040
[0.21]
0.93
2185

0.004
[0.07]
0.69
3591

0.111**
[2.43]
0.86
5594

0.015
[0.20]
0.80
2484

-0.246**
[2.12]
0.95
2493

-0.743***
[3.33]
0.86
2576

-0.386
[0.80]
0.94
2293

-0.840***
[3.33]
0.86
2576

0.422***
[5.62]
0.79
2735

0.119***
[3.07]
0.017***
[6.97]
0.08
5594

-0.006**
[2.04]
0.028
[0.57]
0.12
2467

-0.084**
[1.99]
-0.01
[1.30]
0.20
2493

-0.023*** -0.795***
[3.85]
[4.82]
-1.088***
-0.01
[7.00]
[1.17]
0.25
0.09
2558
2293

-0.040***
[5.94]
-0.970***
[6.70]
0.21
2558

0.010***
[4.83]
0.539***
[7.93]
0.13
2714

0.082*
[1.77]
0.014***
[3.05]
0.86
5594

-0.006
[0.73]
0.024
[0.31]
0.80
2484

-0.240**
[2.03]
-0.003
[0.26]
0.95
2493

-0.044***
[3.43]
-0.684***
[3.08]
0.86
2576

-0.044***
[2.99]
-0.781***
[3.10]
0.86
2576

0.011**
[2.31]
0.406***
[5.40]
0.79
2735

0.016*** -0.056 0.007***
[4.92]
[0.93]
[3.83]
-0.038 0.025*** 0.024
[0.70]
[4.23]
[0.64]
0.09
0.08
0.06
3203
2185
3565
0.007
[0.87]
-0.002
[0.02]
0.75
3225

-0.077
[0.39]
0.021
[1.01]
0.93
2185

0.013***
[3.17]
-0.017
[0.32]
0.69
3591

-0.177
[0.36]
-0.075*
[1.93]
0.94
2293

Table 3c
Behavioral Scores vs. Chronic Conditions
Adult
Grade
In
Delinquency Repetition School
Canada
Canada
Canada
OLS
Chronic Conditions 1994
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Chronic Conditions 1994
R2
N
OLS
Chronic Conditions 1994
Combined Score 1994
R2
N
Fixed Effects
Chronic Conditions 1994
Combined Score 1994
R2
N

Standardized
Math Score
Canada

-0.010
[0.49]
0.07
2185

0.000
[0.06]
0.06
5594

0.00
[0.30]
0.20
2493

-0.03
[0.74]
0.09
2293

0.079
[1.02]
0.93
2185

0.036**
[2.18]
0.86
5594

0.012
[0.25]
0.95
2493

-0.143
[1.05]
0.94
2293

-0.015
[0.73]
0.024***
[4.17]
0.08
2185

-0.003
[0.31]
0.019***
[7.86]
0.07
5594

0.006
[0.38]
-0.01*
[1.80]
0.20
2493

-0.033
[0.73]
-0.02*
[1.66]
0.09
2293

0.081
[1.03]
0.020
[0.97]
0.93
2185

0.037**
[2.22]
0.016***
[3.50]
0.86
5594

0.012
[0.24]
-0.008
[0.63]
0.95
2493

-0.148
[1.10]
-0.079**
[2.09]
0.94
2293

Table 4
Fixed Effects Robustness Checks of the Effects on Behavioral Scores on Various Outcomes
Standardized
Special
Young Adult
Standardized
Reading Score Education
Delinquency
Grade Repetition
In School
Math Score
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
U.S.
Dropping Children Diagnosed
with Learning Disabilities
Total/Combined Score
R2
N
Excluding Treated Children
Total/Combined Score
R2
N
Assigning Treated Children
the 90th Percentile Score
Total/Combined Score
R2
N

Child
Delinquency
Canada

0.006
[0.81]
0.75
3141

0.015
[0.65]
0.93
2110

0.014***
[3.37]
0.71
3504

0.013***
[2.89]
0.87
5452

-0.005
[0.58]
0.81
2410

0.006
[0.41]
0.95
2401

-0.043*** -0.067*
[3.28]
[1.70]
0.86
0.94
2532
2272

-0.043***
[2.93]
0.86
2532

0.011**
[2.32]
0.78
2683

0.013
[0.72]
0.92
2260

0.010
[1.11]
0.62
1825

0.001
[0.02]
0.94
2046

0.007
[1.44]
0.55
2050

0.015***
[3.18]
0.87
5338

-0.012
[1.29]
0.71
1411

0.006
[0.41]
0.95
2337

-0.042*** -0.077**
[2.87]
[2.00]
0.80
0.94
1515
2231

-0.047***
[2.90]
0.80
1515

0.009*
[1.70]
0.67
1603

0.006
[0.31]
0.92
2219

0.005
[0.70]
0.75
3225

0.007
[0.31]
0.93
2185

0.010***
[2.60]
0.69
3591

0.014***
[3.11]
0.86
5594

-0.005
[0.74]
0.80
2484

-0.003
[0.24]
0.95
2493

-0.047*** -0.093**
[3.73]
[2.54]
0.86
0.94
2576
2293

-0.042***
[2.91]
0.86
2576

0.010**
[2.14]
0.79
2735

0.007
[0.38]
0.92
2283

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The absolute value of each t-statistic is in brackets.

Table 5
Interactions of Income and Mother's Education with Total/Combined Behavioral Score
Young Adult
Standardized Standardized Special Ed.
Reading Score Education
Delinquency
Grade Repetition
In School
Math Score
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S. Canada
U.S.
U.S.
OLS - Income
Income * Total/Combined Score
Total/Combined Score
Income
R2
N
Fixed Effects - Income
Income * Total/Combined Score
Total/Combined Score
R2
N
OLS - Mother Less than HS
Mother Less than HS * Total/Combined
Total/Combined Score
Mother Less than HS

-0.004
[0.56]
0.017***
[3.82]
0.034
[0.75]
0.09
3204

-0.017 -0.007*** -0.034***
[1.07]
[3.32]
[5.83]
0.034*** 0.011*** 0.040***
[3.02]
[4.35]
[7.81]
0.089
0.019
0.051**
[1.47]
[1.60]
[2.57]
0.08
0.06
0.08
2185
3566
5594

0.001
[0.35]
-0.006
[1.58]
0.052*
[1.85]
0.12
2467

0.005
[0.21]
-0.049***
[2.79]
0.86
2563

0.102
[0.85]
-0.131*
[1.79]
0.94
2293

-0.006**
[2.27]
0.016***
[5.34]
0.010
[0.69]
0.06
2715

-0.007
[0.24]
-0.043**
[2.19]
0.86
2563

-0.003
[0.34]
0.015**
[2.30]
0.79
2719

0.061
[0.96]
-0.024
[0.48]
0.93
2185

-0.005
[0.68]
0.015***
[2.80]
0.69
3572

-0.015
[0.99]
0.025**
[2.40]
0.86
5594

-0.005
[0.67]
0.017***
[4.60]
0.038
[0.66]
0.09
3204

0.017
[1.40]
0.019***
[2.84]
-0.064
[1.20]
0.08
2185

0.002
[0.50]
0.007***
[3.58]
0.053
[1.44]
0.06
3566

0.010*
0.004
-0.001
-0.002 0.022
[1.65]
[0.66]
[0.07]
[0.13]
[0.79]
0.016*** -0.007** -0.007 -0.027*** -0.024*
[6.42]
[2.26]
[1.60]
[4.10]
[1.85]
0.040 -0.117** -0.086** -0.237** -0.385***
[1.55]
[2.13]
[1.97]
[2.06]
[3.17]
0.07
0.12
0.20
0.23
0.09
5594
2467
2493
2559
2293

-0.005
[0.35]
-0.043***
[5.66]
-0.336***
[2.66]
0.20
2559

0.000
[0.05]
0.013***
[5.56]
0.029
[0.67]
0.06
2715

0.008
[0.19]
0.017
[0.69]
0.93
2185

-0.003
[0.37]
0.014***
[2.92]
0.69
3586

0.002
[0.24]
0.015***
[2.87]
0.86
5594

0.005
0.006 -0.090
[0.19]
[0.20]
[1.07]
-0.010 -0.048*** -0.056
[0.64]
[3.27]
[1.33]
0.95
0.86
0.94
2493
2573
2293

-0.029
[0.84]
-0.041**
[2.48]
0.86
2573

0.000
[0.01]
0.013**
[2.41]
0.79
2732

0.010
[0.79]
0.021***

0.003
[0.83]
0.006***

0.022*** 0.012**
0.001
-0.003 -0.010
[3.41]
[2.12]
[0.07]
[0.23]
[0.43]
0.014*** -0.011*** -0.007* -0.026*** -0.017

0.002
[0.14]
-0.045***

0.002
[0.32]
0.013***

-0.008
[0.49]
-0.003
[0.32]
0.80
2480

-0.03
[0.73]
0.012
[0.40]
0.95
2493

0.030**
[2.42]
-0.060***
[6.47]
0.061
[0.85]
0.20
2559

0.009
[0.60]
0.003
[0.29]
0.75
3209

R2
N
Fixed Effects - Mother Less than HS
Mother Less than HS * Total/Combined -0.030*
[1.77]
Total/Combined Score
0.015
[1.63]
R2
0.75
N
3221
OLS - Poverty
Poverty * Total/Combined Score
0.002
[0.26]
Total/Combined Score
0.015***

0.005
[0.40]
-0.008
[0.78]
0.80
2471

-0.010 0.022* 0.001
[0.82]
[1.66]
[0.04]
-0.001 -0.039*** -0.020
[0.10]
[4.55]
[0.92]
0.120*** 0.112 0.359***
[2.71]
[1.43]
[2.83]
0.20
0.22
0.09
2493
2559
2293

Poverty
R2
N
Fixed Effects - Poverty
Poverty * Total/Combined Score
Total/Combined Score
R2
N

[3.55]
0.028
[0.57]
0.09
3159

[3.34]
-0.069
[1.19]
0.08
2185

[2.65]
0.013
[0.50]
0.06
3517

-0.019
[1.28]
0.018
[1.64]
0.75
3164

-0.039
[0.49]
0.022
[1.05]
0.93
2185

0.000
[0.05]
0.012**
[2.16]
0.69
3523

[5.59]
[3.32]
[1.75]
-0.061** -0.135*** -0.018
[2.33]
[3.19]
[0.36]
0.08
0.12
0.20
5594
2431
2493
0.019
[1.64]
0.012**
[2.54]
0.86
5594

0.000
[0.00]
-0.004
[0.36]
0.80
2435

[3.46]
-0.105
[1.08]
0.23
2534

[1.22]
0.066
[0.56]
0.09
2293

-0.016 0.048* -0.109
[0.32]
[1.88]
[1.16]
-0.007 -0.071*** -0.057
[0.54]
[3.93]
[1.37]
0.95
0.86
0.94
2493
2538
2293

[5.18]
-0.174
[1.60]
0.20
2534

[4.98]
0.020
[0.62]
0.06
2686

0.064**
[2.25]
-0.079***
[3.88]
0.86
2538

-0.008
[0.83]
0.017**
[2.53]
0.78
2690

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The absolute value of each t-statistic (clustered at the household level for OLS) is in brackets.

Appendix Table 1
OLS: Effects of Total/Combined Behavorial Score on Various Outcomes
Young Adult
Standardized
Delinquency
Grade Repetition
In School
Math Score
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
U.S.
Canada
Total/Combined Score
0.016***
0.023***
0.007***
0.019***
-0.005**
-0.007*
-0.028***
-0.019*
[4.88]
[4.13]
[3.97]
[7.86]
[1.97]
[1.78]
[4.69]
[1.66]
Permanent Income (/$100,000)
0.013
0.030
-0.019**
-0.066***
0.061***
0.085***
0.230***
0.364***
[0.61]
[1.02]
[2.56]
[6.89]
[4.74]
[4.44]
[4.80]
[5.56]
Mother Is Immigrant
-0.042
0.061
-0.045*** -0.034***
0.073**
0.030
-0.031
0.018
[1.12]
[1.65]
[2.66]
[2.84]
[2.54]
[1.25]
[0.40]
[0.20]
Male Child
-0.073***
0.182***
0.031**
0.037***
0.033*
-0.030**
-0.463***
0.084**
[3.18]
[8.88]
[2.53]
[4.89]
[1.68]
[2.10]
[9.68]
[2.03]
First Born Child
0.052**
0.014
0.037***
-0.013
-0.035
0.038**
-0.330***
0.026
[2.01]
[0.58]
[2.83]
[1.49]
[1.64]
[2.33]
[6.52]
[0.56]
Ln(Family Size)
0.153***
0.072
0.034***
-0.012
-0.026*
-0.049
0.115***
-0.069
[9.05]
[1.37]
[3.96]
[0.55]
[1.81]
[1.23]
[3.49]
[0.61]
Two Parent Household
-0.092***
-0.036
-0.021**
-0.038**
0.054***
0.072**
0.159***
0.068
[4.85]
[0.98]
[2.17]
[2.12]
[3.29]
[2.47]
[4.34]
[0.89]
Mother's Age at Child's Birth
-0.091***
0.002
-0.023
-0.001
-0.002
-0.001
-0.066
0.018***
[3.28]
[0.73]
[1.25]
[0.89]
[0.06]
[0.39]
[0.97]
[3.45]
Child Born to Teenage Mother
-0.031
-0.095*
-0.039**
-0.016
0.054**
-0.040
0.060
0.040
[1.22]
[1.86]
[2.25]
[0.66]
[2.27]
[0.93]
[1.11]
[0.39]
0.004
-0.003
0.082***
0.009**
-0.089***
0.028***
-0.294***
Mother Has Less than High School Edu -0.010**
[2.20]
[0.17]
[1.36]
[6.52]
[2.42]
[4.40]
[3.41]
[5.62]
0.007
0.008
0.016
0.067
-0.035*
0.078
-0.077
Mother Depressed or Has Activity Limita -0.019
[0.40]
[0.26]
[0.26]
[1.28]
[1.59]
[1.69]
[0.52]
[1.31]
Black (U.S.)
0.007
0.083***
-0.088***
-0.338***
[0.31]
[5.59]
[4.11]
[7.16]
Hispanic (U.S.)
0.033
-0.003
-0.060***
-0.158***
[1.55]
[0.28]
[3.05]
[3.47]
Adult Respondent is Female (Canada)
0.066
0.016
-0.026
-0.313***
[1.54]
[1.07]
[1.05]
[2.99]
Imputation Dummy (Canada)
-0.055*
0.005
-0.033***
-0.020
[1.76]
[0.50]
[2.60]
[0.43]
Age 4
-0.293***
0.036
-0.048***
-0.066
[5.93]
[1.59]
[3.10]
[0.77]
Age 5
-0.232***
0.050**
-0.012
-0.011
0.001
[5.70]
[2.14]
[0.71]
[0.13]
[0.01]
Age 6
-0.177***
0.033
-0.002
0.083***
0.288***
-0.030
-0.144***
[4.61]
[1.59]
[0.14]
[3.05]
[10.41]
[0.39]
[2.60]

Standardized
Reading Score
U.S.
-0.045***
[6.68]
0.222***
[5.35]
-0.025
[0.28]
-0.378***
[6.75]
-0.104*
[1.74]
-0.040
[1.05]
0.270***
[6.65]
-0.116
[1.50]
0.082
[1.26]
0.022**
[2.31]
0.164
[0.62]
-0.451***
[7.76]
-0.112**
[2.02]

Special Ed.
Education
U.S.
0.013***
[5.95]
-0.023***
[3.27]
-0.043**
[2.19]
0.003
[0.18]
-0.004
[0.25]
0.058***
[5.45]
-0.025**
[2.05]
0.004
[0.16]
-0.026
[1.33]
0.000
[0.16]
-0.026
[0.43]
0.037**
[2.02]
0.031*
[1.81]

-0.036
[0.39]
-0.022
[0.24]
-0.026
[0.31]

0.043
[1.62]
0.042*
[1.72]
-0.001
[0.06]

Age 7
Age 8
Age 9
Age 10
Constant
R2
N

-0.117***
[3.20]
-0.086**
[2.45]
-0.076**
[2.32]
-0.075**
[2.28]
0.823***
[6.89]
0.09
3204

0.036
[0.35]
0.117***
[3.19]
0.121***
[3.46]
0.093***
[3.53]
-0.065
[0.53]
0.08
2185

-0.009
[0.46]
-0.016
[0.83]
-0.005
[0.29]
0.002
[0.10]
0.132**
[2.00]
0.06
3566

0.004
[0.26]
0.029
[1.59]
0.030*
[1.71]
0.030*
[1.83]
0.092**
[2.05]
0.07
5594

0.050*
[1.78]
-0.121***
[3.94]
0.023
[0.84]
-0.137***
[4.67]
0.617***
[5.79]
0.12
2467

0.335***
[8.12]
0.352***
[15.66]
0.315***
[13.23]
0.135***
[5.21]
0.680***
[7.70]
0.20
2493

0.019
[0.25]
-0.057
[0.79]
-0.040
[0.55]

0.221***
[3.79]
0.324*
[1.81]

-0.038
[0.46]
-0.037
[0.45]
-0.029
[0.37]

0.026
[1.20]
0.043*
[1.91]
-0.020
[1.01]

-0.353
[1.49]
0.22
2559

-0.122
[0.50]
0.09
2293

0.128
[0.47]
0.19
2559

-0.036
[0.48]
0.06
2715

* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The absolute value of each t-statistic (clustered at the household level) is in brackets.

