NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AFTER JOHNNY CAME MARCHING HOME:
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF VETERANS' BENEFITS IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
Sung Won Kang
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 13223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13223

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

We are very grateful for the comments on previous drafts that we received during presentations at
the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute (Cambridge, July 2006), the International
Economic History Meetings (Helsinki, August 2006), and the Southern Economic Association Meetings
(Charleston, November 2006). We owe a special debt to John James and Robert Whaples who were
the discussants on the latter occasion. Lloyd DeWitt Bockstruck and Lee Craig graciously took time
to answer questions about their areas of expertise. Daniel Fleisch and Adam Yaari provided thoughtful
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Sung Won Kang and Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

After Johnny Came Marching Home: The Political Economy of Veterans' Benefits in the Nineteenth
Century
Sung Won Kang and Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 13223
July 2007
JEL No. N11,N4
ABSTRACT
This paper explores new estimates of the number of veterans and the value of veterans' benefits -both cash benefits and land grants -- from the Revolution to 1900. Benefits, it turns out, varied substantially
from war to war. The veterans of the War of 1812, in particular, received a smaller amount of benefits
than did the veterans of the other nineteenth century wars. A number of factors appear to account for
the differences across wars. Some are familiar from studies of other government programs: the previous
history of veterans' benefits, the wealth of the United States, the number of veterans relative to the
population, and the lobbying efforts of lawyers and other agents employed by veterans. Some are less
familiar. There were several occasions, for example, when public attitudes toward the war appeared
to influence the amount of benefits. Perhaps the most important factor, however, was the state of the
federal treasury. When the federal government ran a surplus, veterans were likely to receive additional
benefits; when it ran a deficit, veterans' hopes for additional benefits went unfilled. Veterans' benefits
were, to use the terms a bit freely, more like a luxury than a necessity.
Sung Won Kang
Samsung Economic Research Institute
7th floor, Kukje Center Building
191, Hangangro 2-Ga, Youngsan-Gu
Seoul, Korea 140-702
sungwon90.kang@samsung.com
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
Rutgers University
College Avenue Campus
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@fas-econ.rutgers.edu

“let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him who
shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan,…”1
- Abraham Lincoln

1. Veterans' Benefits by War2
This paper compares veterans' benefits across America's nineteenth-century wars and
explores the determinants of the level of benefits. These comparisons are based on new estimates of
the number of pensions, the value of cash pensions, and the amount and value of land grants. The
amount of benefits, it turns out, varied substantially from war to war and depended on several factors
– the wealth of the United States, the previous history of veterans' benefits, the number of veterans
relative to the general population, lobbying by agents for the veterans, and so on. Perhaps the most
important factor, however, was the state of the federal treasury. Veterans’ benefits were, to use the
term somewhat freely, a luxury: When the federal treasury was in the black demands for additional
benefits were approved; when it was in the red demands for additional benefits were denied.
By veterans’ benefits we mean simply money or other assets paid to former members of the
armed forces. In many cases benefits were simply cash paid to a veteran, often in the veteran's old
age, or to the veteran's widow or children. In-kind benefits, however, were important in some cases.
Land grants were important before the Civil War. Old soldier's homes, as they were termed, have
been important since the Civil War, although facilities for retired army and naval personnel were
established earlier. Health care provided through the veterans system has been important since the
First World War, although military hospitals were sometimes pressed into service even earlier.

1

From Lincoln's second inaugural, this statement became the motto of the Veterans Department.

2

The idea for this paper emerged from a conversation that one of us had many years ago with Lawrence Fisher of
Rutgers University, Newark.

3

Educational benefits were first provided, as far as we are aware, for veterans of World War I and
became famous with the GI bill for veterans of World War II. Veterans have also been the
beneficiaries of veterans' preference laws that give veterans a leg up in the pursuit of civil service
jobs. Private firms could also introduce a preference for veterans. Here we will focus on the
amounts spent by the federal government for cash payments and the amount and value of the land
grants. Although it is hard to be certain, we believe that our totals include the great bulk of benefits
paid to America's veterans in the nineteenth century.
Since benefits were paid after, sometimes long after, a war ended and the veteran returned to
civilian life, we will use present values to compare veterans' benefits of different wars. In effect, we
are asking what the value would be of a bond given to each veteran at the end of the war that would
have produced income equal to the benefits the veteran later received. As soon as one begins to
calculate present values, of course, various questions arise: what discount rate should be used, how
money paid to widows and children should be counted, and so on. We address these questions by
computing variants, for example by using alternative discount rates. As it turns out, the broad
differences to which we draw attention do not depend on the way present values are calculated.

2. What Explains the Level of Benefits?
In many cases veterans' benefits were simply deferred pay. When soldiers volunteered or were
drafted they were promised a reward after the war. The contract might have been explicit or implicit:
Retirement benefits might have been part of the recruitment package; but even when there was no
explicit promise soldiers might have assumed that they would be rewarded after the war simply
because legislation rewarding veterans was passed after previous wars.

4

Sometimes there is more to veterans' benefits, however, than deferred pay. We also reward
veterans to express our gratitude for the risks they have taken and the hardships they have suffered.
The analogy with gratuities paid for more mundane services, although it may be unpleasant to think
about it in these terms, is apt. We often give a gratuity because it is part of the pay for the services
rendered, but sometimes we give a larger gratuity to reward extraordinary service. Sometimes we
use military language to describe a civilian gratuity: we reward someone generously because they
“went beyond the call of duty.” In the nineteenth century civilian language was used, on occasion,
to describe veterans' benefits: Veterans' benefits were referred to as the “veterans' gratuity.” George
Washington referred to the distinction between deferred pay and gratuities in a circular letter to the
governors defending the pension awarded his officers. The pension was part of their hire, "…it was
the price of their blood, and of your independency; it is therefore more than a common debt, it is a
debt of honor; it can never be considered as a pension or gratuity, nor be cancelled until it is fairly
discharged."3
The decision to reward veterans was always a contentious political decision that was
influenced by a number of factors. We will discuss these factors in this section in general terms and
then apply them to the cases that follow. Most of these forces can be grouped under six headings:
(1) The previous history of veterans' benefits. Veterans' benefits are a good example of a
path-dependent process. The amount veterans received after the last war produces a strong
gravitational force. If veterans of the last war received $100 per month starting at age 62, a strong
presumption is established that veterans of the next war should get same pension. If they receive less,
they have a strong basis for claiming that they have been treated unfairly. If they receive more, they
can be criticized for being greedy, and the way is opened for veterans of previous wars who can
demand more benefits based on equity.
3

Quoted in Glasson (1918, 43).

5

This does not mean that benefits inevitably ratchet upward. At times benefit systems have
come under heavy criticism. Perhaps after the last war benefits were extended to individuals with
dubious claims to service. Or perhaps benefits were extended through "pension marriages" – aged
veterans marrying young women so the women and their children could receive a pension after the
veterans died. If so, there may be a reaction in the form of stricter eligibility requirements when the
next set of veterans ask for benefits. As with other path-dependent processes, the accidents of history
may shape the course of events. The occupant of the White House might be important: A former
military officer, for example, might be more sympathetic to veterans.
(2) Secular changes in national wealth. As the United States has grown richer it has been
able to reward its veterans more generously. Indeed, for some purposes it makes more sense to
measure benefits relative to national wealth when comparing benefits across wars. In other words,
the right question might be whether veterans of one war received more or less relative to wealth in
their era compared with veterans of another war.
(3) The number of veterans. The number of veterans is an important determinant of their
political influence. As usual, numbers cut two ways. A larger number of veterans means that
veterans (and their families) have more votes to offer politicians who support higher benefits. On the
other hand, a larger number of veterans means that taxes have to be raised in order to pay for higher
benefits, or that the benefits provided other citizens have to be cut. Either decision involves heavy
political costs. It may be possible to provide a small number of veterans with higher benefits without
raising taxes to the point that the increase is visible to tax payers.
(4) The effectiveness of individuals and organizations working on behalf of veterans. After
every war veterans have joined new or existing veterans' organizations that have lobbied on their
behalf. The effectiveness of those organizations and their leaders has played a role in determining

6

the level of benefits. At times lawyers, or other paid agents of veterans have carried out important
lobbying efforts, hoping to profit if they win additional benefits for veterans.
(5) Public attitudes towards the war. How much did the veterans actually suffer during the
war? How much did they accomplish? How just was the war? Our first reaction is that the answers to
these questions should not matter: all veterans should be well treated. But as we will show below,
the answers to these questions did influence the level and timing of benefits.
(6) The state of the federal treasury. If the treasury is running a surplus, and more surpluses
are in the offing, the demands of veterans can be met easily; if the treasury is running a deficit, and
more deficits are in the offing, veterans will find the road to higher pensions difficult. The crucial
thing, of course, is how the public and the politicians view the state of the treasury. The same budget
will look very different to politicians who hold a balanced budget sacrosanct than to politicians who
believe a deficit is a good way of assuring full employment.
The state of the treasury will be more important when benefits are paid from general
revenues. In the early part of the nineteenth century some naval benefits were paid from a fund
derived from the sale of captured foreign merchant ships and their cargoes. This method of finance
changes the role of the taxpayer. Naval pensions and the role of the Naval Prize Fund are discussed
in detail in Clark, Craig, and Wilson (2003). Most nineteenth century veterans, however, were army
veterans, so the state of the treasury was the key factor. In the antebellum period the federal
government's and the states’s "land budgets" were often as important as fiscal budgets.4 There were
times when generous grants of land could be made to veterans even when cash grants seemed
difficult; in other words times when governments were land rich and cash poor.
Veterans’ benefits, we will argue, can be characterized like consumer spending. Benefits to
compensate veterans who were injured in the course of the war are analogous to necessities: The
4

Grubb (2005) stresses the importance of land to the "net asset" position of the United States.

7

government will pay without regard to the current state of the budget. Old-age pensions, however,
were like luxuries: The government would “buy” them provided its income was high enough relative
to its expenditures.
These six factors have often been cited in previous studies of veterans benefits in the
nineteenth century such as Bodenger (1971), Oberly (1990), Skocpol (1992), Resch (1999), Teipe
(2002), Clark, Craig, and Wilson (2003), and the classic with which all other studies of nineteenthcentury pensions begin, Glasson (1918). We cannot claim, therefore, that our analysis, including our
emphasis the state of the federal treasury, is unprecedented. Indeed, any explanation of something as
important as veterans' benefits that was based on an entirely new set of explanatory factors would be
highly suspect. Rather, our claim is that we have sharpened the existing portrait of the political
economy veterans' benefits and established more rigorously some of the empirical generalizations
already in the literature by developing and exploring data on the number and value of cash pensions
and land grants. We will begin by comparing cash pensions awarded to veterans of the antebellum
wars.

3. Service Pensions for Veterans of the Antebellum Wars
Figure 1 compares the present discounted value of the cash benefits received by veterans for service
in the Revolution, the War of 1812, and the Mexican War. In each case we deflated the annual
amount spent on a pension by a cost of living index (Historical Statistics 2006, series Cc2),
discounted the resulting series back to the end of the war at three percent or six percent, 5 and
divided by the number of soldiers and sailors who served in the war (Table 1). Evidently, the

5

Over the years 1798 to 1860 the yield on U.S. long-term bonds averaged (in years when it is available) 5.71
percent; the yield on New England municipals averaged 5.11 (Historical Statistics 2006, series Cj1192, Cj1194).

8

veterans of the War of 1812 received substantially less than did the veterans of the Revolution or the
Mexican War. The difference between the benefits when discounted at three percent and when
discounted at six percent points to the important role of timing: The veterans of the War of 1812 do
relatively better when a low rate of discount is used.
A natural if somewhat cynical conclusion that follows from Figure 1 is that it is the
difference in the success of American arms that explains the difference in benefits. America won the
Revolutionary War and the Mexican War – indeed America won great empires in these wars – but
lost, or at least accomplished very little, in the War of 1812. This interpretation, we argue below in
more detail, may have an element of truth to it, although another, perhaps more important factor, the
state of the federal treasury, was also at work: Veterans of the Revolution benefited from periods of
treasury surpluses, while veterans of the War of 1812 came due for their pension when the budget
was in deficit.
In terms of nominal amounts, the idea that veterans of a given war should be given what
veterans of the proceeding war were given worked to an unusual extent in the nineteenth century.
The standard rate of $8 per month did not change from 1818 to 1903. Some variation in the real
value of pensions was introduced, as shown in Figure 2, by movements in prices and wages. It is
evident, however, that price movements were not a major source of the differences revealed by
Figure 1. Thus, the main factor behind the differences in Figure 1 was the time that veterans had
to wait for their service pensions.
One way to highlight the role of timing is to calculate the pensions of a hypothetical
standardized veteran. Consider a private or noncommissioned officer, who (1) survived a war
without a disability entitling him to a pension, who (2) was eligible for a service pension when it
became available, who (3) lived for 70 years after the war, and who (4) left no dependents. Although

9

hypothetical, these calculations provide a picture of the relative size of the pensions; both in terms of
what the legislators had in mind, and in terms of what the veterans ultimately received. When we do
this we find that our hypothetical long-lived veteran of the Revolution would have received a service
pension worth $64 in 1860$s, our hypothetical veteran of the War of 1812 would have received $27,
and our hypothetical veteran of the Mexican War would have received $143. These figures are
higher than the estimates in Figure 1 that reflect the actual experience of the veterans, but the
ordering is similar. Evidently, the Veterans of the War of 1812 received less in large part because
they had to wait so long for their service pensions. We therefore need to look at the history of how
and when these benefit programs were established to explain why the veterans of the War of 1812
did less well than the veterans of the other antebellum wars.

4. Service Pensions: The Revolutionary War
The Revolutionary War was no exception to the rule that debate over veterans' benefits starts
with what was awarded to veterans of the last war. English and colonial practice was to pay
compensation to all soldiers who were injured and unable to work, but to pay service pensions
only to officers. Legislation promising compensation for Revolutionary soldiers was passed soon
after the Revolution began. The rate for privates and noncommissioned officers was $5.00 per
month.6 Pensions for widows and orphans of officers were also well accepted. One of the first
awards, in April 1777, was to the youngest son of General Mercer who died in the Battle of
Princeton. All told, General Mercer’s youngest son would receive $3,876, perhaps $1.6 million
6

A crude estimate of daily wages of unskilled labor during the Revolution varies between $.40 and $.56. So $5.00
represents what an unskilled laborer could earn in 9 to 13 days: a small sum to live on, but an important supplement
for veterans who had other sources of income. Wages during the Revolution were estimated by using an index
money wages for unskilled labor available during the Revolution (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ba4218) to
backdate daily wages for unskilled labor in Philadelphia (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ba4219), a series that first
becomes available in 1785.

10

in today’s money (2004) using the wages of unskilled labor as an inflator (U.S. Senate 1877;
Williamson 2004).
But the officers' demand for half-pay for life, although based on current British practice,
proved highly controversial. At first Washington opposed the idea of half pay on the grounds that it
would be too expensive; but when conditions in the army deteriorated in 1777-78, and officers began
returning home, Washington changed his mind and supported half-pay for life. In May 1778
Congress promised half pay, although only for seven years, for officers who served until the end of
the war, and $80 mustering out pay (one year's pay) for common soldiers, about $33,000 in today's
money (2004) using the wages of unskilled labor as an inflator (Williamson 2004). In October 1780
Congress, under pressure from the officers and from Washington, increased the offer to officers to
half pay for life for those who served until the end of the war.
The story, however, was not to end so happily for the officers. Early in March 1783 the
officers with the American army at Newburgh, New York became increasingly anxious about
whether arrears of pay and the commitment to half-pay for life would be fulfilled once a treaty of
peace was signed. On March 10, 1783 an anonymous letter appeared urging the officers not to lay
down their arms and disband until their demands for back pay and pensions were met: the famous
"Newburgh Conspiracy." Washington met this challenge by calling a general meeting of the officers
on March 15. At that meeting Washington addressed his men and assured them that Congress would
fulfill its promises. The story goes that during the speech Washington began to read a letter from
Congress and said "you will permit me to put on my spectacles, for I have not only grown gray but
almost blind in the service of my country."7 Supposedly his officers, some of whom did not know

7

Flexner (1984 [1974], 168-178) provides a clear and moving account of the conspiracy. Historians are not agreed
on how far the plotters were really prepared to go. In an interesting exchange in the William and Mary Quarterly,
Richard H. Kohn (1970) argued that it was a full blown conspiracy; a position strongly disputed by Edward C.
Skeen (1974).

11

that he wore glasses, were so overcome with emotion that they began to cry. On March 22, with the
threat quashed, and the budget once more on the front burner, Congress passed the "Commutation
Act," which promised former officers cash or interest bearing securities amounting at face value to
full pay for five years in lieu of half-pay for life.8 About 2,500 officers received securities under the
Act (Bodenger 1971, 21).
The events in Newburgh made up the most extreme case of a conflict between the claims of
the veterans and the state of the federal treasury. Indeed, Flexner (1984 [1974], 177) claims that the
meeting on March 15 "was probably the most important single gathering ever held in the United
States." But the conflict was to be repeated in some form after every war in the nineteenth century.
The fear of the officers that Congress would fail to pay them once their services were no
longer needed proved well-founded. Under the Confederation the government failed to pay interest
on the commutation bonds. Eventually, these debts were assumed by the federal government under
Hamilton's plan for reorganizing the debt. Indeed, they were the largest part of the debt assumed by
the federal government. In the meantime, however, many officers and enlisted men had sold their
securities to investors at heavy discounts. E. James Ferguson (1954) studied what happened in
Maryland, the state with the best-preserved records, and found that about 52 percent of the securities
issued to Maryland's soldiers had been acquired by the State of Maryland because they could be used
to satisfy state debts. Of the 48 percent that remained in private hands about 82 percent had been
transferred to private investors at a price that might have been, according to Ferguson (1954, 41), 20
to 40 cents on the dollar. The officers continually petitioned Congress for additional compensation.
And in 1818 officers in "reduced circumstances" received a pension of $20 per month, about $4,200
per month in today's money (2004) using the wages of unskilled labor as the inflator (Williamson

8

The par value of the commutation bonds equaled half pay for 16 years discounted at 6 percent.

12

2004). This was, as we will explain below, a period of extraordinary federal budget surpluses.
Finally, in 1828, the surviving officers were granted full pay for the remainder of their lives.
There was no precedent, as far as we are aware, in the American experience for a service
pension for privates or noncommissioned officers. It was natural, however, in a new nation that took
democracy seriously that privates and noncommissioned officers would feel they deserved a pension,
and would be viewed as deserving by the public. In their case the pension received by the officers
was the precedent. The enlisted men, moreover, could point to the same failures on the part of
Congress to live up to its promises, as could the officers. Congress had paid in Continental dollars
that had depreciated rapidly, and sometimes had failed to pay altogether. True, Congress had given
the enlisted men interest-bearing securities for the arrears in pay and for the $80 bonus, but Congress
had failed to pay interest on these securities, as it had on the securities given to the officers.
In the years following the War of 1812, moreover, the state of the federal treasury was
promising for the passage of a service pension for veterans of the Revolution.9 The United
States ran large deficits during the War of 1812; in 1816 and 1817, however, the treasury ran
large surpluses, as can be seen in Figure 3. The surplus was 56 percent (measured as a
percentage of expenditures) in 1816, and 52 percent in 1817 (Historical Statistics 2006, series
Ea584, Ea585). The surpluses were temporary, the result of a postwar surge in imports that
produced increased tariff revenues. One result, nevertheless, was an important piece of veterans'
legislation. The law of 1818, mentioned above in connection with the officers, also provided a
pension of $8 per month for privates and noncommissioned officers who had served nine months
during the Revolution and were now in "reduced circumstances." As can be seen in Figure 3,
spending on pensions ratcheted upward as a result. Spending on pensions under the law of 1818

9

The following two paragraphs are based on John Resch (1999).

13

significantly exceeded compensation for wounded veterans including those wounded in the War
of 1812 and for the dependents of soldiers and sailors who died while in service (the lowest line
in Figure 3).
The new law was soon in trouble. The War Department was overwhelmed with
applications and it was clear that many veterans were misrepresenting their resources. The
widely discussed case of Ebenezer Huntington, a wealthy former officer from Connecticut who
had managed to get a pension, personified the corruption. The problem even reached into the
War Department where bureaucrats enrolled veterans whose assets exceeded the Department's
standards. The treasury surpluses, moreover, disappeared soon after the law of 1818 took effect:
In 1820 the deficit was two percent of expenditures, and in 1821, eight percent of expenditures
(Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea585). Congress responded to the public's outrage
over corruption in the pension system and the deterioration in the budget by striking all of the
veterans from the rolls and requiring that they reapply. In the summer of 1820 Americans
watched in fascination as veterans of the Revolution mustered prior to presenting their
applications. Old soldiers shouldered their crutches as they had once shouldered their muskets.
The effect of the re-enrollment amendment shows up clearly in Figure 3 as a sharp contraction in
net expenditures in 1821.10
The 1820 amendment, and its vigorous enforcement by Secretary of War John C.
Calhoun and the head of the pension bureau James L. Edwards, put an end to the scandals and
saved the program. Now public attention shifted from men who had been unfairly added to the
rolls to men who had been unfairly excluded. There were many possible inequities. A veteran
who had gone into debt to buy property on the expectation of a pension might now be denied a
10

Our estimates of net expenditure are the differences between warrants issued and repayments. Since repayments
could be based on warrants issued in previous years, our estimate of zero net expenditure in fiscal 1821 is consistent
with some veterans receiving payments from the government.

14

pension on the grounds that his gross assets (one of the criteria used by the War Department)
were too high. A veteran who deeded his property to his children in exchange for long-term care,
a common practice, would qualify for a pension; a veteran in similar circumstances who kept
title to his assets would not. The budget, moreover, having recovered from the effects of the
Panic of 1819, was now solidly in the black: the surplus was about 30 percent of expenditures in
1822 and 1823 (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea585). In 1823, therefore, Congress
allowed veterans to submit amended applications. Veterans were now free to restate their assets
in a way that met War Department standards. The 1823 amendment does not seem to have left a
strong imprint on the pension rolls (Table A1 column 4), but it does illustrate the willingness of
Congress to address inequities provided the budget was favorable.
Pressure now began to build for a non-means-tested pension and a reduction in the required
term of service. The legislation of 1828, mentioned above, that awarded officers who served until the
end of the war full pay for life, made a similar award to privates and noncommissioned officers who
had enlisted in the Continental Army and served until the end of the war. This law, however,
pensioned few soldiers.
With this precedent on the books, however, it is easy to see why pressure then built to expand
benefits further. Veterans who had served, but not until the end of the war, or who had served in
state or local militias rather than the Continental Army, now had a basis for claiming a pension. In
his first State of the Union Message in 1829 Andrew Jackson, a hero of the War of 1812 and the
Indian Wars, advocated extending benefits to the militia who served in the Revolution, although only
when a veteran "… is unable to maintain himself in comfort."11 Legislation passed in the House, but
stalled in the Senate. Among those opposed to increased benefits was Senator Robert Y. Hayne of
11

Andrew Jackson, State of the Union Message, December 8, 1929. The American Presidency Project:
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/, accessed June 12, 2007.

15

South Carolina. Hayne pointed out, among other things, that there was a connection between the
protective tariff – the famous "Tariff of Abominations" had been passed in 1828 – and veterans'
pensions. To increase the pension rolls was to delay the day when tariffs could be reduced (Glasson
1918, 77-78). In 1832, however, despite opposition from men like Hayne, legislation was passed that
provided full pay for life to all veterans without regard to their economic or physical status who had
served for two years in the regular army, the navy, or (significantly) the militias. Those who had
served for shorter periods received proportionately less.
As can be seen in Figure 4, the Act of 1832 was passed during a run of years when the
federal budget was in surplus, and following two years of record surpluses. Indeed, the surplus had
been larger, measured as a percentage of expenditures, in only two proceeding years (Historical
Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea585). Spending on Revolutionary pensions increased as a result of
the legislation. The amounts of additional spending, however, were relatively small, although the
effect on the surplus was not negligible. Fifty years had passed since the end of the war, and the
number of eligible veterans had been greatly reduced. Nevertheless, an important precedent had been
established. From this time onward veterans could claim that equity with veterans of the Revolution
required that they be given a pension based on service alone when they reached an advanced age.
Shortly after passing this bill, which increased the need for long-term taxes, Jackson signed the tariff
legislation that led to the Nullification Crisis.
The Revolutionary War also set the precedent for pensioning widows. During the war the
widows of soldiers or sailors killed in battle were pensioned, a colonial tradition. But under the Act
of July 4, 1836 widows who were married before 1794 to revolutionary officers, soldiers, seamen,
and marines were made eligible for a pension. Thus, to put it somewhat differently, women who had
married a non-commissioned officer or soldier who had survived the war became eligible for a

16

pension. The effect of the pensioning of widows, orphans, and other dependents can be seen in
Figure 4 as the opening of the gap after 1836 between total expenditures and Act of 1832
expenditures. This law was a remarkable break with colonial tradition. At the peak over 9,000
widows and other dependents would be on the rolls (Table A1 column 5). Pensioning the widows of
ordinary soldiers and seamen who had survived the war set a dominant precedent: The widows of
veterans of all future wars would be pensioned.
An attempt was made at about this time to pension the veterans of various engagements with
Native Americans that had taken place in the years immediately following the Revolution (U.S.
House 1836). This effort ran into opposition based on the political morality of the war. It was
contended that the Indian Wars were different from the Revolution – they were carried on by private
individuals with the goal of private gain. The veterans of the Indian Wars, as they were known,
would have to wait for their pensions.
Legislation in March 1837 directed the Navy Pension Fund to pay the widows and orphans
who were now eligible for a pension from the time of the veteran's death. This legislation, according
to Clark, Craig, and Wilson, although passed when the Navy Pension Fund appeared to be in good
financial shape, doomed it. In a few years the fund was gone (2003, 58-60). Clark, Craig, and
Wilson are probably right that the increase in benefits for veterans was partly due to the attempt to
build up the navy because of the tensions with Britain over the U.S. boundary with Canada. And
Theda Skocpol is probably right that the expansion of the franchise made it more important
politically to pension the widows of ordinary soldiers and sailors (1993, 92). However, the
pensioning of the widows and orphans is also consistent with a simple fiscal theory of the pensions:
Fiscal 1836 saw the last and largest in a series of surpluses. The federal budget would go into deficit
after the Panic of 1837.

17

Time soon took its toll. By 1848 little more than 3,000 widows remained on the rolls (Table
A1, column 5). An act of July 29, 1848 pensioned widows who were married before January 1800.
In other words it pensioned women who had married veterans between 1794 (the cutoff under the
law of 1836) and 1800. This amendment, a subsequent amendments along the same lines, produced
small increases in the number of widows on the rolls.
As we have seen, Revolutionary War Veterans had to wait 35 years (1783 to 1818) for a
means-tested service pension, and 45 years (1783 to 1828) for a non-means-tested service pension.
Given that the precedent of an old-age pension had been established and that the United States had
grown richer one might have expected that the veterans of the War of 1812 would have received
their old-age pension in fewer years. In 1845, 30 years after the end of the War of 1812, for example,
real per capita income was 30 percent higher than it was in 1818 when the Revolutionary War
Pension was created (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ca11). However, this was not to be. Veterans
of the War of 1812 would have to wait longer for their service pensions even though the country had
grown richer.
Before exploring the cash pensions received by the veterans of the War of 1812 and
subsequent wars, however, we need to look at the land grants made to veterans of the Revolution and
subsequent wars. As Farley Grubb (2005) has recently argued, it is a mistake to look solely at cash
expenditures, because land was an important part of the government's "net asset position." It is
possible that including land grants would alter our conclusion that the veterans of the War of 1812
did badly compared with the veterans of other nineteenth-century wars. The land grant story,
however, reinforces the cash pension story.

18

5. Land Grants
Land grants for military service were a long-standing colonial tradition.12 Land was awarded, for
example, to soldiers who had participated in the Pequot War in 1637. Maryland awarded land in
1645 for help in suppressing the rebellion led by the pirate Richard Ingle. Land was also awarded to
the veterans of King Philip's War in 1675-76. The French and Indian War of 1754-1763 provided the
immediate precedent for the Revolutionary land grants. The war began in the west with the
campaigns in which George Washington took part. A proclamation by Governor Dinwiddie of
Virginia issued in 1754 authorized land grants to soldiers who participated. At the conclusion of the
War, George III's Royal Proclamation of 1763 rewarded veterans with 50 to 5,000 acres depending
on their rank.13
The reliance of colonial authorities on land grants is easily understood. As Paul Wallace
Gates put it in his magisterial History of Public Land Law Development, America in that era was
“long on land and short on money” (Gates 1968, 249). It was natural, therefore, that America would
reward veterans of the Revolution with land grants. The earliest offer came in 1776, but ironically it
was an offer of 50 acres to British soldiers who deserted (Gates 1968, 251). To make sure that the
offer reached the Hessians, it was printed in German on the backs of tobacco wrappers (Hibbard
1965 [1924], 118).

12

The examples in this paragraph are drawn from the "Introduction" to Lloyd DeWitt Bockstruck's forthcoming
volume on bounty and donation land grants in British North America. We thank Dr. Bockstruck for making the
Introduction available to us prior to publication.
13

The Proclamation can be read at http://www.ushistory.org/declaration/related/proc63.htm. (Accessed Friday, May
25, 2007).

19

Both the Continental Congress and the states made grants. The grants made by the
Continental Congress went to veterans of the Continental Army; the grants made by the states went
to veterans of their militias and as supplemental grants to their citizens who served in the Continental
Army. The southern states were especially generous. Virginia, the most populist state and the one
with the most western land, steadily increased its bounties during the course of the war as it became
harder and harder to enlist men. Toward the end of the war ordinary soldiers and sailors were
promised 300 acres and a slave to work the land. North Carolina made the largest grants. Under a
law of 1780 the North Carolina scale started with 640 acres for privates and 1000 acres for
noncommissioned officers.
The rewards to officers, in many cases, were far more generous than the rewards for enlisted
men. The Continental Congress gave brigadier generals 850 acres and major generals 1,100 acres.
North Carolina added 12,000 for both brigadier and major generals, but rewarded Major General
Nathaniel Greene, the hero of the Revolution in the South, with a “little dukedom,” as one Tennessee
legislator put it, of 25,000 acres (Gates 1968, 252-53). Virginia added an additional 10,000 acres for
brigadier generals and 15,000 for major generals. Virginia granted Major General Charles Lee,
16,875 acres, Brigadier General Daniel Morgan, 23,328 acres, and Major General Horatio Gates, 31,
000 acres (Bockstruck 1996, 196, 308, 376).14 Washington undoubtedly could have had an enormous
amount of land. He refused, however, to accept any land for his service during the Revolution, even
though his personal economy depended on the extensive lands awarded to him for his service in the
French and Indian War (Flexner 1984 [1974], 53-54, 194). The Northern states made smaller
distinctions among ranks. Whereas Virginia gave privates 300 acres and major generals 15,000, a
ratio of 50 to one; New York gave privates 500 acres and major generals 5,500, a ratio of 11 to one
14

The area of the island of Manhattan is about 13,000 acres; the borough, which includes some water and adjacent
islands, is about 22,000 acres.

20

(Gates 1968, 252). The states with large claims on western lands were, of course, in a position to
reward their veterans generously. The expectation that those claims might have to be surrendered to
the central government simply added another incentive to reward their own citizens generously.
Although the veterans of the Revolution were promised a great deal of land, its monetary
value is difficult to estimate, and may not have been very great. Some preliminary efforts to
distribute federal land were made in the mid-1780s, but it was not until 1796 that a military track
in Ohio was made available where small holders could exercise their warrants (Gates 1968, 259).
In the meantime most veterans had sold their warrants to speculators. The largest of the
speculators in federal warrants was the New Jersey politician Jonathan Dayton who acquired
90,936 acres by buying warrants (Gates 1968, 260). The story of how land was distributed by the
states varied from state to state, but the tendency for veterans to experience long delays and to
sell their warrants to speculators and developers was the norm.
The policy of rewarding soldiers with land grants continued after the Revolution. Texas,
as might be expected based on its vast acreages, made generous grants. The Texas constitution of
1836 promised families who were loyal to the state "a League and Labor" of land, 4606 acres;
single men over the age of 17 were promised a third of a league, 1,476 acres. An act of
December 21, 1837, awarded 640 acres to veterans who had participated in various engagements
during the Texas War of Independence such as the Goliad campaigns of 1835 and 1836, and the
battle of the Alamo.15
Initially, veterans of the War of 1812 who served in the regular army received bounties of
160 acres; an amount that was raised to 320 acres toward the end of the war (Hickey 1989, 243-44).
About 29,000 of the 60,000 regulars took them up. There were, however, several problems with the

15

See Land Grants in The Handbook of Texas Online;
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/LL/mpl1.html, accessed 6/28/2007.

21

grants from the point of view of the veterans. First, the grants were located in a few restricted
western areas, in part because it was hoped that the veterans would be a buffer against Native
Americans. This was also true of the Revolutionary warrants, but many of the Revolutionary grants
were in highly productive farmland, such as those in South Central Ohio. One area in Michigan
reserved for veterans of the War of 1812 was replaced when it was found to be too swampy,
although some of the other areas reserved for the veterans of 1812 did contain good farmland. The
warrants, moreover, could not be sold to a broker, at least not without some legal maneuvering; they
were not "assignable" in the language of the time. Although veterans and their agents found various
ways around this limitation, it undoubtedly raised the cost of selling the warrants. An even more
important factor, however, was simply that the veterans who had served in state militias were not
entitled to grants. State governments rewarded many veterans who had served in militias during the
Revolution. However, this was no longer possible because the states had ceded their western lands to
the federal government.
It was undoubtedly the officers of the War of 1812 who felt most aggrieved. As we noted, the
officers of the Revolutionary War received handsome land grants. In 1811, however, when bounties
were first offered to soldiers for the War of 1812, there was nothing extra for the officers. Further
attempts to reward the officers were made during the war and in 1817, but nothing came of them
(Gates 1968, 262 ftn. 37). As Gates suggests, Congress was probably reacting to the perception that
great estates had arisen as a result of the huge grants made at the close of the Revolution. Congress
also may have been reacting to the related perception that the land grants had produced excessive
speculation in western lands, always a political liability.
There was also the perception that the fighting was not very intense. In a memorial to
Congress in 1831 a group of War of 1812 officers pointed out the Revolutionary War precedents and

22

asked for similar treatment. They also pointed out that U.S. citizens living in Canada in 1812 and
who had volunteered to serve with the American forces had received land bounties, and in that case
the officers had been given larger bounties than the enlisted men – up to 960 acres for a colonel. The
officers conceded that they may not have suffered as much as the officers of the Revolutionary
armies, but they insisted that they had accomplished as much. "The [officers in the War of 1812] …
exhibited the same valor and love of liberty [as the officers in the Revolution], and, although they
may not as a body have suffered as much, yet their zeal was not less, nor their exertions less
meritorious or successful" (U.S. House 1831). One wonders, of course, whether Congress found the
last part of their claim persuasive. Unlike their brethren in the Revolution and the Mexican War, the
veterans of the War of 1812 had conquered little land for the United States.
No legislation responding to these complaints was forthcoming, however, until the land
grants given to the veterans of the Mexican-American war (1847-48) ignited a campaign to secure
additional land for the veterans of 1812. The "Ten Regiments Act" of 1847 designed to fill the ranks
for the Mexican War provided more valuable benefits than had the 1812 grants: a warrant for 160
acres of land anywhere in the public domain for every regular and volunteer who joined the war
against Mexico and served for 12 months or until the end of the war. The warrants, moreover, could
be sold to a broker for cash if the veteran did not want to settle the land; they were assignable.
According to Oberly "After the act's passage and the president's signature, army recruiters busily
signed up men on the basis of the new bounty (1990, 11)."
The passage of the Ten Regiments Act reminded the surviving veterans of the War of 1812
of their old grievances. They demanded parity with the veterans of the Mexican War, and Congress
obliged soon after the war with Mexico ended. This is not surprising. The veterans of 1812 had a
strong claim based on equity, and granting it was easy given the immense booty, including

23

California, taken from Mexico. The Bounty Land Act of 1850 provided veterans of the War of 1812,
of various Indian Wars, and of various other fights with up to 160 acres depending on length of
service. The warrants, however, could not be sold to brokers, a nod to the opponents of
"speculators." It was implausible, however, that the veterans of the War of 1812, many now in their
sixties, would move West to take up farming or even that they would go through the laborious
process of taking possession of and selling their land. The veterans wanted assignable bounties.
The brokers were also an important voice for liberalization of the Bounty Land Act because
they were running out of warrants issued under the Ten Regiments Act. Congress responded with
what was popularly known as the Assignment Bill of 1852, which allowed veterans of the War of
1812 to sell their land warrants through brokers. The 1850 and 1852 Acts required one month of
service for 40 acres and nine months for the full 160 acres.
The fight to secure bounties for the veterans of the War of 1812 was led by the United
Brethren of the War of 1812. It was headed by Joel B. Sutherland, a physician in the War of 1812, a
successful politician in the postwar era, and as it proved, a skillful champion of the veterans. In 1855
the veterans held a march on the White House holding aloft a banner bearing the slogan under which
they had gone to war in 1812: "Free Trade and Sailor's Rights." President Pierce met with a
delegation, but did not commit himself to their demands (Oberly 1990, 35-36). Further pressure,
however, produced the Old Soldiers Act of 1855, which gave 160 acres to any soldier, whether in the
regular army or the militia, who had served at least two weeks in the War of 1812. This was the high
point for the United Brethren, which never held another national convention.
We have made some preliminary estimates, shown in Figure 5, of the amount of land given
to the veterans of the Revolution, the War of 1812, and the Mexican War. These estimates are
subject to a wide margin of error. Nevertheless, we believe that the impression created by the chart is

24

probably broadly correct. The details of how we made the estimates are in the appendix. The bar for
the War of 1812 is divided into two parts. The lower part shows the amount awarded during the war.
The upper part shows the amount awarded to the veterans of the War of 1812 after the Mexican War.
The veterans of the War of 1812, evidently, received less initially, but caught up many years later.
Without the latter grants the veterans of the War of 1812 would have done less well in terms of total
land received, than the veterans of the Revolution.16
We have also made some back-of-the envelope estimates of the real value to the veterans of
the land grants. These estimates are subject to larger margins of error than the estimates of the total
amount of land received because we lack data on exactly when veterans disposed of their land, how
much they were paid for it, and what they were charged in transaction costs. Nevertheless, we made
some estimates by assuming various schedules according to which veterans disposed of their land,
and by using some available information on prices. The details of our calculation are in the appendix.
These estimates show that on average the veterans of the Revolution received the equivalent $28 in
1860 dollars in land warrants, veterans of the War of 1812 received $14, and veterans of the
Mexican War received $137. These estimates again suggest that the veterans of the War of 1812 did
less well than either the veterans of the Revolution or the Mexican War.

6. Service Pensions: The War of 1812 and the Mexican War
Sutherland, after his success with the land grants, began to lobby for a non-means-tested cash
pension. He did not live, however, to see it finally awarded in 1871, 56 years after the end of the

16

Veterans of subsequent wars also received help in buying land, but it appears that the Mexican War was the last in
which land grants were a prominent component of benefits. Under the Homestead Act (1862) land could be acquired
by paying $1.25 per acre or by farming the land for 5 years. Veterans could substitute military service for residence
down to one year. Veterans of the Civil War also received the right to buy supplemental amounts of land. Many
veterans probably made use of their military service in this way. However, the lack of transferability of the benefit
limited its value to most soldiers.

25

war. By this time the ranks of the veterans had been greatly thinned, and hence the potential cost of
the program was relatively low. Nevertheless, there was some strong opposition to a non-meanstested pension based on the budget. Senator John Sherman, the Chair of the Committee on Finance,
warned that a bill that pensioned all veterans of the War of 1812 would be too expensive; he wanted
it restricted to indigent veterans. Sherman mentioned the precedent set by the law of 1832 but
dismissed it on the grounds that the veterans of the Revolution had been paid initially with worthless
paper.17 Sherman complained, moreover, that the Revolutionary War pension had produced pension
marriages, and wanted the War of 1812 pensions limited to widows who had been married to
soldiers at the time of the war. To add all of the widows would add $5 million to annual
expenditures.18 When the law was finally enacted a pension was granted to all soldiers and sailors
who had served 60 days – with no requirement that the veterans be in reduced circumstances – but it
did limit benefits to widows who had been married to a veteran before the treaty of peace was signed
and who had not remarried.
In 1878 the service pension for the War of 1812 was liberalized: only two weeks of service in
the war were required. This change produced a small increase of about 1,200 in the number of
survivors on the rolls (Table A1 continued, column 6). There was at the time, we should no longer
be surprised, a surplus in the federal budget. Indeed, the federal budget had been in surplus in every
year after the Civil War. This was consistent with the policy of deflating prices and returning to the
gold standard at the prewar par. Running a surplus was a way of retiring the greenbacks and the
federal debt. By the late 1870s the dollar was close to the prewar par, and return to the gold standard
17

There was considerable inflation during the War of 1812, but it was of a lower order of magnitude than the
Revolutionary War inflation. The cost of living seems to have risen about 30 percent between 1812 and 1814, before
subsiding to its prewar level in 1815-1817 (Historical Statistics 2006, series Cc2).

18

"Forty-First Congress; Third Session," New York Times, Feb 4, 1871, p. 2. Federal expenditures in 1871 were
$292 million (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea585).
.

26

was in sight. The monetary case for maintaining a surplus was less compelling, and therefore the
case for spending more on the veterans was more attractive.
Why did the veterans of the War of 1812 and their heirs do less well than did the veterans of
the Revolution? One factor, clearly, was the state of the treasury when the veterans of the War of
1812 came due for their pensions. The veterans of the Revolution in "reduced circumstances” won
lifetime pensions, as we noted above, 35 years after the end of the Revolution, and a non-meanstested 10 years after that. With the same lags, the veterans of the War of 1812 would have been
“due” for their means-tested pension in 1850 and due for their non-means-tested pension in 1860.
The timing was unfortunate. In 1850 the veterans of the War of 1812 were in the midst of their fight
for land bounties on a par with the veterans of the Mexican War. Indeed, the land bounties that they
won, since they were easily convertible into cash, were a substitute for a cash pension. The amounts
they actually received from the land grants were small compared with a cash pension at the
Revolutionary rate. However, this might not have been obvious at the time: The rapid distribution of
the public lands soon depressed the value of federal lands. The second date, 1860, falls just before
the Civil War. Congress did not put all other projects aside simply because the nation was at war.
Nevertheless, pensioning the veterans of the War of 1812 during the Civil War probably appeared
injudicious in light of the rapid increase in the number of wounded veterans, widows and orphans on
the pension rolls and the inflation and large deficits that marked the Civil War years. The number of
pensions compensating for death and disability rose from 7,991 in 1860 to 154,477 in 1867 (Table
A1 columns 2, 3); the deficit rose from $7 million in 1860 to close to a billion in 1865 (Historical
Statistics 2006, series Ea586); and the price level doubled. So part of the explanation for why the
veterans of the War of 1812 received less than the veterans of the Revolution was simply bad timing:

27

Their pension obligations fell due when the federal treasury was stretched to the limit by the Civil
War.
There may have been something more at work: the perception that American arms had done
badly in the War of 1812. Perhaps, as mentioned in our discussion of the land grants, this group of
veterans did not deserve as large a "gratuity" as the veterans of more successful wars. It is hard to
prove that the lack of success of American arms contributed to the delay in the awarding of the
service pension. Few politicians would have admitted to this concern even if it had consciously or
unconsciously influenced their thinking. However, it was from the start one of the most controversial
wars in American history. The Federalists, the dominant party in New England, and with sizable
groups of supporters in the South and West, opposed the war at every turn. Donald Hickey writes
that in Congress the Federalists "unanimously opposed the declaration of war in June of 1812, and
thereafter they voted against almost every proposal to raise men or money, to foster privateering, or
to restrict trade with the enemy" (Hickey 1989, 255). To be sure, once the war was over, many
Americans adopted the view that the war had been a great moral victory, even if the treaty had
restored the status quo antebellum. The Federalists party disappeared as a result of its opposition to
the war. Andrew Jackson and William Henry Harrison parlayed wartime victories into the
Presidency. Nevertheless, it is possible that some remaining bitterness may have influenced the
treatment of the veterans.
One piece of suggestive evidence is that the successful fight for land bounties in the 1850s
was accompanied by an effort to burnish the image of the war. In 1847, just as the Mexican War
began, Congressman Charles J. Ingersoll, who proved to be a strong ally of the veterans, published a
two-volume revisionist history of the War of 1812. The Ingersoll volumes, soon followed by others
along the same lines, argued that the army and navy had fought praiseworthy campaigns and

28

accomplished a great deal for the country (Oberly 1990, 30). In the end we probably will never know
for certain that the controversial nature of the war and its ambiguous conclusion slowed the
awarding of service pensions to the veterans of the War of 1812. But we cannot rule out the
conclusion reached by the U.S. President’s Commission on Veterans’ Benefits (1956, 66) that one
factor was that “There was little land fighting during the war, not many men were engaged in any
one battle, and it was felt that the army did not accomplish much.”
The veterans of the Mexican War turned to the National Association of Mexican War
Veterans to lobby for their pensions.19 Its founder and leader was Alexander Kenaday, an eccentric
and sometimes radical populist labor leader from California. The principal demand was for the same
pension, $8.00 per month, that veterans of the Revolution and the War of 1812 had gotten. After
continual lobbying, this pension was granted in 1887 for veterans aged 62 or more. From a fiscal
point of view it was a favorable period for awarding a pension. The budget had been in surplus for
several years; in 1886 the surplus was close to 30 percent of revenues. Thus, veterans of the Mexican
War had to wait a shorter period (39 years) for their pension than did the veterans of the War of 1812
(56 years). The wait for veterans of the Mexican War, however, was comparable to that experienced
by the veterans of the Revolution: 35 years for a means-tested pension and 45 years for a nonmeans-tested pension.
The awarding of the pension created a period of confusion for Kenaday, who was also the
editor of the organization’s newspaper and, not incidentally, a prominent pension agent. He soon
turned, however, to the next logical step: an increase in the pension. An increase to $12 per
month was finally achieved in 1903. The pensioners got their raise, it should not surprise us,
during a period of surplus. From 1894 through 1899 the budget was always in a deficit averaging

19

The next two paragraphs are based on Davies (1948).

29

-10.25 percent per year; from 1900 through 1903 the budget was in a surplus averaging +10.74
percent per year (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea585).
Thus it appears that the major determinants of the old-age pension for the veterans of the
Mexican War were what the veterans of earlier wars had received and the state of the federal budget.
Public attitudes toward the war, however, did play a role in the timing. The Mexican War, although
highly successful from a military point of view and highly profitable in terms of the wealth added to
the United States, had aroused opposition from the start. Many Northerners saw it as an imperialist
war undertaken by a southern president (James K. Polk) designed to add new slave territories to the
United States. Ulysses Grant in a famous passage from his Memoirs recalled his opposition to the
annexation of Texas and to the Mexican War which he regarded as "one of the most unjust ever
waged by a stronger against a weaker nation" (Grant 1885, vol. 1, 53). Many of the soldiers who had
taken part, moreover, were southerners who then fought for the Confederacy during the Civil War.
Robert E. Lee was the most prominent example. According to Wallace E. Davies (1948, 226-228),
early efforts to secure a pension for the Mexican War veterans failed during Republican
administrations “because of apprehensions that such a measure might benefit many exConfederates.” It was not until 1887 when the South-friendly Democrats were in power that the
Mexican War veterans secured their service pension, and even then some ex-Confederates were
disqualified.

7. Service Pensions: The Civil War20

20

We discuss only the pensions for Union veterans. Confederate veterans did not receive federal pensions. The
Confederates, however, did receive pensions from southern states. These are described in Ratchford and Heise
(1938). Short (2001) explores the (small) effect of these pensions on the retirement behavior of Confederate veterans.

30

The Civil War pension proved highly contentious. The reason was not that the individual pension
was significantly larger than the earlier pensions. Controversy on that issue, as we have seen, was
minimized by keeping the nominal pension constant. Economists looking for sticky nominal prices
would have to look hard to find a better example. As can be seen in Figure 2, the post-Civil War
deflation raised the purchasing power of the standard $8 per month pension, measured with the
consumer price index, until at the end of the century it was on a par with the level in the late
antebellum period.
In terms of wage units the standard pension, as shown by the lower line in Figure 2, was
worth less in the postbellum era. In 1818, to put it somewhat differently, the standard annual pension
could hire a farm laborer for 10 months; but by 1899 it could hire a farm laborer for only 7 months.21
Deflating the pension by the wage of unskilled labor is relevant to the actual pattern of consumption
of many veterans. As the veteran aged he spent more of his income, in many cases, on services such
as nursing care and less on goods. The Civil War pension system was often criticized because it led
to corrupt "pension marriages." An elderly veteran would marry a young woman simply so that she
would be eligible for a pension. One defense offered for the pension marriages was that they were
really part of an exchange that benefited the veteran. The veteran received nursing care from a young
woman for which the veteran was unable to pay out of his current income (because it was fixed in
nominal terms and wages had risen), and in return the young woman entered into a pension marriage
and received the pension after the veteran died.
Rather than the amount per veteran, the real sources of contention were the large number of
veterans who received pensions, which meant that transfers to veterans materially affected taxes, and
the disparity between the North and the South. As shown in Table 1 Union forces amounted to 6.84
21

The monthly earnings with board for farm laborers is from (Historical Statistics 2006, series Bc 4234-4243).

31

percent of the 1861 population. This percentage meant that the cost of the pensions was visible to the
average taxpayer. The federal government, moreover, was financed to a substantial extent by tariffs.
Southerners, therefore, saw themselves as twice abused.22 First they paid high tariffs on imported
goods, a tariff that protected northern industries from competition, but made it harder for southerners
to export cotton and other cash crops. Then the proceeds of the tariff were distributed to union
veterans and their families. In 1895, for example, tariffs accounted for 47 percent of total revenues;
and pensions (mainly Civil War pensions) accounted for 40 percent of total federal expenditures
(U.S. Bureau of the Census 1975, series Y353, Y352, Y457, and Y463).
The legislation providing pensions for the Civil War veterans evolved along much the same
lines as the legislation providing pensions of the veterans of earlier wars. A general law of 1862
provided a pension at the rate of $8 to $30 per month (depending on rank) for totally disabled
soldiers, or to the widows, orphans, or mothers of soldiers killed in battle. Subsequent legislation
refined the table of benefits, creating specific benefits for a long list of disabilities.
Two pieces of legislation were crucial to the postwar expansion of the Civil War pension: the
Arrears Act of 1879, and the Dependent Pensions Act of 1890. The Arrears Act became law in
January 1879. Many soldiers had been placed on the rolls and started receiving benefits from dates
well after the end of the war. There was, as many veterans and their advocates pointed out, a
potential inequity here. A soldier who had shown great courage in battle might be receiving less than
another soldier with an inferior military record simply because the first soldier had been slow to
apply for a pension out of pride or lack of understanding. The Arrears Act would make good this
inequity by paying any soldier who had qualified for a pension an additional amount to cover what
they were due from the time of their discharge to the beginning of their pension. The Arrears Act,
22

Only Union veterans, with one exception, received federal pensions. The exception was the last surviving
Confederate veteran who was pardoned and given a lifetime Federal pension – at age 105.

32

moreover, applied not only to those currently on the rolls but also to those who would be added in
the future.
There was some uncertainty about the cost of the Arrears Act, and the plausibility of a
relatively low estimate may have aided passage of the act. At a cabinet meeting at which the bill,
having already passed both houses, was discussed, the Secretary of the Treasury, John Sherman,
offered a figure of $150 million, while Carl Schurz, the Secretary of the Interior, offered a figure of
$50 million based on an estimate by the Pension Office. President Hayes expressed some concern
about the cost of the additional pensions, but signed the bill.23 The cost of the Arrears Act eventually
reached $200 million (U.S. President’s Commission 1956, 81).
Skocpol (1993, 98-99) has argued that the Arrears Act was not as closely associated with a
bulging surplus in the federal treasury as was the law of 1890 (discussed below). Nevertheless, some
account should be taken of the budget. The budget was in surplus, had been for a number of years.
The surplus, moreover, was needed no longer to deflate the price level because the United States had
returned to gold at the prewar par. Although we shouldn't make too much of the coincidence in
timing, the return to the gold standard was accomplished on January 1, 1879 and the Arrears Act was
passed by Congress on January 25.
The Dependent Pensions Act of 1890 clearly owed its existence to large budget surpluses.
The law pensioned all veterans who had been honorably discharged and who now suffered from a
disability that prevented them from performing manual labor.24 There was no requirement, as there
had been under previous laws, that the disability be the result of wounds suffered during the war.
The law was not technically a service pension. It would not be until 1907 that a pure service pension

23

New York Times, "Yesterday's Cabinet Session," January 22, 1879, p. 1

24

The infirmity could not be the result of the veteran's “own vicious habits.”

33

became law. The Pension Office, however, was instructed to grant a pension to all veterans who
were 65 or older unless they were unusually vigorous, so in effect the law of 1890 was close to a
service pension. The notion that the law of 1890 amounted to a service pension has been widely
accepted (Costa 1995, 300-301). Figure 6 shows that the spending that resulted from this law (and
from previous liberalizations) was sufficient to erase the surpluses that had persisted in the second
half of the 1880s.
The close connection between the bulging surpluses in the federal treasury, which were
produced by the tariff, and the liberalization of the pension in the early 1890s was no secret.
Republican politicians made their support for generous pensions and high tariffs clear. As the
Republican Party platform put it in 1888:
The legislation of Congress should conform to the pledges made by a loyal people and be so
enlarged and extended as to provide against the possibility that any man who honorably wore
the Federal uniform shall become the inmate of an almshouse, or dependent upon private
charity. In the presence of an overflowing treasury it would be a public scandal to do less for
those whose valorous service preserved the government.

The next, and last, plank in the platform invited “…all workingmen, whose prosperity is seriously
threatened by the free-trade policy of the present Administration,” to vote for the Republican
candidate.25
After the election President Harrison followed through on Republican promises. His first
appointment to head the Pension Bureau was James Tanner a legless Union veteran who soon got
into trouble. In one of his bombastic speeches, Tanner promised that as Pension Commissioner he
would raise the pensions of veterans receiving only a pittance – often less than a dollar a week for
small disabilities – even if his decisions raised from some lips the prayer: “God help the surplus”
25

Republican Platform 1888, American Presidency Project, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/index.php. The
Democratic platform noted that the Cleveland Administration had paid out more in pensions than any previous
administration, but made it clear that the Democrats intended to cut the tariff and other Civil War taxes.

34

(McMurry 1926, 345-347). Green B. Raum, a staunch but more discreet friend of the veteran, soon
replaced Tanner.
The erosion of the surplus may have affected the next major piece of legislation. When
legislation was passed in 1892 to provide pensions for veterans of the Indian Wars the youngest
veterans who became eligible were veterans of the Seminole wars between 1832 and 1842. In other
words, the minimum time that veterans of the Indian Wars had to wait was 50 years (1842 – 1892):
Veterans of later engagements with Native Americans were not yet old enough for a pension.
The association between budget surpluses and veterans' pensions that we have identified for
the 19th century is less surprising than it would be in the twentieth century because surpluses were
common. Indeed, between 1800 and 1899 the federal budget was in surplus in 69 out of 100 years,
and in most of those years the surplus was fairly large. Nevertheless, one can show that there was a
strong association between surpluses and pension legislation. Perhaps the simplest calculation that
illustrates the association between budgets and pension legislation is the following. If the chance of a
surplus was .69 the probability that all nine major pieces of pension legislation that we have
identified (Table 2) would have fallen by chance in surplus years was only about 3.5 percent (.699).
If we confine our attention to periods in which there was a run of years with surpluses an even
clearer association between surpluses and pension laws emerges. The probability that by chance all 9
pieces of legislation would have fallen into a year in which the budget was in surplus and had been
in surplus in the two previous years was only .20 percent (.509).
A more formal method of making the same point is to estimate a regression in which the
dependent variable is a binary variable that takes the value one in years when legislation expanding
benefits for veterans was passed and the independent variables are current and lagged values of the
surplus in the federal budget measured as a percentage of revenues. We ran several regressions of

35

this sort. We started with both the surplus and the first lagged value of the surplus. We dropped the
former because it was not significant, although it was signed correctly. The result was the following.

Legislation = -2.21 + .038*Surplus(-1)
(2.36)

(McFadden R2 = .20)

This was a probit regression. The number in parentheses is the z-statistic, which indicates that
Surplus(-1) was significant at the .02 level. Adding additional lags of the surplus did not yield
significant variables or improve the fit. The results were similar when logit or extreme value
methods were used to estimate the equation. Evidently, as both the narratives and the equations
suggests there was a strong association between the condition of the federal treasury and pension
legislation for veterans.

8. Some Tentative Generalizations
Veterans' benefits varied substantially from war to war in the nineteenth century and were
usually the subject of bitter controversy. Veterans of the War of 1812 received less than veterans of
either the Revolution or the Mexican War. Union veterans of the Civil War did well compared with
veterans of earlier wars, but only after a contentious political debate.
Several factors account for the differences across wars. Veterans’ benefits evolved, first of all,
along a path-dependent process. The precedent set by past policies shaped what was considered a
fair reward for service. Veterans of a given war would point to how veterans of previous wars were
treated and demand equity. Veterans who served in the militia would point to veterans who had
served in the regular army and demand equity. Privates and noncommissioned officers would point

36

to the awards made to commissioned officers and demand equity. Opponents of generous benefits
pointed to what they regarded as abuses of previous systems and demanded greater economy.
We would like to believe that feelings toward veterans were independent of the war they
fought. There are some suggestions in the historical record, however, that the politics of a war
influenced how and when its veterans were rewarded. This is an inherently difficult proposition to
prove because the it is not the sort of thing that people involved in the political process are likely to
talk about. Nevertheless, we can point to several possible examples: (1) In the years immediately
following the Revolutionary War, veterans of the militia were considered the real heroes, and
veterans of the Continental Army were sometimes perceived as lesser soldiers, as mere mercenaries.
With the rise of the image of the suffering soldier, associated especially with Valley Forge, however,
pressure built for cash benefits for veterans of the Continental Army. (2) Attempts were made to add
veterans of campaigns carried out against Native Americans in the wake of the Revolution to the
service pension rolls, but these efforts ran into opposition based partly on the contention that these
were wars carried out for private gain. (3) The veterans of the War of 1812 received less in cash and
land than either the veterans of the Revolution or the veterans of the Mexican War. There were a
number of reasons, but one may have been that the war itself was politically divisive, and went badly
for the United States. (4) The Mexican War was much more successful from a military point of view
than the War of 1812. Nevertheless, in the 1880s the veterans of the Mexican War were frustrated on
some occasions in their campaign for a service pension for political reasons. Republican Congresses
were unsympathetic to what they regarded as a southern war undertaken by a southern president to
expand slavery, and fought by men who later served in the Confederate military. (5) Confederate
veterans, of course, received nothing from the federal government. Even pensioners from antebellum

37

wars who lived in the South during the Civil War had to prove their loyalty during the Civil War to
remain on the rolls (U.S. Senate 1867).
We would also like to believe that veterans’ benefits are independent of fiscal politics. After
all, since it's founding the United States has been a wealthy nation compared to most other nations,
and has always been in a position to reward veterans generously whatever the current balance of
taxes and spending. Nevertheless, in case after case, the state of the treasury was an important
determinant of the level of benefits: When federal coffers were full, additional benefits were
provided; when coffers were empty, claims for additional benefits were rejected.
Here are some examples. (1) The officers of the Revolutionary Army asked for half-pay for
life, the practice in the British army. The American officers, however, were forced to settle for bonds
worth five year's pay at face value. Under the Confederation, moreover, Congress failed to pay the
interest on the bonds, and many former officers parted with their bonds at a fraction of their face
value. (2) In 1818, however, after a two-year run of treasury surpluses, The Continental Army’s
officers and common soldiers in "reduced circumstances" received a lifetime pension. In 1828 and in
1832, after another run of surpluses that began in 1825, benefits were awarded to veterans without
regard to their economic status, and in 1836, after the last and largest of these surpluses; widows of
ordinary soldiers were pensioned, even when the marriage took place after the war. (3) The veterans
of the War of 1812 were not successful in winning postwar rewards until the Mexican War created
the precedent for a generous land bounty and, not incidentally, the means – the vast lands won from
Mexico – for awarding it. The veterans of the War of 1812 eventually qualified for a cash service
pension in 1871 in the middle of a run of double-digit surpluses. Even in 1871, moreover, 56 years
after the end of the war, there was some sentiment for means-testing the pension to save expenses. (4)
The Arrears Act of 1879, which increased the incentives for Civil War veterans to apply for pensions,

38

also was passed during a period of surpluses, and when the surpluses could no longer be defended on
the grounds that they were needed to deflate prices and restore the gold standard. (5) The Dependent
Pensions Act of 1890 was passed during a period of large treasury surpluses, and the connection
with the budget was explicit. The Republicans promised to support a high tariff and to expand
pension benefits.
One might hope that decisions on veterans' benefits would be above politics. In the
nineteenth-century, at least, the opposite was true. Affection for the veterans as individuals often
took second place to the politics of war and to current budget realities.

39

Figure 1
Present Value of Service Pensions (1860 $s)
$100

$90

$80

$70

$60

$50

$40

$30

$20

$10

$0
Revolution

War of 1812
Six Percent

Mexican War

Three Percent

Source: Appendix Table A2.

40

Figure 2
Standard Annual Pension, Non-Commissioned Officers and Privates, 1818-1916
$250.00

$200.00

$150.00

$100.00

$50.00

$0.00
1818

1828

1838

Nominal

1848

1858

1868

1878

Constant Prices

1888

1898

1908

Constant Wages of Unskilled Labor

Source: Glasson (1918, passim) and Historical Statistics (2006, series Cc2, Ba4218).

41

Figure 3
Service Pensions for Veterans of the Revolution, 1816-1824
$20,000,000

$15,000,000

$10,000,000
Impact of the
Law of 1818

$5,000,000

$0
1816

1817

1818

1819

1820

1821

1822

1823

-$5,000,000
Total Pensions

Compensation

Surplus

Source: Appendix Table A2 and (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea585).

42

1824

Figure 4
Service Pensions for Veterans of the Revolution, 1830-1839
$25,000,000

$20,000,000

$15,000,000

$10,000,000

$5,000,000

$0
1830

1831

1832

1833

1834

1835

1836

1837

1838

1839

-$5,000,000

-$10,000,000

-$15,000,000
Total Pensions

Law of 1832 Pensions

Surplus

Source: Appendix Table A2, (U.S. Senate 1877), and (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea585).
43

Figure 5

Land Bounties in Three Antebellum Wars, Acres per Veteran
200.0

175.0

Acres per Veteran

150.0

125.0

100.0
Grants made to Veterans of the War
of 1812 after the Mexican War
75.0

50.0

25.0

0.0
Revolution

War of 1812

Sources: Appendix Table A3.

44

Mexican War

Figure 6
Service Pensions for Veterans of the Civil War and the Surplus, 1885-1895
$200,000,000

$150,000,000

$100,000,000

$50,000,000

$0
1885

1886

1887

1888

1889

1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

-$50,000,000

-$100,000,000
Total Pensions

Law of 1890 Pensions

Surplus

Sources: Appendix Table A2 and (Historical Statistics 2006, series Ea584, Ea5853).
45

1895

Table 1. Basic War Statistics
War
(1) Start
(2) End
(3) Number Serving
(4) Number Serving as a Percent of the Population
(5) Battle Deaths per 1000
(6) Casualties per 1000
(7) Start of a Service Pension

American
Revolution

War of 1812

Mexican War

Civil War
(Union)

1775

1812

1846

1861

1783

1815

1849

1865

217,000a

286,730

78,718

2,213,363

8.81

3.71

0.37

6.84b

20.4

7.9

22.0

63.4

n.a.

n.a.

221.5

292.0

1818

1871

1887

1890

(8) Service pensions
$12.59
$2.52
$24.35
$104.87
(per capita, $1860, discounted at 6%)
a
The exact number is not known. This is the midpoint of figures frequently used by the Department of Defense.
b

The figure is 10.09 percent if the 1,050,000 estimated Confederate soldiers is added.

Sources by Row. (1-6): Historical Statistics 2006, Table Ed1-5. (7): See narrative sections 3-6. (8): Authors' calculation based
on Table A2 and Historical Statistics 2006, Series Ed327.

46

Table 2. Pension Legislation in the Nineteenth Century
Year

Purpose of legislation

1818

Service Pensions for veterans who served in the Continental Army and who
were in "reduced circumstances."

1828

Full pay for life granted to certain officers and to noncommissioned officers
and privates who served in the Continental Army until the end of the war.

1832 Service Pensions for veterans of the Revolution who served in the Continenta
Army o or in a militia, whether or not in reduced circumstances.

1836 Pensions for widows of veterans of the Revolution

1855 Land grants for veterans of the War of 1812.

1871 Service Pensions for veterans of the War of 1812

1879

The Arrears Act awarded pensioners a lump sum to cover the time between th
end of the war and the time when they qualified for a pension.

1887 Service pensions for veterans of the Mexican War

1890 Service pensions for veterans of the Civil War

Source: The narrative in sections 3-7.

47

References
Black, John D. and Charles D. Hyson. 1944. "Postwar Soldier Settlement." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 59, No. 1 (Nov.): 1-35.
Bockstruck, Lloyd DeWitt. 1996. Revolutionary War Bounty Land Grants: Awarded by
State Governments. Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Pub. Co.
__________. 2002. Naval Pensioners of the United States, 1800-1851. Baltimore, MD:
Genealogical Pub. Co.
Bodenger, Robert George. 1971. Soldiers' Bonuses: A History of Veterans' Benefits in the
United States, 1776-1967, Ph.D. dissertation, Pennsylvania State University.
Clark, Robert L., Lee A. Craig, and Jack W. Wilson. 2003. A History of Public Sector
Pensions in the United States. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Costa, Dora L. 1995. "Pensions and Retirement: Evidence from Union Army Veterans." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 110, No. 2 (May): 297-319.
__________. 1998. The Evolution of retirement: An American Economic History, 1880-1990.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Davies, Wallace E. 1948. “The Mexican War Veterans as an Organized Group.” The
Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 35, No. 2. (September): 221-238.
Donaldson, Thomas. 1884. The Public Domain, Its History and Statistics. Washington: GPO.
Issued also in the Congressional series as House misc. doc. 45, pt. 4, 47th Cong., 2d sess.
Farnam, Henry W. 1938. Chapters in the History of Social Legislation in the United
States to 1860. Washington, D.C: Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Ferguson, E. James. 1954. "Speculation in the Revolutionary Debt: The Ownership of Public
Securities in Maryland, 1790." The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 14, No. 1 (Winter):
35-45.
Flexner, James Thomas. 1984 [1974]. Washington: the Indispensable Man. New York:
Signet, New American Library.
Gates, Paul Wallace. 1968. History of Public Land Law Development. Washington: U.S.
Govt. Print. Off.
Glasson, William H. 1918. Federal Military Pensions in the United States. Edited by David
Kinley. New York: Oxford University Press, American Branch.

48

Grant, U.S. 1885. Personal Memoirs of U.S. Grant, 2 vols. New York: Charles L. Webster
and Company.
Grubb, Farley. 2005. "The Net Asset Position of the U.S. National Government, 17841802: Hamilton's Blessing or the Spoils of War?" NBER Working Paper No. 11868.
Hibbard, Benjamin Horace. 1965 [1924]. A History of the Public Land Policies. Madison and
Milwaukee: The University of Wisconsin Press.
Hickey, Donald R. 1989. The War of 1812: A Forgotten Conflict. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press.
Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial ed. 2006.
Carter, Susan B., et al., editors in chief. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Kinley, David. 1918. "Editor's Preface." In William H. Glasson, Federal Military Pensions in
the United States, pp. vii-x. New York: Oxford University Press, American Branch.
Kohn, Richard H. 1970. "The Inside History of the Newburgh Conspiracy: America and
the Coup d'Etat." The William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd Ser., Vol. 27, No. 2 (Apr.): 187220.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1985. "The Demand for Land: The United States, 1820-1860." The
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 45, No. 2, The Tasks of Economic History (June): 181212.
McConnell, Stuart Charles. 1992. Glorious Contentment: the Grand Army of the Republic,
1865-1900. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
McMurry, Donald L. 1922. "The Political Significance of the Pension Question, 1885-1897."
The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 9, No. 1 (June): 19-36.
__________. 1926. "The Bureau of Pensions During the Administration of President Harrison."
The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 13, No. 3 (December): 343-364
Oberly, James W. 1990. Sixty Million Acres: American Veterans and the Public Lands
Before the Civil War. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press.
O’Calaghan, Jerry. 1954. “The War Veteran and the Public Lands.” Agricultural History, 28:
163-68.
Ratchford, B. U. and K.C. Heise. 1938. “Confederate Pensions.” Southern Economic
Journal 5 (October): 207-17.

49

Resch, John Phillips. 1999. Suffering Soldiers: Revolutionary War Veterans, Moral
Sentiment, and Political Culture in the Early Republic. Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press.
Severo, Richard. 1989. The Wages of War: When America's Soldiers Came Home - from
Valley Forge to Vietnam. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Short, Joanna Sandra. 2001. The Retirement of the Rebels: Georgia Confederate Pensions
and Retirement Behavior in the New South. Ph.D. Dissertation, Indiana University.
Skeen, C. Edward. 1974. "The Newburgh Conspiracy Reconsidered (with a Rebuttal by
Richard H. Kohn)" The William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd Ser., Vol. 31, No. 2 (Apr.):
273-298.
Skocpol, Theda. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social
Policy in the United States. Cambridge MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
__________. 1993. “America's First Social Security System: The Expansion of Benefits for
Civil War Veterans.” Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 108, No. 1 (Spring): 85-116.
Teipe, Emily J. 2002. America’s First Veterans and the Revolutionary War Pensions.
Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen Press.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to
1970, Bicentennial Edition. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. 2005. “America’s Wars” Office of Public Affairs,
Washington DC. http://www1.va.gov/OPA/fact/docs/amwars.doc, accessed May 17, 2006.
U.S. House. 1826. "Number of Land Warrants Issued to the Officers and Soldiers of the
Revolution." 19th Congress, 1st Session, Publication No. 477.
__________. 1830. "Claims for Virginia Military Bounty Lands." 21st Congress, 1st Session,
Publication No. 852.
__________. 1831. "Memorial of Sundry Officers of the United States' Army in the Late
War, Praying for a Grant of Land in Consideration of their Services." 21st Congress, 2nd
Session, H. Doc. 25.
__________. 1836. “Pensions to persons engaged in Indian Wars.” 24th Congress, 1st
Session, H. Rpt. 338.
U.S. President’s Commission on Veterans’ Pensions. 1956. A Report on Veterans’ Benefits in
the United States, Staff Report No. I: The Historical Development of Veterans’ Benefits in the
United States. Printed as U.S. House of Representatives, House Committee Print No. 244, 84th
Cong., 2nd Sess.
50

__________. 1956. Staff Report No. II: Veterans’ Benefits Administered by the Department and
Agencies of the Federal Government, Digest of Laws and Basic Statistics. Printed as U.S. House
of Representatives, House Committee Print No. 262, 84th Cong., 2nd Sess.
U.S. Senate. 1841. “Message from the President … Showing the Number and Names of the
Soldiers Enlisted during the late War, and Entitled to Bounty Land.” 26th Congress, 2nd
Session, S. Doc. 50.
__________. 1867. "Report of the Commissioner of Pensions."
__________. 1877. "Statement of Annual Appropriations and Expenditures for Army and
Navy Pensions from March 4, 1789 to June 30, 1876." 45th Congress, 1st Session, S. Exec.
Doc. 4.
Weber, Gustavus A., and Laurence F. Schmeckebier. 1934. The Veterans’ Administration: Its
History, Activities and Organization. Washington: The Brookings Institution.
Williamson, Samuel H. 2004. "An Index of the Wage of Unskilled Labor from 1774 to the
Present." Economic History Services, December, 2004, URL:
http://www.eh.net/hmit/databases/unskilledwage/. Accessed June 10, 2007.

51

Appendix: Nineteenth-Century Veterans' Statistics.
For the 1956 edition of Historical Statistics the Veterans Administration made estimates of
the number of veterans receiving pensions by period of service (in the case of deceased
veterans their descendants received the benefits) and the amount of expenditures. These
estimates were carried over in the Bicentennial and Millennial editions. The estimates for the
nineteenth century, however, were incomplete: There was no information on the number or
dollar amount of pensions before 1866. More information was given for the postbellum, but
no distinction was made between pensions for military personnel and pensions for their heirs.
Some additional data was available in Glasson (1918) who presented separate estimates on
number of pensions and their dollar value for veterans and heirs for the War of 1812, the
Mexican War, the Indian Wars, and the Civil War. Glasson also did not present figures for
the period prior to the Civil War. He also did not present figures for the period after 1866 for
compensation, except at 5-year intervals, or for Revolutionary war pensions. No estimates
were presented, moreover, in these sources of the amount of land given to veterans, an
important source of benefits in the antebellum era. To fill these gaps we made annual
estimates by period of service for the whole of the nineteenth century of the annual number
and dollar value of pensions and of the total amount and total dollar value of land. Tables
A1-A4 contain our estimates.
The Number of Pensions. Table A1, which is divided into A1 and A1 continued,
shows the number of pensions annually from 1791 until 1900. These estimates were
compiled mainly from the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Pensions. Column (1)
shows the total number of pensions on the rolls. Columns (2) and (3) show the number of
pensions awarded as compensation to soldiers or sailors for disabilities incurred while in

52

service – these were known as "invalid pensions" in the nineteenth century – and to widows
or other dependents as compensation for the death of a soldier or sailor in service. Columns
(4) and (5) of Table A1 show pensions awarded for service in the Revolution. Table A1
continued shows the number of pensions awarded for service during the War of 1812, the
Mexican War, the Civil War, and the Indian Wars. These pensions were awarded after the
Civil War, so Table A1 continued begins in 1870.
There are certain limitations to these series. (1) Each pension was awarded because an
individual served in the armed forces. In some cases, however, the pensions were divided
among several descendants. This is the reason the tables refer to the number of “pensions”
rather than the number of "pensioners." (2) The tables exclude some awards paid as lump
sums, perhaps because the number on the rolls was meant to serve as a predictor of future
expenses. The Commissioner of Pensions, moreover, may have missed some pensions paid
by other federal offices. (3) The rolls listed some pensioners who had died and whose heirs
were not entitled to a pension. The decrease in the number of pensions in 1841 and 1842 was
the result of a purging of the names of pensioners assumed to be dead. Despite these
limitations, we believe the number of pensions provides a good picture of the growth of the
pension system in the nineteenth century.
The series in Table A1 may be of interest for issues aside from those explored in this
paper. The series showing the number of pensions compensating for death and disability, for
example, is new, and puts into perspective the amount of fighting in the War of 1812, the
Seminole War, the Mexican War, and the Civil War.

53

Table A1. The Number of Pensions: Total, Pensions Compensating
for Death and Disability, and Revolutionary Service Pensions, 17911900.

Year

1791
1792
1793
1794
1795
1796
1797
1798
1799
1800
1801
1802
1803
1804
1805
1806
1807
1808
1809
1810
1811
1812
1813
1814
1815
1816
1817
1818
1819
1820
1821

Total
Number of
Pensions
(1)
1,356
1,472
NA
NA
1,444
NA
NA
NA
NA
1,711
NA
1,661
NA
NA
1,593
NA
1,530
NA
NA
1,544
NA
NA
1,501
NA
2,050
3,597
3,658
12,350
22,189
NA
NA

Compensation for Death or
Disability (All wars)
a

Army

Navy

(2)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
1,544
NA
1,452
NA
NA
1,451
NA
NA
1,353
NA
1,798
3,345
3,300
3,814
NA
NA
NA

(3)
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
22
NA
37
37
49
65
78
85
90
93
107
122
148
176
252
252
358
358
438
480
191

54

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors
(4)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8,178
16,270
16,355
13,968

Widows
and other
dependents
(5)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table A1. The Number of Pensions: Total, Pensions Compensating
for Death and Disability, and Revolutionary Service Pensions, 17911900.

Year

1822
1823
1824
1825
1826
1827
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
1833
1834
1835
1836
1837
1838
1839
1840
1841
1842
1843
1844
1845
1846
1847
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852

Total
Number of
Pensions
(1)
NA
17,254
17,496
17,194
17,068
16,858
16,447
16,591
16,484
16,280
NA
NA
NA
41,445
41,718
42,446
42,717
44,875
45,308
32,831
26,016
28,254
29,544
28,894
28,352
23,798
16,216
22,319
21,472
22,875
20,156

Compensation for Death or
Disability (All wars)
a

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions

Army

Navy

Survivors

(2)
NA
3,870
3,736
3,743
3,805
3,805
3,786
3,794
3,873
3,868
3,806
3,875
3,940
3,893
4,044
4,116
4,200
4,236
4,289
2,605
2,662
2,720
2,778
2,834
2,949
2,946
3,126
6,119
6,766
7,109
8,086

(3)
431
423
524
524
533
534
270
596
536
536
NA
NA
NA
442
466
678
847
901
914
959
981
566
540
728
752
780
930
999
1,097
1,228
1,288

(4)
12,071
12,961
13,236
12,927
12,730
12,519
12,391
12,201
12,075
11,876
13,883
34,472
38,544
37,110
37,208
36,187
34,440
32,925
31,759
21,076
19,671
18,774
17,733
16,002
15,460
12,388
9,031
9,017
6,932
6,324
5,502

55

Widows
and other
dependents
(5)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,465
3,230
6,813
8,346
8,194
2,702
6,194
8,493
9,330
9,191
7,684
3,129
6,184
6,677
8,214
5,280

Table A1. The Number of Pensions: Total, Pensions Compensating
for Death and Disability, and Revolutionary Service Pensions, 17911900.

Year

1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
1858
1859
1860
1861
1862
1863
1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880

Total
Number of
Pensions
(1)
15,097
15,082
14,468
13,914
13,287
11,615
11,585
11,284
10,709
8,159
14,780
51,135
85,986
126,722
155,474
169,643
188,850
199,413
208,129
232,700
238,411
236,241
234,821
232,137
232,104
223,998
242,755
250,802

Compensation for Death or
Disability (All wars)
a

Army

Navy

(2)
7,564
7,014
7,352
7,397
7,290
6,261
6,788
7,052
6,961
5,363
12,068
48,200
83,013
123,577
152,096
166,136
185,125
195,739
203,718
208,923
211,447
209,563
209,984
209,237
210,992
206,071
206,111
211,795

(3)
999
1,017
838
836
949
892
918
939
957
916
1,121
1,505
1,856
2,213
2,381
2,618
2,838
2,947
3,050
3,179
3,200
3,336
3,420
3,387
3,439
3,558
3,616
3,930

56

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors
(4)
1,466
1,069
726
514
346
253
165
89
63
30
18
12
3
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Widows
and other
dependents
(5)
5,068
5,982
5,552
5,167
4,702
4,209
3,714
3,204
2,728
1,850
1,573
1,418
1,114
931
997
888
887
727
634
471
445
410
379
320
262
237
213
189

Table A1. The Number of Pensions: Total, Pensions Compensating
for Death and Disability, and Revolutionary Service Pensions, 17911900.

Year

1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
a

Total
Number of
Pensions
(1)
268,830
285,697
303,658
322,756
345,125
365,783
406,007
452,557
489,725
537,944
676,160
876,068
966,012
969,544
970,524
970,678
976,014
993,714
991,519
993,529

Compensation for Death or
Disability (All wars)
a

Army

Navy

(2)
229,542
249,442
272,893
294,688
320,211
345,947
379,401
413,865
449,045
497,240
522,134
498,406
468,564
461,008
453,172
442,460
431,564
420,280
408,084
395,089

(3)
4,195
4,316
4,375
4,554
4,671
4,831
5,254
5,898
6,813
7,734
8,017
7,646
7,365
7,153
7,201
7,210
7,163
7,133
7,014
6,936

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors
(4)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Widows
and other
dependents
(5)
166
144
123
104
86
69
54
37
29
25
23
22
17
12
12
14
16
12
11
11

Beginning in 1893 this column includes nurses.

Sources: Column (1) is the sum of (2) through (5) of Table A1 and (6) through
(13) of Table A1 continued. (2), (4), and (5) were compiled from the Annual
Reports of the Pension Office. (3) through 1840 is from Clark, Craig, and
Wilson (2003, 55); 1841-1900 is from the Annual Reports of the Pension Office.

57

Table A1 continued. Pensions for Service in the War of 1812, Mexican War, Civil War, and Indian Wars,
1871-1900.
War of 1812
Survivors

1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888

(6)
683
17,100
18,266
17,620
15,875
14,206
12,802
10,407
11,621
10,138
8,898
7,134
4,931
3,898
2,945
1,539
1,069
806

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(7)
44
3,027
5,053
5,312
5,163
4,987
4,609
3,725
21,194
24,750
26,029
24,661
21,336
19,512
17,212
13,397
11,831
10,787

War with Mexico
Survivors

(8)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,503
16,060

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(9)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
895
5,104

58

Civil War
Survivors

(10)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(11)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Indian Wars
Survivors

(12)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(13)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900

603
413
284
165
86
45
21
14
7
3
1
1

9,964
8,610
7,590
6,651
5,425
4,447
3,826
3,287
2,810
2,407
1,998
1,742

17,065
17,158
16,379
15,215
14,149
13,461
12,586
11,800
10,922
10,012
9,204
8,352

6,206
6,764
6,976
7,282
7,369
7,686
7,868
8,017
8,072
8,143
8,175
8,151

0
0
101,112
293,068
377,202
375,084
378,115
383,818
392,440
413,909
420,912
430,657

0
0
13,645
47,613
81,952
94,260
100,800
107,103
116,359
125,729
130,266
135,726

Sources: Columns (6) through (13) were compiled from the Annual Reports of the Pension Office.

59

0
0
0
0
2,544
3,104
3,012
2,718
2,373
2,019
1,656
1,370

0
0
0
0
1,338
3,284
3,911
4,237
4,288
4,067
3,899
3,739

Cash payments. For the years up to 1865, we relied on The Statement of Annual
Appropriations and Expenditures for Army and Navy Pensions, March 4, 1789, to June 30,
1876 (U.S. Senate 1877). We checked these figures against the figures in the Annual Reports
of the Commissioner of Pensions. In broad terms the figures in the two sources agree,
although there are many small discrepancies that may be the result of accounting differences.
There are also a number of differences between Historical Statistics (2006 series Ea643) and
column 1 of Table A2. The former seems to have been carried over from the 1876 Finance
Report. The Senate document (1876, 30-31) explains the differences between its estimates
and those in the Finance Report. The main differences are that the Senate document includes
expenditures made by the Naval and Privateer Pension Funds, excludes certain transfers
made to Virginia to settle claims for previous payments to veterans, and includes a number of
miscellaneous expenditures. On the whole, the Senate series would appear to give a more
accurate account of current spending. There are still probably omissions.
Beginning in 1866 we relied on the estimates of total spending in Historical Statistics
(2006, series Ed297) and Glasson (1918). Glasson compiled the data from the Annual
Reports of the Commissioner of Pensions for the War of 1812 (p. 113), the Indian Wars (p.
115), the Mexican War (p. 119), and the law of 1890 (p.271). We also included annual
estimates from the Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Pensions for expenditures for
general compensation since Glasson (1918, 144) only included estimates at 5-year intervals,
and for the Revolutionary War pensions which Glasson omitted.

60

Table A2. Cash Expenditures for Veterans Benefits by Period of Service,
1791-1900 (dollars)
Total

Compensation
for Death and
Disabilitya

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors

1791
1792
1793
1794
1795
1796
1797
1798
1799
1800
1801
1802
1803
1804
1805
1806
1807
1808
1809
1810
1811
1812
1813
1814
1815
1816

(1)
$175,814
109,243
80,088
81,399
68,673
100,844
92,257
104,845
95,444
94,015
124,688
126,080
62,902
80,093
81,855
82,084
70,500
82,576
87,834
83,744
82,150
91,880
213,373
248,254
178,104
286,056

(2)
$175,814
109,243
80,088
81,399
68,673
100,844
92,257
104,845
95,444
94,015
124,688
126,080
62,902
80,093
81,855
82,084
70,500
82,576
87,834
83,744
82,150
91,880
213,373
248,254
178,104
286,056

(3)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

61

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(4)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

War of 1812
Service
Pensions
Survivors

(5)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table A2. Cash Expenditures for Veterans Benefits by Period of Service,
1791-1900 (dollars)
Total

Compensation
for Death and
Disabilitya

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors

1817
1818
1819
1820
1821
1822
1823
1824
1825
1826
1827
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
1833
1834
1835
1836
1837
1838
1839
1840
1841
1842
1843
1844

(1)
426,480
972,361
2,416,829
3,218,495
244,779
1,947,968
1,778,760
1,355,069
1,384,625
1,560,891
978,341
850,574
934,070
1,356,797
1,031,931
1,343,478
4,589,751
3,363,391
1,929,240
2,832,787
2,432,578
2,303,617
3,126,864
2,623,520
2,504,384
1,467,011
857,073
2,027,442

(2)
426,480
672,361
568,928
452,055
244,779
305,377
329,663
87,469
75,815
255,696
182,329
127,439
169,577
267,769
26,096
284,605
294,890
246,198
116,944
277,051
-36,165
417,250
255,376
272,272
380,176
343,257
123,440
189,971

(3)
0
300,000
1,847,901
2,766,440
0
1,642,591
1,449,097
1,267,600
1,308,811
1,305,195
796,013
723,135
764,492
1,089,028
1,005,836
1,058,873
4,294,861
3,117,193
1,812,296
2,555,737
1,916,769
836,608
1,280,425
1,211,760
1,120,037
769,674
498,023
1,090,237

62

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(4)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
551,973
1,049,759
1,591,063
1,139,488
1,004,171
354,080
235,610
747,234

War of 1812
Service
Pensions
Survivors

(5)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table A2. Cash Expenditures for Veterans Benefits by Period of Service,
1791-1900 (dollars)
Total

Compensation
for Death and
Disabilitya

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors

1845
1846
1847
1848
1849
1850
1851
1852
1853
1854
1855
1856
1857
1858
1859
1860
1861
1862
1863
1864
1865
1866
1867
1868
1869
1870
1871
1872

(1)
2,500,748
1,905,335
1,837,124
1,290,840
1,246,281
1,622,385
2,226,569
2,382,872
1,736,262
1,232,368
1,473,599
1,296,230
1,310,381
1,219,768
1,222,223
1,100,802
1,032,768
852,170
1,078,513
4,985,274
16,338,155
15,858,000
21,276,000
24,164,000
29,658,000
30,543,000
30,081,000
31,454,000

(2)
253,548
253,280
301,807
237,541
317,157
496,626
598,760
603,911
529,006
492,703
535,788
503,443
711,373
663,263
779,817
661,121
659,588
541,098
806,091
4,620,967
15,989,116
15,741,369
21,139,565
24,037,371
29,518,043
30,431,242
29,986,022
29,076,697

(3)
790,040
540,552
416,227
280,099
191,145
304,165
270,997
442,284
221,356
-118,641
24,249
43,325
140,750
78,931
7,671
18,735
23,208
35,620
24,970
0
0
125
0
142
0
0
0
0

63

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(4)
1,457,160
1,111,504
1,119,090
773,200
737,979
821,594
1,356,812
1,336,677
985,900
858,306
913,563
749,462
458,258
477,575
434,735
420,947
349,972
275,452
247,452
364,307
349,039
116,505
136,435
126,487
139,957
111,758
91,912
63,794

War of 1812
Service
Pensions
Survivors

(5)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,555
1,977,515

Table A2. Cash Expenditures for Veterans Benefits by Period of Service,
1791-1900 (dollars)
Total

Compensation
for Death and
Disabilitya

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors

1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900

(1)
28,681,000
31,908,000
31,106,000
29,887,000
30,145,000
28,764,000
35,526,000
58,585,000
52,771,000
56,882,000
64,361,000
62,184,000
70,196,000
68,931,000
79,451,000
84,512,000
95,066,000
112,647,000
125,351,000
147,784,000
165,315,000
147,408,000
147,606,000
145,789,000
147,903,000
152,814,000
146,822,000
146,887,000

(2)
25,859,556
29,647,774
29,167,195
28,310,991
28,848,793
27,700,509
32,318,775
55,136,231
49,767,586
54,379,518
62,121,123
60,218,809
68,470,015
67,327,714
77,523,884
80,396,923
91,125,241
108,921,831
113,063,145
93,425,047
93,966,832
85,830,628
84,953,908
84,011,962
83,059,120
83,541,420
79,712,387
78,538,922

(3)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

64

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(4)
53,534
55,377
50,205
41,199
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

War of 1812
Service
Pensions
Survivors

(5)
2,078,607
1,588,833
1,355,600
1,089,037
934,658
768,918
1,014,526
790,710
621,613
478,275
357,335
278,889
207,783
144,390
105,837
73,659
52,800
38,847
22,505
11,909
10,494
5,312
3,583
1,972
1,440
791
193
96

Table A2. Cash Expenditures for Veterans Benefits by Period of Service,
1791-1900 (dollars)
Total

Compensation
for Death and
Disabilitya

Revolutionary War
Service Pensions
Survivors

(1)

(2)

(3)

Widows,
Orphans,
and other
Dependents
(4)

War of 1812
Service
Pensions
Survivors

(5)

a

This column includes some expenditures from the Naval Pension Fund and Privateer
Pension Fund that may have been service pensions rather than compensation.
Sources: 1791-1865: (U.S. Senate 1877). 1866-1900, column (1): (Historical Statistics
2006, series Ed297); columns 2-4: Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Pensions;
column 5, Glasson (1918, 113).

65

Table A2 continued. Cash Expenditures for Veterans’ Benefits by Period of
Service, 1791-1900 (dollars)
Year

War of 1812

1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900

Widows,
Orphans,
other
Dependents
(6)
$511
335,994
689,304
616,016
533,000
445,773
361,549
294,572
2,192,700
2,658,058
2,381,801
2,024,208
1,882,542
1,686,302
1,518,202
1,458,896
1,765,582
1,596,605
1,397,487
1,263,239
1,040,284
827,081
721,060
645,297
541,923
456,848
388,292
347,070
293,097
248,913

Indian Wars

(7)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
158,076
377,884
308,365
268,778
227,580
189,981
165,327
138,143

Mexican War

Survivors

Survivors

Survivors

(8)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
66,434
456,652
460,161
468,694
442,083
418,997
403,872
379,035

(9)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
53,149
1,861,756
1,796,899
1,728,028
1,622,115
1,425,258
1,396,392
1,388,707
1,433,691
1,368,686
1,279,188
1,213,509
1,107,595
1,011,504

(10)
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,548
583,056
693,572
695,055
695,315
686,734
736,173
803,346
802,033
814,096
818,564
846,560
818,068
804,308

Sources: Glasson (1918, 113, 115, 119, 271).

66

Civil War
(Law of 1890)
Survivors
Widows,
Orphans, and
other
Dependents
(11)
(12)
$0
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7,812,108
1,095,529
43,845,071
7,562,900
54,568,610
13,690,927
45,062,151
12,838,023
46,478,227
12,624,108
45,257,663
13,140,301
46,514,122
15,172,610
49,947,222
16,308,449
49,045,132
15,276,329
50,431,124
15,334,956

Land Grants. Table A3 shows a preliminary estimate of the amount of land awarded
to veterans of the Revolutionary War, the War of 1812, and the Mexican War. We started
with 2,666,080 acres awarded by the Continental Congress and the federal government
(Gates 1968, 276; Weber and Schmeckebier 1934, 451). We then added the amounts awarded
by the states cited in Gates (1968): New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia (and Indiana), and
Georgia. Gates did not include figures for four other states that granted land: Massachusetts
(and Maine after it became a separate state), Maryland, North Carolina, and South Carolina.26
For these states we included a rough estimate equal to .497 times the amount awarded by the
states for which we had estimates. The ratio .497 was based on bounties listed on 10 pages
randomly selected from Bockstruck (1996). Although small, the sample contains 469 records,
and the ratio quickly settled in the neighborhood of one half. The total awarded to veterans of
the Revolution, according to the last line of Table A3, was 16,599,283 acres, of which only
16 percent came from the Continental Congress and federal government, while 37 percent
came from the extraordinary grants made by Virginia to its veterans.
Our estimate for the veterans of the War of 1812, based on the legislation passed
during and immediately after the war, is 4,891,000 acres (Gates 1968, 276; Weber and
Schmeckebier 1934, 451). To estimate the amount of the land awarded to veterans of the War
of 1812 after the Mexican War we relied on James W. Oberly (1990). Oberly's Table 4 (1990,
18) shows a distribution of land warrants by period of service under the Act of 1850 based on
a sample of warrants, Table 5 (Oberly 1990, 20) shows a distribution for the Act of 1852, and
Table 6 (Oberly 1990, 22) shows a distribution for the Act of 1855. We blew up the sample
26

New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island and Connecticut, apparently, did not grant land to veterans.
Connecticut, however, did award land to citizens as compensation for property damaged during the
Revolution.

67

estimates by 200 (Oberly's sampling ratio) to produce estimates of the total amount of acres
transferred to veterans by period of service (War of 1812, Mexican War, and other 19th
century conflicts) under each law.
To estimate the amount of land awarded to veterans of the Mexican War we also
included the amount of land awarded under the Law of 1847 (Oberly 1990, 3) in addition to
the estimates for the Mexican War derived from Tables 4, 5, 6. The total amount issued to
veterans of the Mexican War, 16,885,640 acres, is less than the total amount issued to
veterans of War of 1812 after the Mexican War, 34,304,000 acres, because more soldiers
served in the War of 1812 (Table 1). The estimate of land per veteran for the Mexican War in
Figure 5 was computed by dividing the total amount of land awarded to veterans of the
Mexican War by the standard estimates of the number who served (Table 1). This results in a
rather large acreage per veteran. We do not have a definitive explanation for this anomaly. It
is possible that some men who received bounties did not actually join the expeditionary force
and proceed to Mexico.

68

Table A3. Land Awarded to Veterans of the Antebellum Wars (acres)
Revolutionary War
Continental Congress and the Federal
2,666,080
government
New York
1,022,500
Pennsylvania
1,336,500
Virginia
6,190,117
Georgia
750,000
Other Land Bounty States
4,634,086
Total
16,599,283
War of 1812
Awards made before the Mexican War
4,891,000
Awards made after the Mexican War
34,304,000
Total
39,195,000
Mexican War
Total
16,885,640
Native American Wars
Total
10,062,000
All Antebellum Wars
Total
82,741,923
Sources and Notes. Revolutionary War: Gates (1968, 276). This figure is also given in
Weber and Schmeckebier (1934, 451). New York: We multiplied the 2,045 officers and
privates entitled to land (Gates 1968, 255) by 500 acres, the minimum entitlement.
Pennsylvania: We added two tracts reserved for veterans, Gates (1968, 253, 253 ftn. 11).
Virginia: Gates (1968, 257). This is a lower bound estimate that combines the amount of
federal land office scrip that was exchanged for Virginia warrants and the amount of
Virginia land warrants located in the Virginia Military Track in Ohio. It omits warrants
located in Kentucky. Georgia: Gates (1968, 253). Other Bounty Land States (Massachusetts,
Maryland, North Carolina, and South Carolina): 49.7% of the total for New York,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Georgia based on a sample of bounties from Bockstruck (1996),
a comprehensive list of warrants issued by state governments. War of 1812, original grants:
Gates (1968, 276); Weber and Schmeckebier (1934, 451). War of 1812, post Mexican War
grants: Oberly (1990, 18, 20, 22). Mexican War: Oberly (1990, 3, 18, 20, 22). See the text of
the appendix for additional details. Native American Wars: Oberly (1990, 18, 20, 22).
Grants by state governments are excluded except for the Revolutionary War.

69

The Value of the Land Grants. The estimates cited in the text of the value of land grants
in the antebellum era are back-of-the-envelope calculations intended only to provide a
sense of relative magnitudes. For the Revolution we started with our estimate of total
land grants to revolutionary officers and soldiers from Table A3. We assumed that 30
percent of these grants were sold in the first year after the war, 25 percent in the second
year, and so on. We priced land at $.50 per acre. Stanley Lebergott (1985, 186) used
$1.00 per acre for federal land circa 1800. Farley Grubb (2005, 25-26) zeros in on the
same figure. Discussions of the revolutionary land grants, however, stress that most of the
land was sold to speculators at relatively low prices before 1800, hence the lower
estimate. We then deflated by a cost of living index (Historical Statistics 2006, series Cc2)
to put the resulting value in 1860 dollars and computed the present value at the end of the
war at 6 percent. The final figure was $6,179,593. A slower schedule of sales, in which
only 25 percent of the land was disposed of in the first year after the war, yielded a figure
of $4,654,508.
To estimate the value of the land bounties awarded to veterans of the War of 1812,
we started with the estimates in Table A3. We assumed that the warrants issued during
the war were generally disposed of quickly after the war was over, 40 percent in the first
year, 30 percent in the second year, 20 percent in the third year, and 10 percent in the
fifth year. The assumption of rapid disposal is consistent with most descriptions of the
process. We then multiplied the amount disposed of in each year by a rough estimate of
$.72 per acre (Oberly 1990, 9-10). This is very likely an upper bound estimate. The
nominal amounts received in each year were then deflated by the consumer price index
and the present value was taken in 1815 at 6 percent.

70

The estimates of the value of the warrants issued to veterans of the War of 1812
after the Mexican War and the warrants issued to the veterans of the Mexican War were
computed analogously. We assumed that 40 percent of the warrants were disposed of in
the first year, 30 percent in the following year, 20 percent in the year after that, and 10
percent in the fifth year after the war. We then multiplied the acreage figures disposed of
in each year by Oberly's estimate of the value of land warrants (1990, Table 28, 170). We
then deflated these figures by the cost of living index (Historical Statistics 2006, series
Cc2) and discounted them at 6 percent to the end of the War of 1812 or the end of the
Mexican War as appropriate.

Table A4: Present Value of Land Awarded to Veterans in 1860
Dollars at 6 Percent
War

Total

Per Veteran

Revolutionary War
War of 1812 (Immediately after the
War)
War of 1812 (After Mexican War)

$6,179,593

$28.00

1,601,260

5.58

4,778,271

8.50

Mexican War

22,348,881

136.52

Sources. Quantity of Land: Table A3. Prices of Land: Lebergott (1985, 186),
Grubb (2005, 25-26), Oberly (1990, 9-10, 170). See the discussion in the
Appendix for more details.

71

