                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SOCIAL SECURITY AND PENSIONS


                         Edward P. Lazear



                      Working Paper No. 1322




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1984




Funding by the Department of Health and Human Services through the
Brookings Institution is gratefully acknowledged. Brookings holds
the copyright to this paper and it cannot be reproduced without
their permission. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper 1/1322



                    Social Security and Pensions


                                ABSTRACT




     Recent and proposed changes in the social security statutes can have

profound etfects on worker behavior and on pensions themselves. In the

context of an optimal lifetime compensation plan, pensions depend on efficient

dates of retirement. TO the extent that changes in social security affect the

efficient date of retirement, both the pension and the wage profile itself

will react. Four proposed changes in the social security system are analyzed.

The cost savinjs associated with the change, as well as the effect on pensions

and worker compensation in general are discussed.




                                                    Edward P. Lazear
                                                    Graduate School of Business
                                                    University of Chicago
                                                    1101 East 58th Street
                                                    Chicago, IL 60637

                                                    312—962—7464
     This essay is an attempt to understand the effects of proposed changes in

 the rules governing the receipt of social security on private pension

formulas.   Four policy proposals are considered. Both short-run and long—run
implications   are analyzed. An empirical strategy, which allows the estimation

of the magnitudes of the effects, is described. In addition to examining the

effects on pension formulas, an intermediate step is the determination of

changes in retirement behavior. A by-product is a discussion of the effects

of the proposed changes on costs to the social security system.



I. Social Security and Optimum Retirement

     The basic assumption to be employed throughout this analysis is that

firms and workers agree to engage in arrangements that are privately

efficient. This implies that they maximize the joint value of output and

leisure. More specifically, it implies that work occurs when and only when

the private value of work exceeds the value of the worker's leisure. There is

a large literature that employs this notion. Becker, Landes, and Michael

(1977), Lazear (1979), Hashimoto and Yu (1980), and Hall and Lazear (1984) are

a few examples of a principle that is by now reasonably well understood among

practitioners.

     The reason that the "privately efficient" is distinguished from efficient

is that social security creates distortions which enable firms and workers to

act opportunistically against the system. By selecting one date of retirement

over another, it is possible to make both firms and workers better off. This



     'A related idea was exposited by Feldstein (1976) and pursued by others
including Topel (1983).
                                     —2—




is because there is no monotonic link between the amount received in social

security payments by the worker and the length of the work life so the rela-

tion of contributions to benefits received is not appropriate for efficiency.2

The implication is that changes in social security are likely to affect the

private optimum date of retirement. In order to understand the effects of

social security on private pensions, it is first necessary to understand the

way that the social security system alters the retirement decision.

     There are five primary ways that the social security system distorts the

relationship between workers1 worth to the firm and the value of leisure. The

first is the vesting provision. Social security requires that (under most

circumstances) a worker have 40 contributing quarters in order to be fully

insured. This means that the value of working the 40th quarter far exceeds

the value of output produced by the worker at the firm.

     Second, social security benefits levels are a function of the average

wage that the worker receives over his entire lifetime (adjusted for wage

inflation). If the worker's productivity is not constant over the lifetime,

his average wage is affected by when he chooses to retire. This is derived

more formally below, but it implies that a worker can affect the size of his

benefits by altering his retirement date.

     Third, it has been argued convincingly (see, for example, Gordon and

Blinder (1980), Mitchell and Fields (1984), Burkhauser (1976)), that social

security is not actuarially neutral of the date of retirement, independent of

the wage effect already mentioned. The current consensus is that workers who

retire before 65 do not have benefits with expected present values as high as




     2The relationship sometimes goes the wrong way since workers who remain
with the firm for a longer time pay a larger amount in, but may actually
receive less in benefits from the system if they continue to work beyond 65.
                                        —3—



otherwise identical workers who retire at 65. The direction of the bias is

not essential. What is important is that the value of benefits is not

independent of the age of retirement.

        Fourth, the earnings test implies that workers who continue to work

beyond age 65 lose benefits permanently that are not made up in higher

payments later on. This implies that even if the present value of benefits

rises with work to age 65 (or more exactly, with the election to defer receipt

of payments until 65), the reverse is true for work beyond that date. More

will be said about this issue below.

        Finally, since the system is financed by the current working generation

(and its employers), continuing to work increases the contributions to the

system without necessarily changing the amount of benefits. This link is the

least well defined, however, because of the pay—as—you-go nature of the

system. Not only is any one worker's benefits in large part independent of

his contributions to the system, but an entire generation's benefits may be

independent of its contributions.

        With these points in mind, let us derive the worker's true wage at each

point    in his life cycle as a function of age of retirement.
        The worker's problem is to maximize lifetime utility. In this simplest
of    problems there are two components: leisure and pecuniary wealth, which are

assumed separable in the utility function. The worker can select the number

of years of work after which to retire. If Y(t) is the worker's pecuniary

wealth if he works t years including social security, L(T' —         t)   is the

total value of leisure when he works t years, where T'          is the year of

death, then the worker's maximization problem is


(1)                            Max   Y(t)   +   L(T'   —   t)
                                t
                                         —4—



with first-order condition


(la)                           Y'(t) =   L'(T    —    t)

Equation Cia) says that the   worker should equate the value of incremental
leisure with his income per period since Y'(t) is income.

       For the purposes of this study, Y(t) consists of three components:

direct earnings from work (net of taxes including FICA), social security

wealth, which the worker creates by participating in the covered sector of the

labor market, and pension wealth. In a competitive labor market, it must be

the case that the worker's total income through T equals his total lifetime

product through T, where P is selected time of retirement. Let V(t) be

the present value of lifetime product through year t and v(t) be the

incremental product associated with the tth year of work. Define W(T) as

lifetime wage income. If pension wealth were zero, then


(2)                                 v(T) = W(T)


However, it need not be true that


                           v'(t)    v(t) =     w(t)        w'(t)


for any t. It is not necessary that the wage at any point in time equal that

year's marginal product.

       Now, social security wealth, S, depends not only upon years worked, but

also upon the average salary, adjusted for inflation. So


(3)                                S = S(T,    (T))

where (T) is the average salary earned through T, conditional upon

retirement at T (adjusted for inflation). The properties of SC.) have
                                                —5—



already been mentioned. First,


 (4)     (a) S1 = 0           for T <                   where T* is the normal date
                                                        of retirement (currently 65)

         (b) s   < 0          for T > T*

         (c) S                is discontinuous at 10

         (d) 52>0

Statement (4c) is the vesting rule. Statement (4d) says that up to a point,

the higher are average earnings, the higher are social security benefits.

Statement (4b) is the earnings test: Work beyond the normal date results in

the withdrawal of benefits, which are never made up. Statement (4a) says that

years of service (other than 10) do not affect benefits. This may seem

confusing, given the earlier statement that early retirement benefits are

lower than normal retirement benefits. But retiring at, say, T* - 3,               does

not require that the worker receive benefits at that point. In fact, if

workers could borrow against social security wealth, no one would ever elect

to start benefits before T*, irrespective of the date of retirement. Below

the assumption of perfect capital markets is relaxed.3

        Equation (2) implies that

                              P                    T
(5)                       f
                              0
                                  v(t)e_rtdt   = J     w(t)edt
                                                  0

Also,


(6)                                 (T)        J   w(t)dt

If r = 0,     then from (5) and (6),



     3mis also implies that the earnings test between years T* — 3 and T*
is irrelevant since workers always would opt for zero benefits between T* — 3
and T
                                            —6—



                              (T)      J     v(t)dt     =   (T)
so that


(7)
                         d = d =1           (v(T)   -
                                                        -
                                                        v(T))

Equation (7) says that the change in the average wage from one additional year

of work must be the same as the effect of the marginal product of that year on

the average, independent of the shape of the age—earnings profile. Since

totals must add up, averages must be the same. This means that for these

purposes, the wage profile is irrelevant. Only the V(t) profile must be

analyzed.

      Somewhat aside, if r > 0, then there is an incentive to steepen the

profile relative to the true productivity profile. By "lending" to the firm,

the wOrker gets to count the firm's interest repayment as part of the average

wage upon which social security payments are based.

      For simplicity, assume that r = 0           so that (3) becomes


(8)                                 S = S(T, (T))


Now, the private return to work T is


                              Y(T) = W(T) + S(T, w(T)

                                    = V(T) + S(T, w(T))


so from (5), (7), and (8),     y(T), defined as the change in private wealth

associated with retiring one year later, is


(9)                  y(T) =   v(T) ÷ s1 + s2 d(T)

                                             S2
                         =    v(T) +   S1   +-_ (v(T)
                                                            —   v(T))
                                            —7—



Then (la) can be written as

                                                     S
                    L'(T' — T) =                               —
(la')                              v(T) +   S1
                                                 +   4 (v(T)
A typical pattern is illustrated in Figure 1.

        The y(T) path shown is the value of working the Tth year on the

assumption that year T is the final year. For T < 10,                 there is no social

security effect. At T = 10         there is a spike in the y(T) function because

the worker becomes fully insured at (10) earnings. For 10 < T < T*,

S1 =    0,   but         0. At T0, v(T0) = v(T0),              but for T >   T0   the

marginal is below the average, pulling it down. At T >              T*,   the earnings

test takes hold so that each additional year's earnings are offset by a

corresponding decrease in social security wealth. This causes a kink in the

y function since S1 is no longer zero and its effect must be added to that
    dv
of S2.
        Note that in Figure 1, social security induces earlier retirement than

would otherwise occur. The earnings test pushes in this direction, but so

does gearing benefits to average wage when the final years are associated with

declining productivity.4 Additionally, zero interest tends to artificially

depress the slope of y relative to that of v. Figure 2 illustrates another

possibility where social security may or may not result in earlier retirement

depending upon the value of leisure. If leisure value is L' rather than

L',     then the social security system induces later retirement.

       The point is that it is privately optimal (for the firm and worker

jointly) to declare that retirement occurs at the time when the worker's

value, including increases or decreases in social security, equals the value




        4mis result is similar to that of Carliner and MacDonald (1980).
                   —8—




      *
v,w




                                          - T)


                               v(T)
                           t




                               y(T)
          10                          T
                          T0




               Figure 1
         —9-.




                    L'(T'- t)
                                           L'(T'- t)
                                    v(T)




                                'y(T)




10              T               T




     Figure 2
                                       —1 0—




of his leisure. Changes in social security payments are likely to change that

date.



II. Total Worth, Wages and Pensions

        The y(T) path that was derived in the last section can be thought of as

the total private worth of the worker. It is linked to pensions and wages

because the worker's pension and wage path affects the date at which the

worker chooses to retire. It is privately efficient to have the worker retire

at the intersection of y(T) and L(T' - T),        but the worker only chooses

that date if it is forced upon him (via mandatory retirement) or if his total

compensation is set up in a way that induces him to choose the efficient date

as his optimum.

        The theory that links pensions and wages to retirement is exposited in

four papers (Lazear 1979, 1981, 1983, 1984). It would require too much space

to fully exposit those ideas here, so only a sketch of the methodology with

more explicit derivations of the essential relationships is provided.

        In Lazear (1979), I argued that an age—earnings profile that was steeper

than the age—productivity effects would produce incentives for the worker to

perform more efficiently on the job. By paying workers less than they are

worth when young and more than they are worth when old, the young and old

alike are induced to work harder than they otherwise would. Steepening the

profile raises the cost of losing the job for poor performance.

        There are two direct consequences of this approach for motivating

workers: First, a pension or some lump sum after retirement is a necessary

part of the optimal profile. This ensures that the effort level during the

final years is the efficient one (derived explicitly in Lazear (1981)).
                                      —11—



      Second, the profile distorts the labor supply decision. Workers, left to

 their own devices, choose to quit work when the value of leisure exceeds the

 wage, not the true value of work. If the worker could be forced to work only

 when it was efficient to do so, then all, including the worker, could be made

 better off. Herein lies the explanation for mandatory retirement. Mandatory

 retirement, by forcing the worker to retire at the efficient age, permits the

 firm to pay the worker the appropriate amount over his lifetime.   If the

worker were permitted to work beyond that date, the distortion in labor supply

induced by tilting the age-earnings profile would cause him to work longer.

But the value of these additional years to the firm falls short of the value

of forgone leisure. Thus, over the worker's entire lifetime (although not

during the final years) the increment in payment does not cover the cost of

leisure. The firm that uses mandatory retirement at the appropriate date is

able to attract all workers.

     Figure 3 illustrates this. The worker is worth y in the final year

P. Paying the worker w(T) rather than y(T) provides the appropriate

incentives for effort. The problem is that the worker prefers to retire at

P1 rather than T*. If the worker were permitted to work until T1, then in

competition the firm would pay the worker the present value of OABC over his

lifetime. With mandatory retirement at T*,    the firm pays OADE, but the
worker has additional leisure from T* to     T1 The mandatory retirement
scheme is better iff the value of the additional leisure exceeds the incre-

mental payment to the worker. This amounts to asking whether EDFC is larger

than EDBC. It is under all circumstances.

     This distortion is not confined to retirement at T. Tilting the age—

earnings profile causes workers to be too reluctant to leave, even when

departure would be worthwhile. it turns out that a cleverly chosen pension
           —12—




w,




                            w(T)



 A                                     y (T)




     0             *               T
                  T    T1




         Figure 3
                                          —13—




 plan can rectify the situation. Figure 4 illustrates the problem and the

 solution.

      Suppose that a worker receives wage w(T) for each year through T* and

a pension, the value of which is EFGH, upon retirement at T*. The size of

 EFGH is chosen to solve the end—period effort problem, taking into account

 the worker's access to capital markets, his desired savings, progressive

income taxes, and his confidence that the firm will not default on its pension

promise. (All are discussed in detail in Lazear (1981).)

     The problem is that at to,     the   worker may find that his alternative use

of time is unexpectedly high, say   w0. This might result because he receives

an unexpected outside offer, or because the value of his leisure rises, say,

due to illness. The worker chooses to remain because w(t) >           Yet all

could be made better off if the worker were to leave. In fact, the

appropriate amount of severance pay could make all better off.

     In Lazear (1983, 1984), I show that the efficient severance pay is

ABCD + EFGH.   Under these circumstances, the firm is indifferent between

retaining or losing the worker. If he stays, the firm pays tOBCT* + EFGH

and gets value of tOADT*, yielding a quasi—loss of ABCD + EFGH.        If he

leaves, the firm simply makes a direct payment of ABCD + EFGH.      Both policies

yield the same profit to the firm. But the worker benefits by leaving only

when it is efficient. If       > v*(t), then the worker receives ABCD +

t0JKT* + EFGH, which exceeds t0BCT* + EFGH.

     This implies that the optimal severance pay is ABCD + EFGH. A pension,

the expected present value of which declines with age of retirement beyond

t, can act as exactly this kind of severance pay. Indeed, in Lazear (1983,

1984) I find strong evidence to suggest that the decline in present value of

pension benefits (stock——not flow) with age of retirement is widespread.
              —14—




 v,w




"Jo                               y (T)




                          F
                              C

                              H

       t        to    T




           Figure 4
                                           —15—



       The link between pensions, y(t), and w(t) is established: Let P(T)

he the expected present value of the pension if retirement occurs at time T.

Assume that (T) > y(T)         implies that '(t) > y(t) for t > T.     For

simplicity, continue to assume that interest is zero. Then the worker retires

at time T* —    1   iff


(10)                      (T) ÷ P(T — 1) > w(T) + P(T)


Select the pension optimally so that


(11)                           T-1 -      = w(T)   —   y(T)

Substitute (11) into (10) to obtain the result that the worker retires early

when and only when


                      w(T) +         + w(T) —   y(T)   > w(T) + P(T)
                               T-1
or when


(12)                                   (T) > y(T)


which is the criterion for private efficiency.



III. Social Security and Pensions

       All the necessary tools are now available to analyze the impact of

changes in social security on pensions. Since equation (11) gives the rela-

tionship between pensions, wages and y, we need only detern-tine the effects

of social security on y(T), and to a lesser extent on w(T) and P(T*).

Neither w(T) nor P(T*) are likely to be affected much by changes in social

security relative to y(T). The determinants of w(T) and P(T*) have to do

with life cycle savings, capital markets, and firm default. Of these, life
                                     —16—




cycle savings is the determinant most likely to be affected, but even its role

is limited. Each is considered along with the various policy changes.


A. Delay Without Reduction in Social Security

     (1) The Basic Analysis

     The first policy to be considered does not imply any direct cost savings

for the social security system, but indirect savings are present. Consider

shifting the entire actuarial relationship that currently exists for retire-

ment between 62 and 65 to ages 65 to 68. The expected present value of

pension benefits, given retirement at 65 would be equal to the current

expected present value for retirement at age 62. Similarly, 66 corresponds to

63, and so forth.

     The key to understanding the effect on pensions is to understand how this

alters the basic shape of y(T) as shown in Figure 1. Equation (9) is the

determining factor.

     Define T* as the number of years of work that corresponds to retirement

at age 65. Then for T < T* - 3,    the policy has no effect on y(T) since,

from equation (9), neither v(T),   S1 or S2 is altered. Whether or not

there is a change between age 62 and age 65 depends upon the assumption about

capital markets. For this policy change and the next, continue to assume that

capital markets are perfect. For the last two changes, that assumption is

relaxed to illustrate the differences that are introduced by this assumption.

     If capital markets are perfect, and workers can borrow against their

social security wealth, then S1    is zero between 62 and 65 because workers

need not take the benefits early, even if they retire early. But under the

current regime, it always pays to begin the benefits at age 65 and then the

earnings test starts to bite. Reductions in social security payments via the

earnings test are not made up so the y(T) declines more steeply after 65.
                                              —17—



         Under the proposed scenario, workers would not elect to receive social

security until age 68 because to do so would reduce the present value of

benefits. But after age 68, the earnings Lest iould take hold. Figure 5

shows the change.

         Under the new policy, the earnings test does not become binding until age

68, or at T* + 3.          The kink that exists at T* under the current system

shifts to T* +        3.   Further, the decline is more rapid on the Y1(T) function

than on the y0(T)          function. The reason is that the payment per year is

larger on 1 than              Yo   in   order tokoep actuarial values the same while

making benefit payments over a smaller number of years.

         The effects on retirement age depend upon the value of the alternative

use of time. Individuals who would have retired under the old regime between

T* and T0 will delay retirement somewhat. The switch to the new system

makes work between T* and T0 more rewarding so some individuals are

induced to remain in the labor force longer. However, there are those with

values of leisure between L0 and L1 who would have retired at T* under

the old system, but at T such that T* < T < T* + 3             under the new system.

Those workers receive benefits that are less than the full value because of

the non—neutral relationship of early retirement social security to normal

retirement social security. But they would have received the full amount

under the old system because they retire after T* under the old system.

This implies that social security costs are reduced on these individuals.

         Individuals whose value of leisure lies between L1 and       L2 also retire
later under the new regime. But the effects on the cost to the system are

ambiguous here. Under the old regime, those workers would have worked beyond
 *
T    ,   forgoing   some benefits as a result. The same is true in the new regime.

The difference is that under the old system, the worker receives benefits for
           —18—




                              wo




L0
L




                                   T
                T   T*+3 T0




     Figure 5
                                     —19—




a greater number of years than in the new system. But because actuarial

values are the same across systems at normal retirement age, the benefits per

year are smaller under the old system. The net effect is ambiguous.

     Workers who have a value of time that is lower than L2 retire at an

earlier age under the new regime than under the old. Here the effect is to

increase costs to the social security system. Under the old system these

workers received benefits for fewer years and the benefits per year were

smaller.



     In order to derive the effect of the policy change on pensions, it is

necessary to examine what happens to the wage path and to the pension at the

normal date of retirement. Since the kink in the v function has moved

from T* to T* + 3,     it is now likely that the modal age of optimal retire-

ment will move from age 65 to age 68. This means that pensions are likely to

follow suit, declaring that as the normal age of retirement. But what is

"normal age" is in large part semantics. What is important is the relation of

value of pensions taken before that date to pensions taken at that date.

Equation (11) allows us to examine what happens.

     If it were privately optimal for workers to work longer under the new

regime, then either the wage profile or pensions at normal retirement age must

be adjusted downward. The reason is that during the final years, workers are

overpaid relative to their worth to the firm. The longer they remain with the

firm, the greater is the quasi—loss, which must be made up by an adjustment in

the profile or the pension. One would expect that the adjustment would work

partly through the pension and partly through the wage. Fewer years of

retirement imply that in a life—cycle savings context, workers prefer to take

relatively less of their income after retirement.
                                                       —20--




        This logic, along with equation (11), yields specific implications for

the way that pensions change with the change in social security policy.

First, the normal age of retirement goes up. Second, the pension received

upon reaching normal age is smaller. (This implies a smaller accrual rate for

each year of work.) Third, since w1(t) lies below w0(t) and since Yi

lies above Y0 between T* and T* + 3,                           the rate of decline in pension

benefits with additional years of work after age 65 is smaller in the new

regime than in the old. The intuition is that since it is privately optimal

I..U WULJ
s-—..
            UL i1IUL --—-—    LIL J11J.UIL .L
                              ,._;L_.__.._______
                                                               Uk) .LII
                                                                          -   __-
                                                                              Wciy L11a1   -   '——.   ,         i——-
                                                                                                          LJ.L% LL

discourage delayed retirement beyond age 65. Fourth, using the same logic,

before age 65, the decline in pension value with delayed retirement is less

pronounced under the new structure than under the old. But the differences

will not be great. Until age 65, the only differences that result come from

the change in the age—earnings profile, not in the y function. Those

changes are not likely to be large. Finally, changes in the decline in

pension value with additional years worked after T0 are ambiguous. The

shift in the y function is in the same direction as the shift in the w

function so the net effect on W —                  v    is ambiguous.

        In addition to these direct effects, there may be indirect effects as

well. Since the present value of the pension upon attainment of normal age is

smaller and since the rate of decline in pension benefits for delayed retire-

ment before normal age is smaller (dPT/dT is closer to zero), this implies

that total pension payments are likely to be smaller as well. But in competi-

tion workers must be paid their lifetime marginal products. Only if the

additional overpayment in wages that occurs between the old T and the new

normal age, T* + 3,          (since w(T) > v(T) for T > T*)                           exactly offsets the

reduced pension costs, are there no indirect effects. Otherwise, the pension
                                                —21—




and/or      wage profile must be readjusted to ensure that
                          *
                         T+3                                        *
                                                    *           T+3
(13)                 f        w(t)ertdt   +   P(T       + 3) = J        v(t)ertdt
                         0                                         0

holds, where T* + 3            is the normal date of retirement. This is the lifetime

constraint that workers be paid their marginal products. Since this net

effect is necessarily ambiguous, a priori, and it may not be unreasonable to

assume that the effects cancel each other out.

       In a nutshell, a change in social security that moves the entire

actuarial      relationship back three years tends to reduce the average pension
level, but more importantly, to reduce the penalty associated with delayed
retirement.
       2. An Empirical Strategy
       It    is possible to be more specific for empirical implementation. What is

required is information on y0, y1, w0, w1, PT* under the old system and

*        under the new system. What is currently observable is w0, P, the
current and proposed social security payments and how they vary with age of

retirement. The rest of the variables are not directly observable. However,

knowing the structure of the social security system allows us to obtain the

y functions once v is known. Equation (9) permits that inference.

       The first trick is to infer v0 from existing data. As I have shown in

Lazear (1983, 1984), this can be done under the assumption that the pension

system is set up efficiently. In fact, equation (11) is all that is needed.

The only thing that is not observed in equation (11) is y.                      It can be

inferred by using this difference equation and information on the current

pension plan, and the current wage profile. This, along with equation (9),

allows estimation of the v0 profile. Once the v0 profile has been

identified using the present data, it is a simple matter to couple it with the
                                               —22—




proposed social security system to obtain Yi' again using equation (9).

      All that is missing now is information on w1 and on P *                       under the
                                                                             T +3
new system. As already mentioned there is some ambiguity here. However, we

are not without some guidance. First, there are constraints placed on the

relationship between P, w and v. In particular, zero profits implies that

equation (13) must hold if all individuals retired at the normal age. One

assumption that is not unreasonable is that the pension value at T* + 3                     j
reduced relative to that under the old system at T* to reflect shorter
 _a..4_.__._a_ 1C..
Le ..LLI1LtI1L LJ,J...
                         n.....
                         rUL    _..._..,_.LL
                                           r _n...:
                                              illUl             ..__.._L s..
                                                      ViUUi pLViUU1y     LLLU               -3
                                                                             ._.3L OJ,CC.Li. VLZ

to   80 and received a pension the expected present value of which was $200,000,

then under the new system, they would get 12/15 of $200,000, or $160,000 as

pension. This number, along with the v(t) profile already estimated, can be

substituted into equation (13) to determine the change in the present value of

the w(t) path. Although there is no way to say specifically how that path

would change, again some sort of proportional reduction would not be

unreasonable as a first approximation. An alternative is to assume that the

annual pension flow would be kept constant.

       This technique identifies all the relevant variables. The information

generated along with equation (11) allows the analyst to estimate the exact

shape of the private pension path that will correspond to the new social

security structure.

       3. Short Run vs. Long Run

       This discussion has focused on the long run, ignoring any effects that

might occur during some interim stage. There is the short run to consider,

however, for workers who are currently with the firm, have a wage path already

established, and already have pension rights. What is likely to happen to

their pensions?
                                     —23—




     For the most part, this is not an important issue. It is unlikely that a

change in the social security system of the kind being considered will not

have enough lead time built into it so that the long run analysis is

appropriate for almost all workers. Even if the change is to occur within

five to ten years, there are sufficient degrees of freedom in the wage and

pension accrual paths to allow the arrangement to quickly approach that of the

long—run equilibrium.

     Still, it is interesting to examine what might happen in the short run if

the change in the structure of social security were to occur immediately and

were completely unanticipated. The issue is best addressed by asking whether

there exists a mid-career Pareto move that can be made, given the history of

wages and pension accrual.

     Consider a worker who has not yet reached T*, the old regime's date of

normal retirement. If there were to be no change in the wage profile, then it

would be optimal to flatten the rate of decline in pension value for retire-

ment delayed to some time between T* and T0 in Figure 5. By the logic of

equations (1O)—(12), such a change induces the worker to leave only when

privately optimal and this necessarily can make the worker better off without

making the firm worse off. However, given the current pension already

accrued, flattening the pension decline in a way that was not anticipated when

the wage and pension accrual paths were set up serves to increase the cost of

the worker to the firm. To the extent that this increased cost is not offset

by increased output (and in these final years of work, that is likely to be

the case), the worker's compensation must be reduced somehow.

     There are two obvious candidates. The first is the level of pension

benefits to which the worker would be entitled at T*.   If this can be

reduced, then the rate at which pension declines with age of retirement can
                                       —24—



also be reduced without a corresponding increase in expected pension costs.

There are some legal restrictions on what employers can do to reduce pension

values. What would be necessary here is a slowdown in the rate of pension

accrual before T* and a speedup in accrual rates from T* to T0. Whether

or not this can be accomplished in the current legal and union environment is

questionable.

     The second candidate is the wage profile itself. The appropriate trade-

off is to flatten the wage profile at the same time that the pension decline

is lessened. In order to do this while creating the correct incentives, the

reduction in wages relative to the current structure must occur for workers

with less than T* of seniority. Otherwise, all that is accomplished by

flattening the pension decline is undone by the reduction in wages. What

would be most preferred, although hardly feasible, is to levy a once—and—f or—

all lump sum tax on the current work force, to be given back in higher pension

benefits later on.

     Unfortunately, it turns out that even with lump sum taxes, there is no

way to alter the shape of the age—compensation profile mid—stream without

raising distributional issues.5 The way to see this is to show that there is no

wage—pension path that brings about efficiency and also leaves the firm no

worse off across all workers. It can be accomplished for any one group, but

not for all, even if a lump sum fee is charged.

     Letting 0 denote the existing and 1 denote the proposed, consider a

worker who, under the old regime, would have retired at T*, but under the

new regime should retire at T* +   1   for private optimality. If C is the

lump sum, then it must be true that, at one year before retirement,



     5This is not a problem when workers first join the firm because sorting
occurs so that no worker is at a disadvantage by joining that particular firm.
                                                    —25—



(14) Wo(T*) +               —   v(T*)   =                                               —   v(T*)   —   v(T*÷1)   — C.
                    POT*)                   w1(T*) + w1(T*+1) + P1(T*+1)

Equation (14) ensures that profits do not change as a result of the scheme

(since profits were zero under the old scheme).

       Although v(T) is exogenous and w0, p0 are predetermined, it is still

possible to set P1 and w1 in a way that guarantees efficiency via equation

(11). Because of the free parameter, C, no change in profit is necessary.

       This is no longer true once we recognize that there are other individuals

with different retirement behavior at the firm. For example, consider an

individual who would have retired at T* +                   1    under the old scheme, but at

T* ÷ 2 under the new. In order to leave the firm indifferent, equation (15)

must hold:


(15)            wO(T*) + wo(T* + 1) + p0(p* + 1) —                   v(T*)   —   v(T*   + 1)

                     =                                               2) + p1(T* + 2)
                         w1(T*) + w1(T* ÷ 1) + w1(T*             +

                            —   v(T*)   —   v(T*   + 1) —   v(T*     + 2) — C


Subtracting (15) from (14) yields


         0 =                           —        — v(T* + 1)
(16)           wQ(T* + 1) + P1(T* + 1)   P0(T*)
                    w1(T* + 2) + v(T* + 2)
                —
                                                         P1(T* + 2) + p0(T* + 1)
                                                     —



To guarantee private optimality, (11) must hold so that


(17)         a. p0(T* + 1) — p0(T*) = y0(T* + 1)                     —
                                                                         w0(T + 1)
             b. Pi(T* + 2) — Pl(T* + 1) = y1(T* + 2) — wl(T* + 2)


Substitution of (17a, b) into (16) yields


(18)                v(T* + 2) —     yl(T*    + 2) =      v(T*   + 1) —    yo(T*   + 1)


But the relationship between y and v is exogenous to the firm, determined
                                     —26—



solely by the social security system as in (9). Thus, it is impossible to

guarantee that (18) will hold. Redistributive effects are a necessary

consequence. The way that firms and workers iron out these differences cannot

be resolved here. This requires a theory of bargaining. As such, short—run

changes cannot be specified unambiguously.


B. Equal Flows Deferred to Later Ages

     The next policy change that is considered is a shift in the flow of

benefits to older ages. Specifically, consider making age 68 the date of

normal entitlement, at which point entitlees would receive the same annual

benefit flow as they currently do at age 65. Similarly, 65 would become the

age of early retirement and they would be entitled to the same annual benefits

then as they currently are now at age 62. Such a change results in an

apparent cost savings because the actuarial value of the pension is reduced

(same payment for fewer years).

     In many ways this is similar to the previous analysis, but there are some

differences. Some of the ambiguities about the dates of retirement and the

cost of the system are removed. Again, with the help of equation (9), Figure

6 can be constructed to illustrate the differences between the before and

after y profiles.
     There are two notable shifts. First, it remains the case that the

perfect capital market assumption guarantees that receipt of social security

payment begins at the peak of actuarial value, but not before. This implies

that the kink point moves from T* to T* + 3.     Second, since the actuarial

value of social security benefits is smaller at normal age under the new

regime than under the old, the deviation of y from v tends to be smaller.

     It is clear that such a scheme induces an increase in the age of retire-

ment for most individuals. Anyone whose alternative value of time lies above
              —27—




v,w




                              V




                                  T
      10              T*+ 3




           Figure 6
                                     —28-




L0 retires earlier under the new scheme than under the old. All of those for

whom the alternative value of time lies below L0 have unchanged retirement

behavior. This implies an unambiguous reduction in the cost of the social

security system. No workers receive benefits for a larger number of years

under the new system than under the old and each year pays the same benefits

as it would have before. Additionally, if      < 0, then the benefits per year

are reduced as well from continued work (from (18)).

     Since the average age of retirement rises, it is likely that the firm

will change the normal age of retirement to reflect this. In fact, it is

likely to change to T* ÷ 3. What is the effect of the change on normal age

pension benefits? Again, since there are fewer years of retirement, life

cycle savings models imply that the pension value received upon normal age

falls as the normal age is increased. So the expected present value of

pension benefits received upon normal retirement falls. This does not imply

that the annual flow of pension benefits will fall. A working hypothesis is

that the flow of benefits per year might be left approximately unchanged as a

function of age of retirement. I.e., current pension formulas which define

benefits as a function of years of service, salary, and other factors will be

set so as to make the pension flow associated with retirement at age 68

similar to what it would have been before if work had continued to age 68.

     Even if annual pension benefits conditional upon retirement at age 68

remain unchanged, it is clear that the rest of the pension formula does

change. As before, if the wage profile adjusts at all, its direction of

change seems reasonably clear. The new w(T) path is likely to lie somewhat

below the old one, in order to retain the relationship given by (13), that

expected present value of payment and output must be equalized. Maintaining

the w(t) path at its old level or dropping it in this fashion has an uriam—
                                      —29—




biguous effect on pension formulas. It implies that the expected present

value of pension benefits should decline more slowly as a function of age of

retirement. Since w(T) —   y(T)   is smaller under the new scheme than the old

up to and perhaps beyond T* + 3 (if w(T) falls), it is clear, using

equaton (11), that pension present value must decline more slowly. Intui—

tively, this says that since there is now more private gain to postponement of

the retirement date, the pension should be set up in a way that encourages

later retirement. So as before, this change in social security includes

smaller private pensions that decline more slowly with postponed retirement.

Indirect effects are the same as in the first case considered in (A) and are

not repeated here. Similarly, the empirical strategy to be used to estimate

the new pension path is identical to that described above.

     1. Short Run vs. Long Run

     The same kind of analysis as performed above can be done here to

distinguish the short run from the long run. As already mentioned, short-run

impacts are not likely to be important because of lead times built into most

contemplated changes in social security policy. Still, the effects are

briefly considered.

     The short—run changes are virtually identical to those of the previously

considered policy change. Again, the goal is to find a Pareto move that takes

as history the path of wages and pension accruals to that point and restruc-

tures the remaining profile from there.

     Since later retirement is the objective, and specifically, since a less

rapid decline in pension value is now desired, accrual rates should be

adjusted upward, especially in the years following T*. The difficulty, as

before, is that this imposes larger costs of labor services on the firm with-

out offsetting increases in output. Also as before, it is impossible to alter
                                       —30—



wages and pensions in a way that is both privately optimal and distributional-

ly neutral. Even the imposition of a lump sum tax, with higher pension flows

later, cannot make all workers better off while leaving the firm indifferent

in every situation. If workers choose different dates of retirement, the lump

sum that is appropriate for some is not appropriate for others.


C. Increase the Actuarial Reduction
    Associated with Early Retirement

     Another policy that seems to reduce the cost to the social security

system is a decrease in early retirement benefits, which leave benefits

unchanged for retirement at age 65 (T*). The reason that this does not

obviously reduce the cost to the social security system is that it changes the

average age of retirement and this may offset any cost savings that accrue

from reduced benefit payments.

     The effects of this policy on y illustrate the importance of the

assumption of perfect capital markets. If workers can borrow and lend at the

market rate of interest, then there are no effects of this policy at all.

Since the present value of social security benefits taken at age 65 are higher

than benefits that begin in any other year, any change to the system that

leaves untouched benefits in year of normal entitlement has no effect on y.

The y function is affected by maximum attainable benefits, as a function of

age of retirement; all other values are irrelevant. Under these circuin—

stances, there is no effect on retirement or pensions of the policy change.

     This is no longer true if capital markets are imperfect. At the extreme,

suppose that workers can neither borrow nor lend and must consume only what

they receive as wages, pensions, or social security during that particular

year. With a concave utility function, workers would elect to begin receipt

of benefits as soon as they retired. The fact that there are a significant
                                        —31—



number of individuals who do opt to start benefits before 65 implies that the

perfect capital market assumption is untenable. tinder the assumption that the

worker consumes only what he earns in that particular period, the y function

shifts as shown in Figure 7.

     Beginning at T = 10       years, the spike is smaller for y1 because an

individual who retires with only 10 years of experience is likely to elect to

receive benefits starting at 62. This also implies that S2 is likely to be

smaller, so y1 deviates from v by less than does Yo          At age 62,
(T* —   3),   both Y0 and y1 kink upward because S1 becomes positive at

that point due to the non-neutrality of the actuarial relationship. The kink

is sharper on        than on       because the actuarial value of early retire-

ment is lower under the new policy so delaying retirement to age 65 is worth

more. Alter age 65, the paths converge since the new policy changes nothing

for retirement after that age.

     It should be noted that it is not necessarily the case that y1 deviates

from v by a smaller amount than y0. This depends upon the cross partial,

S12 It is possible, for example, the cross partial to be zero even though

any given       results in a smaller present value of social security benefits.

     Also recall that what has been assumed implies that workers take their

social security benefits at the earliest possible entitlement date. This is

quite different from what was assumed in the first two cases. In those two

examples, the analysis does not change drastically. Here, it makes all the

difference because there are no effects unless workers do not take social

security in a way that maximizes the present value of their benefits.

     First, consider the effects of this policy on retirement. There is no

effect on those who would have retired after T* since the policy does not

alter y after that point. For those individuals for whom it was previously
        —32—




                                    w(T)




                              :1-




                                           V




                                           yo, Y]
                 *        *           T
10              T-3   T




     Figure 7
                                         —33—



optimal to retire between T* - 3       and T*, retirement will be delayed some-

what under the new system. Under no circumstances is it delayed beyond age

65, but some delay is a necessary consequence of this policy change. The

reason that it cannot be delayed beyond age 65 is that each member of this

group retired at or before 65 (T*) under the current system. This implies

that the value of leisure intersected Y0 before T*. Since Y0 and

converge at 65, there is no possibility of privately optimal retirement beyond

this point.

     The postponement of retirement, which comes about because the private

value of working an additional year is higher between T* and T* - 3         under

the new system, introduces an ambiguity into the effects of the policy change

on the costs of the social security system. Although each year of early

retirement benefits cost less under the new system and there are fewer years

during which benefits are received, that age at which the worker retires

differs under the two policies. Since age of retirement is later, and since

benefits are higher for individuals who begin benefits later, the per year

benefit could actually be greater on average under the new system. The sign

of the net effect depends upon the shapes of the two functions as well as the

value of leisure curves.

     Let us turn to the effects on pensions. Again, it is first necessary to

determine the effects on p ,.    Since    T* does not change, and since workers
                           T
are more rather than less likely to retire at or near T*, there is no ob—

vious reason to expect any change in            The same is true of the wage path.
                                         PT*
Since that path is efficiently conditional upon retirement at normal age, and

since that age does not change, there is no reason to expect w(T) to change.

    This implies that w(T) —    y(T)    is smaller under the proposed social

security system than under the existing one. From equation (11), it follows
                                                       —34—



that pensions decline less rapidly under the new system than under the old.

But this in turn implies that the average level of pension payments change as

well. The direction of the effect is clear. Since P* is unaltered, PT*l
must be smaller under the new system than under the old in order to ensure

that dpT/dT is closer to zero. Further, since retirement occurs later, if

it changes at all, the benefits are reduced even more (dPT/dT < 0). In order

to restore equilibrium, total compensation must rise to its previous level.

There are two ways this can come about: an increase in the entire wage profile

L)L   0.11
                         —
              £11LL1S1 £11      t' * --   An nn ra Ca $ n t ha   na nm F 1 a mn 1 a a F H F
                                 T
w(T) —             v(T)   falls so that the speed with which pensions fall as retirement is

delayed will be reduced. If it takes the form of a rise in p , this is
                                                              T
because the pension is used as a "lump sum" in order to make lifetime compen-

sation equal to lifetime wealth.

     To sum up: The effects on the pension plan are either: (a) P *
                                                                  T
increases and the rate of decline in pension value for delayed retirement

between T* - 3               and T* is reduced. (b) There is no change in                ,,   and
the rate of decline in pension value with delayed retirement between T* — 3

and T* is reduced to a lesser extent.

             1 •     The Short Run

             As before, it is interesting to consider what happens to workers already

in the middle of their careers. Is there some way to change the pension/wage

profile to make all workers better off and not harm the firm? Again, the

proof that this cannot be done without distributional effects applies. To

bring about efficiency, it is necessary to reduce the decline in pension value

with retirement delayed to the normal age. This implies a higher pension

cost, which could conceivably be financed by a lump—sum "tax" on all existing

workers. The difficulty is that some workers benefit more than others by this
                                          —35—



change so that the policy implies distributional effects that cannot be undone

without affecting efficient retirement.


D. Spread Out Ages Over Which Social
    Security Benefits Can Be Initiated

       The final policy to be considered is a more gradual increase in benefits

from early retirement to normal age. Suppose that the system were changed so

that those who retired at age 62 received the same benefit flow under the new

system as under the old, and that those who retire at 68 receive under the new

system, the same annual benefits as those who retire at age 65 receive under

the old system. This change leaves the expected present value of social

security the same for retirement at age 62, but reduces it for retirement at

any other age up to 68. Figure 8 illustrates the change.

       At age 68, the flow is the same as it would have been at age 65 under the

current   system but the number of years over which those benefits are received
is smaller. Between age 63 and 67, the flow of benefits is lower under the
proposed     system   than under the current one so the present value is lower. For
retirement     at ages 68 and beyond, the two systems yield the   same present value
of   benefits.

        effects of the change in policy on y depend again upon assumptions
       The

about capital markets. Both cases are examined. 'lb start, assume that
capital   markets are perfect so that benefits always begin at the age which

guarantees maximum present value. Figure 9 depicts y under the current and

proposed situation.

       This situation is virtually identical to Figure 6, which pertained to

policy B, equal retirement flows deferred to older ages. The reason that y1

has this shape is that under the assumption of perfect capital markets, work-

ers all elect to begin receiving benefits at the normal age. But the maximum
             -36-




 Annual
Flow of
Bei efits




                        Current System


                            Proposed System




                                   Age of
        62     65             68
                                   Retirement




             Figure 8
               —37—




w,v




                                    V




      10      T-      T
                          *   *
                              T+3
                                        T




           Figure 9
                                       —38—




present value of benefits is smaller under the proposed system. If 12 > 0,

then the Y1 deviates from v by less than does y0. Additionally, the

point at which the earnings test becomes relevant is age 68, rather than age

65, so the kink occurs later.

      All implications are the same as in case B and need not be repeated here.

Just to summarize, however, the main effect is that the present value of

pension benefits are likely to be smaller at the new normal age of 68 than

they were at the old normal age of 65. Additionally, the rate at which the

present value of pension benefits declines with deferred retirement is

lessened under the new system. Later average retirement occurs and there may

be some indirect effects on the pension and wage paths.

       The situation is quite different if workers can only consume what they

earn in that period. Then, all workers begin retirement benefits at the

earliest possible age, conditional upon retirement. This means that y0          and

      are identical up to age 62 because retirement at any age on or before 62

induces the worker to begin benefits at that date. Since benefits at age 62

are the same under both systems, the paths converge as shown in Figure 10.

       At T* - 3,   there is a kink upward in both the v and v          functions.

The reason is that present value of social security benefits increases with

postponed retirement beyond that point until the normal age when the earnings

test takes hold. That date is T* under the current system and          T* + 3

under the proposed system. There is a kink downward       at the normal age when
the   earnings test becomes binding.

       The effects on optimal retirement depend upon     the location of the value
of    leisure function. Those who would have   retired   before T* under the

 current system are induced to retire earlier under the proposed system. But

 those who would have retired between 65 and 68 under the current system, post—
            —39—




w,v




                                 T
                   *     *   *
                   T-3   T T+3


      Figure 10
                                     —40—



pane their retirement somewhat under the new system. The reason is that slow-

ing down the accrual rate makes it more worthwhile to retire either toward the

very beginning or toward the very end of benefit initiation dates, but reduces

the value of retiring somewhere in the middle. Later retirement could imply

higher costs to the social security system because the present value of

benefits increases in age of retirement. But this effect is likely to be

swamped by two other factors: First, some workers retire earlier and second,

retirement at a given age implies lower benefits under the proposed system for

many ages and benefits are never higher under the proposed system.

     The effects on the pension system can be traced. First, the normal age

of retirement f or the purposes of pension determination is likely to move to a

new modal age of 68. At that age, the present value of pension benefits is

likely to be smaller than it was at age 65 under the current system because

fewer years of life are left and there is little reason to expect the benefit

flow to change from what it would have been at age 65. Additionally, w - v

is smaller between 65 and 68 so the rate at which pension value declines with

retirement postponed beyond 65 will be smaller under the proposed system.     (If

anything w1(T) < w0(r) for T > T* — 3       because of a longer worklife and the

constraint imposed by equation (13).) However, since Yo > Yi     for T* —    3 <

T < T*, the rate of decline in pension benefits with deferred retirement is

greater under the proposed system. It is possible (although not necessary)

that some very early retirees will receive higher pension benefits under the

proposed system than under the current one. This situation is depicted in

Figure 11. The expected present value of pension benefits under the current

system is less than under the proposed system for retirement before age 68.

     Whether these effects exactly balance to leave total pension payments

unchanged is an empirical question. It seems likely, however, that the direct
                                —41—




Expected present
value of pension
   benefits




                                       current

                   proposed-




                   62                            T
                               65          68




                        Figure 11
                                     —42—



effects are to reduce the amount paid as pension to the workers. This may or

may not be offset by wages that exceed marginal product during these final

years. If all of these factors do not offset one another, then there will be

some indirect effects on wage and pension paths, but it is impossible to

predict the indirect effects.

     To sum up, if workers can neither borrow nor lend, then the normal

retirement age shifts to 68, at which point pensions are smaller in present

value terms than they were under the old system at age 65. The pension

accrual pattern changes to favor early retirement until age 65 when it

switches, making postponed retirement more likely.


     1 •   The Short Run

     As before, distributional considerations prevent an unambiguous predic-

tion on what will occur during the short run. The optimal policy is to make

the pension value at age 68 less than it was before at age 65, but to change

the relationship as shown in Figure 11. It is impossible to levy some tax on

workers that leaves them all better off and still maintains (13). Depending

upon that age of retirement, some workers are subsidized while others are

penalized.



IV. Other Aspects of Pension Plans


A. Vesting

     It is natural to consider whether the changes in the social security

system are likely to have any effects on vesting. Although it is impossible

to provide a definitive answer, most factors suggest that there will be little

or no effect on vesting provisions. There are three reasons.

     First, ERISA places some strict limitations on the nature of vesting.

From an examination of the Bankers Trust (1980) study of corporate pension
                                      —43—



 plans, it is not difficult to conclude that in large part, the ERISA prescrip-

 tion for vesting are the ones most frequently found in practice.   Although

 ERISA may in large part have codified what already existed, to some extent

 deviant plans have been forced to conform to the ERISA standards. Unless

 ERISA provisions on vesting are changed at the same time as the social

 security system is changed, there is no reason to believe that legal changes

 will affect vesting.

     Second, vesting is an event that occurs within the first ten, and at the

 latest 15, years of the worker's career. Retirement usually occurs well

beyond that point. It is unlikely, therefore, that any changes in optimal

retirement ages will bump up against vesting constraints.

     Third, the role of vesting is often overstated. All that vesting

normally does is allow the worker who quits to take with him the right to

receive his currently accrued benefits when he reaches normal retirement age.

This is not an important constraint for three reasons. First, since early

retirement benefits are generally worth more than normal retirement benefits,

and since vesting does not ensure the worker's right to receive early retire—

merit benefits, separation affects the value of the accrued pension even with

vesting. Second, accrual rates can be nonlinear, paying more for later years

of service (after vesting) than for earlier years. Tilting the accrual path

is a way to render the vesting constraint unimportant. Third, since the

pension often depends upon final salary at that firm, quitting 10 to 20 years

before retirement can leave the accrued benefits almost worthless in real

terms, especially in an inflationary environment.

     All of these considerations suggest that vesting rules are not likely to

be affected by changes in the social security system.
                                     —44—




B. Social Security Offsets

     Perhaps the most immediate effect of a change in the social security

structure on pensions workers through the social security offset provision.

Many pension plans provide an implicit or explicit supplement for retirement

that occurs before the age of social security entitlement. This supplement

vanishes as soon as social security begins. These supplements are intended to

smooth the flow of retirement income.

     A number of the proposed policies considered in this analysis have pro-

visions for social security payments that begin later and/or are smaller.

Since most supplements are an inverse function of the social security payment,

these changes imply a direct increase in pension payments for early retire-

ment. Such an increase tends to undo much of what is desired as y changes.

     As a result, one would expect the social security offset/supplement

provisions to be rewritten. Although it is impossible to say what the exact

nature of the rewrite would be, the following seems likely: If the purpose is

to maintain the flow of retirement income constant, assuming that the worker

begins receipt of benefits at the normal age,6 then the supplement often will

depend upon benefits received at age 68 rather than at age 65. However, if

early retirement age is left unchanged, some workers will receive a larger

total supplement than under the current situation. This increases the flow of

pension benefits and must be offset in one of four primary ways. First, wages

may fall over the early part of the life cycle. Since this causes other

distortions, this is the least likely of the four. Second, the size of the

annual early retirement supplement may be reduced. Some smoothing of post-

retirement income is sacrificed if this method is adopted. Third, the age of




     6Some plans are based on benefits beginning at the earliest possible age.
                                         —45--




early retirement may be increased so as to leave the total expected flow of

early retirement benefits unchanged. Fourth, the average size of the pension

payments at normal age can   be   reduced so that post—retirement income can be

smoothed at the same original cost.


C. Other Provisions of Pension Plans

       It is much more difficult to make conclusive statements about other

provisions of pension plans including the age of early retirement, minimum and

maximum years of service restrictions, and maximum age of starting employment

beyond which no pension accrual occurs. The reason is that there is no good

theory on why these provisions exist in the first place. M attempt to

analyze them is continued in Lazear (1984), and to a lesser extent in Blinder

(1982), but no satisfactory answers are given.

       One possible way to treat these provisions is to assume that they are

only   dependent upon the normal age of retirement. If that age changes, the
provisions change accordingly. For example, a change in the normal retirement
age from 65 to 68 might shift the first age of early retirement from 55 to 58.
But there is no compelling reason to assume that this is the way that

provisions would be altered. As a result, nothing more is said on this issue.



V. Conclusion

       Pensions vary a great deal and are quite complex, having many provisions

that are not well understood by analysts. The necessary consequence of

ignorance is a failure to be able to predict precisely the effect of a change

in policy on pension formulas. Still, using a relatively simple formulation,

this paper has provided a number of quite detailed predictions about the way

that pension formulas are likely to change in response to changes in the

social security rules. As such, it may provide a useful starting point for

policy makers.
                                         —46—




                                      References


Bankers'   Trust Study of Corporate Pension Plans. Corporate Pension Plan
      Study,    1980. New York: Bankers' Trust.

Becker,    Gary S., Landes, Elisabeth, and Michael, Robert. "An Economic

      Analysis of Marital Instability," Journal of Political Economy 85

      (December 1977): 1141-87.

Blinder, Alan. "Private Pensions and Public Pensions: Theory and Fact," NBER

      Working Paper No. 902, 1982.

Burkhauser, Richard. "The Early Pension Decision and Its Effect on Exit     from
      the Labor Market," unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of

      Chicago, 1976.

Carliner, G., and MacDonald, G.       "A Theory of Optimal Retirement,"

      unpublished, University of Western Ontario, October 1980.

Feldstein, M. "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," Journal of

      Political Economy 84 (October 1976): 937—57.

Gordon, R., and Blinder, A. "Market Wages, Res. Wages and Retirement

      Decisions," J. Pub. Ec. 14 (October 1980): pp.

Hall, Robert, and Lazear, Edward P. "The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and

      Quits    to   Demand," Journal of Labor Economics 2 (April 1984):

      forthcoming.

Hashimoto, Masanori, and Yu, Ben. "Specific Capital, F2uployment Contracts,

      and Wage Rigidity," Bell Journal of Economics (Autumn 1980): 536—49.

Lazear, Edward P. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political

      Economy 87 (December 1979): 1261—64.

__________      "Agency, Earnings Prof iles, Productivity and Hours Restrictions,"
      American Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 606—20.
                                        —47.-




__________    "Pensions as Severance Pay," in Financial Aspects of the United

      States Pension System, ed. Zvi Bodie and John S. Shoven (Chicago:

      University of Chicago Press, 1983).

_________     "Incentive   Effects of Pensions," NBER Working Paper No. 1126, May

      1983.

Mitchell, Olivia S., and Fields, Gary S. "The Economics of Retirement

     Behavior," Journal of Labor Economics 2 (January 1984): forthcoming.

Topel, Robert. "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," American Economic

     Review (September 1983).
