                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         MEASURING THE DYNAMICS OF YOUNG AND SMALL BUSINESSES:
          INTEGRATING THE EMPLOYER AND NONEMPLOYER UNIVERSES

                                           Steven J. Davis
                                          John Haltiwanger
                                            Ron S. Jarmin
                                             C. J. Krizan
                                           Javier Miranda
                                            Alfred Nucci
                                          Kristin Sandusky

                                        Working Paper 13226
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13226


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




We gratefully acknowledge support from the Kauffman Foundation, the U.S. Census Bureau and the
Initiative on Global Financial Markets at the University of Chicago. For helpful comments on earlier
drafts, we thank Mark Roberts, Tim Dunne, Thomas Holmes, Robert Strom, Robert Litan, E.J. Reedy,
Ying Lowery, Richard Boden, Lucia Foster and participants at the NBER/CRIW conference on Producer
Dynamics in April 2005 and an AEA/SBA session in January 2005. We also would like to thank
Paul Hanczaryk for helping us understand the Census Bureau's nonemployer data. This work has undergone
a more limited review than official Census Bureau publications. The views, findings, and opinions
expressed in this work are those of the authors and not the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been
reviewed to ensure confidentiality. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Steven J. Davis, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, C. J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Alfred
Nucci, and Kristin Sandusky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small Businesses: Integrating the Employer and Nonemployer
Universes
Steven J. Davis, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, C. J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Alfred Nucci,
and Kristin Sandusky
NBER Working Paper No. 13226
July 2007
JEL No. C81,D21,L11

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a preliminary version of an Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (ILBD) that combines
administrative records and survey data for all employer and nonemployer business units in the United
States. Unlike other large-scale business databases, the ILBD tracks business transitions from nonemployer
to employer status. This feature of the ILBD opens a new frontier for the study of business formation,
early lifecycle dynamics and the precursors to job creation in the U.S. economy. There are 5.4 million
nonfarm business firms with employees as of 2000 and another 15.5 million with no employees. Our
analysis focuses on 40 industries that account for nearly half of nonemployers and 36 percent of nonemployer
revenues. Within these industries, nonemployers account for 14 percent of business revenues. About
220,000 of the seven million nonemployers in our selected industries hire workers and migrate to the
employer universe over a three-year horizon. These Migrants account for 20 percent of revenue among
young employers (three years or less since first hire). Compared to other nonemployers, the revenue
of Migrants grows very rapidly in the year prior to and the year of transition to employer status.

Steven J. Davis                                      Javier Miranda
Graduate School of Business                          Bureau of the Census
The University of Chicago                            javier.miranda@census.gov
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Alfred Nucci
and NBER                                             Bureau of the Census
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu                         Center for Economic Studies
                                                     4600 Silver Hill Road
John Haltiwanger                                     Washington, D.C. 20233
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742                               Kristin Sandusky
and NBER                                             U.S. Bureau of Census
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu                                LEHD Program
                                                     4700 Silverhill Road
Ron S. Jarmin                                        Suitland, MD 20233
Bureau of Census                                     lee.k.sandusky@census.gov
ron.s.jarmin@census.gov

C. J. Krizan
Bureau of the Census
Cornell.J.Krizan@census.gov
    1. Introduction
    The measurement of economic activity by federal statistical agencies focuses greater
attention on larger, more mature business units. This data gathering strategy has two clear
advantages. First, it yields greater accuracy in estimating the level of economic activity,
whether “greater attention” takes the form of higher sampling probabilities or more
careful auditing and editing. Second, it is easier to identify and promptly capture the
activity of large, long-established business units. On both counts, the desire for a cost-
effective approach to measuring the level of economic activity leads naturally to a focus
on larger, more mature units.

    There are, however, drawbacks to this data gathering strategy. When responses to
shocks and new developments in the economy vary systematically with business size or
age, a focus on larger and more mature units can yield less accurate, potentially
misleading measures of changes in economic activity. As a simple example, consider the
situation when younger and smaller business units are relatively sensitive to aggregate
shocks. In this case, a cost-effective approach to estimating short-term growth rates can
require the over sampling of younger and smaller business units, and there is tension
between a sample design optimized for the level of activity and one optimized for the
growth rate. More important, the traditional focus on larger and more mature units limits
our ability to measure and study the early lifecycle dynamics of businesses and to
evaluate theories of business formation, selection and growth.

    This paper reports our initial efforts to remedy these drawbacks. We develop a
preliminary version of an Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (ILBD) that
combines administrative records and survey-based data for all nonfarm employer and
nonemployer business units in the United States. In the process, we confront conceptual
and practical issues that arise in measuring the importance and dynamic behavior of
younger and smaller businesses. We also document some basic facts about younger and
smaller businesses. In doing so, we exploit the ability of the ILBD to follow business
transitions between employer and nonemployer status. This aspect of the ILBD opens a
new frontier for the study of business formation and the precursors to job creation in the
U.S. economy.

    There are 5.4 million nonfarm business firms with employees in the United States as



                                              2
of 2000 and another 15.5 million with no employees. Most nonemployer business units
are quite small, never become employers, and do not link to the employer universe by
way of any ownership relation. Nonemployer businesses account for a modest four
percent of aggregate U.S. business revenue within the year, but we show that a
substantial share of employers originate as nonemployer businesses.

    Our analysis focuses on 40 industries for which smaller and younger businesses play
especially important roles. These industries account for nearly half of nonemployer
business units in the U.S. economy and 36 percent of nonemployer revenues. Within
these industries, nonemployers account for 14 percent of business revenues. In addition,
more than 11 percent of employers in these industries are connected by some type of
ownership link to the nonemployer business universe within the previous eight years.
Many of these linkages reflect nonemployer businesses that expand over time, hire
workers, and become employers, but other linkage patterns also arise. For example,
some employer and nonemployer business units operate simultaneously under common
ownership for many years. In the analysis below, we identify and quantity several types
of ownership linkages between the employer and nonemployer business universes.

    Over a three-year horizon, three percent of the roughly seven million nonemployers
in our selected industries become Migrants to the employer universe. By Migrants, we
mean that the firm starts as a nonemployer business and later hires one or more paid
employees. Three percent is a small share of nonemployers, but it amounts to 220,000
transitions. Indeed, Migrants play a nontrivial role in the formation of employer
businesses. They account for 28 percent of firms and 20 percent of revenues among
young employers (three years or less since first hire) in our selected industries. Migrants
also grow very rapidly around the transition event. Mean annual revenue growth for
Migrants is 31 percent in the year prior to transition and 101 percent in the year of
transition, much higher than contemporaneous growth for other nonemployers.

    As another step toward an integrated perspective on the dynamics of young and
small businesses, we compare the revenue growth patterns of employers and
nonemployers. Conditional on survival, net revenue growth rates decline strongly with
business age and size for employers and nonemployers alike. When we include business
exits, however, revenue growth shows much weaker and less clear-cut relationships to



                                             3
size and age. The dispersion in growth rates is also much higher for younger and smaller
businesses, mainly because of much higher business turnover rates.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the construction of the ILBD.
Section 3 presents some facts about business numbers, activity levels, and the business
age and size distributions. Section 4 investigates ownership linkages over time between
employer and nonemployer businesses. We quantify transitions between employer and
nonemployer status and other linkages between employer and nonemployer businesses.
Section 5 reports revenue growth and dispersion patterns by business size and age.
Section 6 discusses next steps in our research program, and Section 7 offers concluding
remarks.


2. Constructing an Integrated Longitudinal Business Database

    A. Overview of Main Tasks and Previous Work
    In terms of data development, our objective is to build a fully Integrated
Longitudinal Business-level Database (ILBD) that covers all employer and nonemployer
business units in the nonfarm private sector of the U.S. economy. We construct the initial
version of the ILBD for the years 1992 and 1994-2000, and we plan updates for later
years in future ILBD enhancements. Key data on nonemployers are unavailable for
1993.

    From an analytical perspective, the presence or absence of employees is simply
another business characteristic to be measured. From a database development
perspective, however, integrating the Census Bureau’s employer and nonemployer
business universes is a major undertaking. The main tasks fall into three categories. One
set of tasks involve the construction of longitudinal links for business units within each
universe. A second task is to integrate the employer and nonemployer universes on a
year-by-year basis, ensuring that each unique business entity is counted once, and only
once. A third task is to construct contemporaneous and dynamic ownership links across
universes between employer and nonemployer business units. To carry out these tasks,
we build on previous work by Jarmin and Miranda (2003) to create the Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD), which contains annual data from 1975 to 2001 for all nonfarm
private employers. We also build on previous efforts to construct longitudinal links



                                             4
within the nonemployer universe by Nucci and Boden (2003) and Boden and Nucci
(2004).


     B. Source Data for the ILBD
     Census Bureau business registers draw on payroll tax records, corporate and
individual income tax returns, applications for an Employer Identification Number (EIN),
and various Census Bureau business surveys. The data available to the Census Bureau
vary with the legal and tax status of a business and, in certain respects, its size and
number of locations. For large corporations, routine data inputs include payroll records
and particular items from corporate income tax returns, augmented by direct Census
Bureau collections for multi-location companies. For sole proprietors, partnerships and
single-location corporations with employees, routine data inputs include payroll records,
certain items from income tax returns and periodic Census Bureau surveys such as the
quinquennial Economic Census. For nonemployer businesses, routine data inputs derive
mainly from income tax returns. Table 1 lists the most important administrative and
survey sources for key variables in the employer and nonemployer universes.

     To construct the ILBD, we must first ensure that administrative data from each
universe are cleaned and ready for integration. On the employer side, this task has been
largely accomplished in the work to create the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).2
The Census Bureau’s Employer Business Register, which underlies the LBD, is a list of
establishments (physical locations) maintained to serve as a mailing list for the Economic
Census and as a sample frame for surveys. The Employer Business Register relies heavily
on administrative data and is supplemented by direct Census Bureau collections. 3
Longitudinal linking is facilitated by establishment IDs (LBD Numbers and Permanent
Plant Numbers or PPNs), EINs, enterprise IDs (Alphas), and business name and address
information. Longitudinal establishment links are relatively straightforward to construct,
because they are one to one, and because establishments typically have well-defined

2
  See Jarmin and Miranda (2003). The main outstanding issue with respect to the LBD concerns the delayed
    identification of new establishments owned by certain multi-unit companies. We are developing
    algorithms to retime these births. The retiming issue pertains only to the recognition date of
    establishment birth, not the company-wide level of revenues or other measures of economic activity.
3
  In order to track the establishment structure of multi-unit enterprises, the Census Bureau conducts an
    annual Company Organization Survey. This survey covers all large multi-unit companies and a sample
    of smaller ones. During an economic census, all establishments of multi-unit companies receive survey
    forms.


                                                    5
physical locations. Firms are more difficult to track over time, partly because firm-level
links can be many to many. It should be noted that the Census Bureau continues to refine
its longitudinal firm linkages.

       Longitudinal links are difficult to construct in the nonemployer universe for some of
the same reasons that they are difficult to construct for firms in the employer universe.
Some nonemployer businesses have an EIN, but most do not and instead are tracked by
the person ID of the business owner, i.e., his or her Social Security Number (SSN). 4
When there is a change in the legal or tax status of a nonemployer business, its EIN or
person ID can also change. (Person IDs do not change for individuals, but ownership
changes can yield a change in the person ID associated with a business.) In these
instances, it is not straightforward to maintain longitudinal links for nonemployer
businesses using data items that are routinely included in the Census Bureau’s
administrative records systems. Direct Census Bureau collections provide this additional
information on the employer side, but there is no ready equivalent on the nonemployer
side. Our longitudinal links for nonemployer businesses currently exploit EINs, person
IDs in the form of SSNs, business name information, and geographic information.

       Our main source of revenue data for nonemployer businesses are Schedule C forms
attached to personal income tax filings. Two complications arise in this regard. First,
multiple Schedule C forms can be attached to a single 1040 tax form. In these cases, we
aggregate to the level of a single 1040 tax filing and associate the revenue to the SSN of
the primary tax return filer. Second, when married couples with Schedule C income file
jointly, either the husband or the wife can be the primary filer. In these cases, we
associate the Schedule C income to the SSN of the primary filer, but we retain the
spouse’s SSN as well. We then create longitudinal links based on the SSN of the primary
filer. In addition, for married couples who file jointly in year t and t+k, we create
additional links that capture a primary filer in year t who matches to his or her spouse’s
SSN in year t+k (for k positive or negative). These additional cases account for less than
one percent of all longitudinal linkages among nonemployers.




4
    A nonemployer business has an Employer Identification Number if it previously had paid employees or
     applied for an EIN in anticipation of hiring paid employees.


                                                     6
    C. Cross-Universe Matching

    In addition to the longitudinal links within each universe, we create a set of firm-
level matches between employers and nonemployers for our selected industries. These
matches rely on numeric identifiers and exact literal matches on business names. In
matching on numeric identifiers, we exploit the fact that many business records contain
both an EIN and an SSN. For example, when a business owner or officer applies for an
EIN, he or she must fill out an SS-4 form for the IRS. This form includes the business
name, the EIN and the SSN of the business owner or chief officer, all of which are
included in Census Bureau business registers. These data allow us to build a crosswalk
between EINs and SSNs, which we then use to match business records across universes.

    We take a conservative approach in matching records between employers and
nonemployers. In particular, we rely only on the EIN-SSN crosswalk and exact literal
matches on business name. As an example of how our matching algorithm works,
consider all establishments with employees in our selected industries as of 2000. Using
the longitudinal links in the LBD, we first create a set of identifiers (EINs, SSNs and
business names) associated with each establishment with employees in 2000 for each
year back to 1992. Given the list of identifiers for a particular establishment, we then
identify its matches to nonemployers in the years from 1992 to 2000. Since we are most
confident about cross-universe matches based on numeric identifiers, we match on EIN,
SSN and business name in that order. For matches on business name, we also require
that the employer and nonemployer be in the same state. The industry restriction applies
to the business under consideration in the origin universe (i.e., employer universe) and
not to its potential matches in the other business universe. We create matches in the other
direction using a similar method. That is, for each nonemployer, we match its numeric
and name identifiers to the identifiers of establishments in the employer universe.

    About 17 percent of our employer-nonemployer matches rely on exact literal
matches on business name strings. We experimented with alternative name-matching
procedures, including the removal of vowels, various symbols, and commonly used
abbreviations (“inc.”, “ltd”, etc.). However, after examining a sample of matches, we
concluded that literal name strings produced highly reliable matches and appeared to miss
very few “good” matches. Nevertheless, previous efforts to develop longitudinal



                                             7
identifiers for the LBD have shown that linkages can be improved by the use of more
sophisticated probabilistic matching algorithms that exploit all relevant available
information, and that take into account the reliability of the information. We plan to
incorporate some of these techniques in future enhancements of the ILBD. Given our
current algorithm, we probably understate the incidence of linkages between the two
universes. For the same reason, we probably understate the contribution of nonemployer
businesses to the formation of employer businesses.

       Given a set of matches between the two universes, we aggregate the establishment
data within an industry to the firm level. The result is a firm-level dataset with ownership
linkages to nonemployer businesses and additional variables that describe the nature of
the nonemployer records to which the employer firm links. At this point, the unit of
observation is a business firm with at least one establishment operating in one of our
selected industries. If a firm operates in more than one of our selected industries, we
maintain separate records for each industry in which it operates.


3. Basic Facts about Employers and Nonemployers

       A. Business Numbers and Activity Levels
       Table 2 provides summary statistics for the employer and nonemployer business
universes in 2000. There are about 15.5 million nonemployer businesses. Of these, 13.4
million are person ID units (sole proprietorships with no employees) and 2.1 million are
EIN units (corporations, partnerships and other nonemployer business entities with
EINs). 5 There are also about 5.4 million employer businesses. Of these, 182 thousand
are multi-unit enterprises with more than one establishment, and the rest are single-unit
businesses. While comparatively small in number, multi-unit enterprises account for 61
percent of aggregate U.S. business revenue. Nonemployer business units account for four
percent of aggregate revenue, and single-unit employers account for 35 percent.

       Given the sheer size of the Census Bureau business registers and some complex
issues of measurement, we focus on a selected set of 40 industries for this paper. We

5
    The distinction between person ID and EIN units can be complex. A sole proprietor with no payroll but
     positive receipts who has applied for an EIN can appear in both the person ID and EIN sections of the
     Nonemployer Business Register. That same proprietor can appear in the Employer Business Register as
     well. We assign all zero-payroll units to the nonemployer universe, even if they reside in the Employer
     Business Register.


                                                      8
choose industries with large numbers and relatively high revenue shares for young and
small businesses. Dynamic links between employers and nonemployers are likely to be
more important for these industries. We avoid industries with complex measurement
issues related to financial holding companies, tax shelters, and special purpose financial
entities. These aspects of corporate organizational structure are interesting, but they are
not the focus of our efforts.

       Our analysis period overlaps with the transition from SIC to NAICS industry
classifications, and the SIC-NAICS crosswalk is a many-to-many mapping. Our
nonemployer data files contain 3-digit SIC codes prior to 1997 and 4-digit NAICS codes
thereafter. The employer data files contain codes for both classifications from 1997 to
2000. Accordingly, we proceed as follows. For many exercises, we look backwards for
businesses in selected 4-digit NAICS industries. For other exercises, we look forward
from a year prior to the NAICS changeover at businesses in 3-digit SIC codes that
correspond closely to our selected NAICS industries.

       Table 3 provides summary information for our selected 4-digit NAICS industries.
Legal Services has the largest number of employer businesses, almost 150 thousand. It
also has the biggest employment and labor costs, with more than one million workers and
more than 58 billion dollars in payroll. The highest-revenue industry for employers is
Gasoline Stations at 187 billion dollars. 6 Other Personal Services has the largest number
of nonemployer businesses, more than 800 thousand. The highest-revenue industry for
nonemployers is Real Estate Agents and Brokers at almost 23 billion dollars.

       Table 4 provides information about industry shares of aggregate business revenues
and the relative size of the employer and nonemployer segments within industries.
Nonemployer revenue shares range widely. At the upper end, nonemployers account for
more than two-thirds of revenue in Independent Artists, Writers and Performers, and they
account for at least 30 percent of revenues in a dozen industries. At the lower end,
nonemployers account for a mere 24 hundredths of a percent of revenue in Software
Publishers, even though 20 percent of all businesses in this industry are nonemployers.
Although extreme, the basic pattern in this industry is not uncommon; it reflects the

6
    High revenue in Gasoline Stations mainly reflects the cost of gasoline. The administrative data in the
     Census business registers typically does not include information on gross margins or material costs.
     Such data are included in the Economic Censuses and various annual surveys.


                                                       9
enormously skewed size distribution of activity in many industries.


    B. Business Age and Size Distributions
    Figures 1 to 4 provide information about the age and size distributions of businesses
in our selected industries. Age is measured in years since first appearance by a business
entity in its respective business universe. For multi-unit firms, business age is defined as
the age of the firm’s oldest establishment. We use revenue measures to compare size
distributions across the two universes, because revenue is the only activity measure
available for both universes.

    As seen in Figure 1, older firms dominate economic activity among employers.
Firms that are at least eight years old account for almost 70 percent of employer revenues
and more than 40 percent of employer businesses in our selected industries. In contrast,
older businesses play a much smaller role in the nonemployer universe. Firms that are at
least eight years old account for only 40 percent of nonemployer revenues. Very young
nonemployers account for a larger share of business units and even revenue than, say,
five-year old nonemployers.

    As seen in Figure 2, most nonemployer businesses are quite small. Roughly a third
of nonemployer businesses generate less than 6,000 dollars in annual revenue. While
large in numbers, these very small nonemployers account for a tiny fraction of revenues.
Somewhat larger business units account for much of the revenue generated by
nonemployers. For example, nearly one-quarter of nonemployer revenue in our selected
industries is generated by businesses with annual revenue in the range of 120 to 360
thousand dollars. In contrast, the size distribution of revenues has a very different shape
in the employer universe. Almost 70 percent of employer revenue is generated by firms
with more than three million in annual revenue.

    The tremendous variation in size across nonemployer and employer businesses
exhibited in Figure 2 serves as a caution when drawing inferences about the behavior of
“small and young” businesses. The wide size distribution reminds us that many
nonemployer businesses are extremely small and often represent a secondary or
supplemental source of income to the household. Analyzing the dynamics of such
businesses alongside much larger businesses is a challenge. In what follows, we often



                                             10
report results for both the share of business units and the share of revenue. The former
provides more insights about the very small and more prevalent businesses, while the
latter provides more insights into the contribution of larger businesses.

    Figures 3 and 4 display the share of revenues and business units accounted for by
young businesses (0-3 years old) and small businesses (less than $90,000 in annual
revenue) in our selected industries. Figure 3 reveals wide variation across industries in
the revenue and number shares of young and small businesses in the nonemployer
universe. Figure 4 shows a similar pattern with respect to the revenue and numbers share
of young businesses in the employer universe and with respect to the numbers share of
small businesses. However, with the exception of Personal Care Services (NAICS 8121),
employers with less than $90,000 in annual revenue account for very small revenue
shares, typically less than five percent.


4. Ownership Links and Transition Dynamics

    A. Backward Links of Employers to Nonemployers

    We turn now to ownership links between the employer and nonemployer business
universes. We first consider all employer businesses in our selected industries in the
2000 cross section. Table 5 reports size and age distributions for these businesses in
columns (2) and (3). These columns show familiar patterns: the number of active
businesses declines with age and size, but the bulk of activity – here measured by payroll
– is concentrated in older and larger businesses.

    The more novel elements of Table 5 appear in the last four columns, which provide
information about ownership links between the employer and nonemployer universes.
The at-risk population for this analysis is all employer businesses in our selected
industries with positive payroll in 2000. For these employers, we consider all ownership
links to nonemployers in the current and previous eight years, i.e., in 1992 or 1994 to
2000. Out of the 2.3 million employers in our selected industries, about 266 thousand
have ownership links to the nonemployer universe within the current or previous eight
years based on the matching algorithm described above.

    Columns (4) and (5) in Table 5 report the number and percentage of employer firms



                                             11
with ownership links to nonemployers by employer size and age. While most employers
have no ownership links to the nonemployer universe, many do, and this pattern holds for
all size and age categories. Among firms with 1 to 4 employees, 14 percent link to the
nonemployer universe within the previous eight years. The propensity for links to the
nonemployer universe is U-shaped in employer size. Among firms less than six years
old, more than 15 percent link to the nonemployer universe. The propensity for
ownership links to nonemployer businesses declines after age five, but this pattern may
simply reflect our inability to identify ownership links in 1993 and prior to 1992.

    Column (7) in Table 5 reports the pre-link distribution of nonemployer revenues for
those nonemployers that link to the employer universe. To construct this distribution, we
sum deflated revenues over the nonemployer records that link to the 2000 LBD. We use
the nonemployer’s revenue value in the year prior to the link. For example, if a 1997
nonemployer record links to an employer that operates in 2000, we use the deflated 1996
nonemployer revenue in the computation. Since there can be multiple dynamic links
between employer and nonemployer, we take the oldest link and count each nonemployer
at most once. Column (6) is constructed in the same manner as column (7), except that
each nonemployer record receives a unit weight. Comparing columns (6) and (7) in the
top panel yields the inference that relatively large nonemployers tend to link to larger
employers. To see this, note that employers with at least 500 workers account for 6.2
percent of pre-link revenues among linked nonemployers but only 0.24 percent of the
linked nonemployers. Similarly, over 75 percent of the employer businesses with links to
a nonemployer business have fewer than five employees, but they link to less than 48
percent of pre-link nonemployer revenues.

    When thinking about the process of business formation and growth, we anticipate a
pattern whereby some businesses start as nonemployers, grow over time, and eventually
transition to employer status, perhaps continuing to grow thereafter. This pattern holds
for many businesses in the ILBD, but it is certainly not the only linkage pattern that
arises. This point is evident in the lower panel of Table 5, specifically in columns (6) and
(7). More than 30 percent of nonemployer firms that link to the employer universe – and
more than 45 percent of pre-link revenues – involve links to employers that are at least
eight years old as of 2000. All of these cases involve nonemployer firms that link to
previously established employer businesses. That is, they do not involve a nonemployer


                                             12
business that evolves into a new employer business.

       Figure 5 highlights this point in greater detail by plotting the frequency distribution
of the age difference between employers in the 2000 cross section and their linked
nonemployers (again using the first link to the employer). Recall that we know the exact
age in years for employers that first appear in the employer universe after 1975. For
nonemployers, we construct an age measure based on first appearance in the
Nonemployer Business Register. Since we only begin observing nonemployers in 1992,
examining this age difference for nonemployers observed first in 1992 is clouded by left
censoring issues. As such, for Figure 5, we examine all 2000 employers with links to
nonemployers where the nonemployer first appeared after 1992 so that we have an
accurate age for the nonemployer. 7 For each of these linked nonemployers, we then
compute the difference between its age and the age of the employer to which it links.

       According to Figure 5, 60 percent of nonemployers are older than the employer to
which they link. These cases are consistent with the “standard” pattern whereby a
nonemployer business evolves into a new employer business. The pronounced mode at a
one-year age difference reflects businesses that transition to employer status one year
after inception as a nonemployer. Many other businesses operate in nonemployer mode
for a few years before transitioning to employer status. In addition to these standard
cases, Figure 5 shows a large number of linkages in which the employer business pre-
dates the nonemployer business. These “nonstandard” linkage cases reflect other types of
ownership relations between the two business universes. For example, an individual who
owns a business with employees may also generate consulting income in a nonemployer
business. As another type of example, a corporate business with employees may
establish nonemployer subsidiaries for legal, financial or tax reasons.


       B. Nonemployer Transitions

       To continue our exploration of linkages between the two business universes, we now
conduct an analysis of transitions. We first examine transitions from the nonemployer
universe. In particular, we consider the population of 1994 nonemployer businesses in
our selected industries and classify their operational status three years later in 1997.
7
    We have also examined a version of Figure 5 with the left censored cases included and the results are very
     similar to those reported.


                                                      13
     Figure 6 summarizes the three-year transition dynamics for the population of
nonemployer businesses in one of our selected industries. 8 The at-risk population is all
nonemployer businesses with revenues in 1994. We classify outcomes into six categories:

         •    Exits – businesses with positive revenue in the nonemployer universe in
              1994, no revenue in the nonemployer universe in 1997, and no payroll in the
              employer universe in 1997.

         •    Migrants – businesses with positive revenue in the nonemployer universe in
              1994, positive payroll in the employer universe in 1997, no revenue in the
              nonemployer universe by 1998, 9 and the matched employer does not pre-date
              the nonemployer with respect to the age of its oldest establishment.

         •    Other Transits – businesses with positive revenue in the nonemployer
              universe in 1994, positive payroll in the employer universe in 1997, no
              revenue in the nonemployer universe by 1998, and the matched employer
              pre-dates the nonemployer business.

         •    Continuers – businesses with positive revenue in the nonemployer universe
              in 1994 and 1997, and no payroll in the employer universe in 1997.

         •    Persistent Duals – businesses with positive revenue in the nonemployer
              universe in 1994, 1997, and 1998 and positive employer payroll in 1997 and
              1998.

         •    Other Duals – business with positive revenue in the nonemployer universe in
              1994 and 1997, positive payroll in the employer universe in 1997, no revenue
              in the nonemployer universe in 1998 and no payroll in the employer universe
              in 1998.

We compute the share of the 1994 nonemployer analysis population that falls into each
category on an unweighted and revenue-weighted basis.

     Continuers account for 62 percent of nonemployer businesses and 58 percent of their

8
  The basic patterns for these transition dynamics are very similar over a six-year horizon, although the
   magnitudes change in the expected way, e.g., the share of activity accounted for by exits rises
   substantially.
9
  We require no revenue in the nonemployer universe by 1998, rather than 1997, because a business that
   transitions during the 1997 calendar year will typically record positive 1997 revenues in both universes.


                                                    14
revenues in 1994. Exits account for another 38 percent of nonemployers and 26 percent
of their revenues. Migrants account for only three percent of nonemployer businesses but
nine percent of their 1994 revenues. While three percent is a small share of the
population at risk, there are 7.4 million nonemployer businesses in our selected
industries. In terms of raw numbers, approximately 220,000 nonemployers in 1994
migrate to employer status by 1997. Other Transits, Persistent Duals and Other Duals
account for very small shares of businesses and revenue. Figure 7 shows that Migrants,
and Exits occur with greater frequency among EIN cases than SSN cases.


    C. The Contribution of Migrants to Young Employers

    We now quantify the contribution of Migrants to the economic activity of young
employers with positive revenue in 1997 but no paid employees prior to 1995. Thus
young employers have had paid employees for at most three years. As reported in Table
6, Migrants account for 28 percent of young employers and 20 percent of their revenues
in our selected industries. Several industries stand out for the large role of Migrants
including Farm Labor and Management Services, Landscape and Horticultural Services,
Painting and Paper Hanging, Carpentry and Floor Work, Insurance Agents and Brokers,
Real Estate Agents and Managers, Computer and Data Processing Services, Automotive
Repair Shops, Legal Services, Child Day Care Services, and Accounting, Auditing and
Bookkeeping. Migration from nonemployer to employer status is an important feature of
business formation and growth in these industries.


    D. The Growth Pattern of Migrants

    Next, we compare the growth rates of Migrants to two other groups of nonemployers
– Continuers plus Exits and Continuers Only. For this purpose, we restrict attention to
Migrants with nonemployer status as of 1996 that transit to employer status in 1997.
That is, we consider Migrants with positive revenue in the nonemployer universe in 1996,
positive revenue in the employer universe in 1997, and no revenue in the nonemployer
universe by 1998. As before, we also require that a Migrant pre-date its matched
employer. For Migrants with positive activity in both universes in 1997, its 1997 revenue
value is the sum of its nonemployer and employer revenues. We also limit Exits and
Continuers in the comparison groups to those with positive revenue in the 1996


                                             15
nonemployer universe. We measure the growth rate as the change in annual revenue
from t − 1 to t divided by the simple average of revenue in t − 1 and t. 10 We compute all
summary statistics on a revenue-weighted basis.

           As reported in Table 7, Migrants grow much faster than other nonemployers. In
the year prior to transition, the mean (median) growth rate for Migrants is 31 (15)
percent, compared to 20 (5) percent for Continuers. In the year of transition, the mean
(median) growth rate for Migrants is 101 (102) percent, compared to 6 (3) percent for
continuers. In short, Migrants are on a trajectory of rapid growth before and during the
transition to employer status.


        E. Employer Transitions

        Figure 8 summarizes three-year transition dynamics for the 1994 population of
employers in our selected industries. As before, we group businesses in the at-risk
population into six categories based on their status three years later. The categories
mirror the ones considered previously. For example, “Migrants” now refer to businesses
with positive revenue in the employer universe in 1994, positive revenue in the
nonemployer universe in 1997, no revenue in the employer universe by 1998, and the
employer pre-dates its matched nonemployer.

        Continuers – businesses with positive revenue in the employer universe in both years
and no ownership links to the nonemployer universe in 1997 – account for 68 percent of
all employers and 74 percent of their 1994 revenues. Exits account for 19 percent of
employer revenues and 27 percent of employer businesses. The exit figures point to high
death rates for employers in our selected industries, but they are considerably smaller
than exit rates for nonemployers (Figure 6). There are approximately 39,000 Migrants
from the 1994 employer universe to the 1997 nonemployer universe, which amounts to
about two percent of employers and two percent of their 1994 revenues. Other Transits
account for one percent of employer businesses and revenues. Persistent Duals account
for one percent of employer businesses and three percent of employer revenues.




10
     The growth rate measure is bounded, symmetric about zero and ranges from -200 to 200 percent, with
      endpoints corresponding to exit and entry. See Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996).


                                                     16
5. Revenue Growth and Dispersion by Age and Size
     There is a vast body of research on the relationship of business growth patterns to
business size and age. Almost all of this research restricts attention to businesses with
employees, and much of it considers a subset of employers that meet a minimum size
threshold or that include only publicly traded companies. 11 Using the ILBD, we can
systematically analyze and compare the dynamics of employer and nonemployer
businesses.

     We consider business growth from 1999 to 2000 with attention to mean growth rates
by size and age and the dispersion of growth rates within size and age categories. Our
dispersion measure is the excess revenue reallocation rate: gross revenue gains at
expanding units plus gross revenue losses at contracting units minus the absolute value of
the net revenue change, all divided by aggregate revenue for the units under
consideration. The excess reallocation rate is equivalent to the average absolute
deviation of growth rates about zero, confirming its interpretation as a measure of cross-
sectional dispersion in growth rates. 12 We consider all employers in our selected
industries but limit attention to Continuers, Exits and Migrants for the nonemployers.
These three groups account for the vast majority of nonemployers and their revenues
(Figures 6 and 7). For Migrants from nonemployer to employer status, our 2000 revenue
measure includes nonemployer revenue, if any. In principle, we could treat Migrants
from employer to nonemployer status symmetrically, but we ignore the matter as
unimportant.

     Figure 9 shows that the mean growth rate of employers drops off very rapidly by age
two and displays no clear relationship to age among older employers when we include
Exits. The drop in mean growth with age is even more rapid among nonemployers.
Indeed, mean nonemployer growth rates are negative for all ages beyond zero, i.e.,
beyond the year of entry. Conditional on survival, mean growth is positive at all ages and
shows a clear tendency to decline with age.

     Figure 10 shows that excess revenue reallocation rates tend to decline with business
age, especially for nonemployers. Perhaps more important, the magnitude of excess

11
   Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1989), Sutton (1997), Caves (1998) and Davis and Haltiwanger (1999)
    review various branches of this literature, which spans several decades.
12
   See Davis and Haltiwanger (1999), who review the use of this measure in the literature on job flows.


                                                  17
revenue reallocation is very large for employers and nonemployers alike, and at all ages.
Excess revenue reallocation exceeds 50 percent in all age groups for nonemployers. It
exceeds 30 percent in all age groups for employers. These results underscore the
tremendous amount of revenue expansion and contraction that takes place on a routine
basis among U.S. businesses. In this respect, the results echo previous findings on the
large magnitude of simultaneous job creation and destruction in Davis, Haltiwanger and
Schuh (1996) and other work. When we condition on survival, considerable revenue
churning remains, but it does not show a strong relationship to business age.

        Figures 11 and 12 display revenue growth and excess reallocation rates by business
size. The size categories are narrow at the lower end to reflect the revenue distribution
among nonemployers. As seen in Figure 11, mean growth rate for small revenue classes
is highly sensitive to whether we restrict attention to survivors. Conditional on survival,
very small businesses have very high net growth rates relative to their larger counterparts.
When we include Exits, the relationship between net revenue growth and size is basically
flat.

        Figure 12 shows that excess revenue reallocation rates decline sharply with size for
employers and nonemployers. Excess reallocation is high for businesses of all sizes,
exceeding 20 percent even for the largest businesses. Perhaps surprisingly, excess
reallocation rates among businesses with less than $120,000 in annual revenue are greater
for employers than nonemployers. However, we know from Figure 2 that there is little
revenue activity in the very small size classes. Once again, conditioning on survival has
a profound effect on size the relationship, although excess revenue reallocation remains
high in all size categories.


6. Where Do We Go From Here?
        The preceding sections describe the employer and nonemployer business universes,
relate our efforts thus far to integrate the two universes, and present evidence on the
dynamics of young and small businesses including the migration of nonemployers to
employer status. In this section, we describe several challenges that arise in further
developing the ILBD.




                                               18
    A. Issues Common to Both Business Universes

    One issue common to both business universes is the conversion from SIC to NAICS
industry codes following the 1997 economic censuses. A related but larger set of
problems involves the reliability and accuracy of industry codes in the ILBD. Large
portions of the two business universes rely almost exclusively on administrative records
for source data on industry codes. As a rough generalization, the industry codes are less
reliable and less precise for nonemployers and for smaller employers. Geographic
identifiers also tend to be less accurate for nonemployers and smaller employers. In
general, there are fewer sources of information for business-level records that derive
entirely from administrative sources, as compared to those that rely on administrative and
survey sources.

    Another common issue pertains to the interpretation of business revenue measures
and their consistency over time. In particular, revenue measures can be affected by
changes over time in income tax rules. This issue merits study.


    B. Issues in the Employer Universe

    Multi-unit businesses above a size threshold are surveyed by the Census Bureau in
the annual Company Organization Survey (COS). However, the list of such businesses is
drawn from the prior economic census. These procedures mean that a firm’s transition
from single-unit to multi-unit status often goes undetected until the next economic
census. In addition, new establishments operated by small multi-unit firms not covered by
the COS are detected only at the economic censuses. In both cases, the economic activity
measures for these new establishments are included with older establishments of the
parent company in the inter-censal years. Hence, the delayed recognition of some new
establishments in inter-censal years leads to inaccurate establishment counts and,
possibly, to an initially incorrect geographic and industrial classification for these new
establishments. These issues are not critical for this paper because our unit of analysis is
the firm, but they are important for the development of the LBD and ILBD.

    Turning to another issue, the Census Bureau has made considerable progress in
developing and maintaining longitudinal establishment identifiers for employer
businesses, but the development of firm-level longitudinal identifiers remains an open


                                             19
area for research and development. Standard firm-level identifiers automatically change
when a business undergoes certain types of reorganization such as a change in its legal
form of organization or a merger. In the analysis above, we dealt with this issue by
equating firm age to the age of the oldest establishment operated by the firm. However,
we identified entry and exit of firms based on changes in standard firm-level identifiers in
the ILBD.


    C. Issues in the Nonemployer Universe

    Some data issues unique to the nonemployer universe reflect the relatively recent
availability and development of annual nonemployer files at the Census Bureau. For
example, we cannot trace the inception of nonemployer businesses to years before 1992.
In addition, as mentioned above, the nonemployer data rely very heavily on
administrative sources. The construction of longitudinal links for nonemployer business
units also raises several challenges, and our work in this area is at a relatively early stage
of development. There is room for improving the longitudinal and cross-sectional
linkages via name and address matching, the treatment of joint returns for proprietorships
(where there are separate firm identifiers for the filer and his or her spouse), and the
reliability of employer identification information for nonemployer proprietors.

    D. Integrating the Two Business Universes

    Studies of the integrated business-level data also face other challenges. First, the
standards for classification by industry and geography differ between the two universes.
These differences limit our ability to isolate narrowly defined industries and regions.
Second, at the most basic level, the unit of observation differs between the two universes.
For employers, the fundamental unit of observation is typically an establishment. For
nonemployers, it is a tax return that reflects economic activity at the home or other
locations. Our current analysis also aggregates tax filers with multiple Schedule C forms
into a single nonemployer entity, even when each Schedule C involves quite different
business activities. Third, some firms with employees create affiliated business entities
with no employees in order to shelter income from taxation or limit legal exposures and
financial risks. We deliberately sought to sidestep the complex measurement issues
associated with these special-purpose business entities through our choice of industries.


                                              20
A thorough treatment of this issue for all industries is likely to require careful study of the
legal framework and economic incentives governing the creation of special-purpose
business entities.


        E. Integrating Employee Records with the ILBD

        An exciting direction for future research is the integration of employee data with the
ILBD. Using the longitudinal matched employer-employee data from the LEHD
program at the Census Bureau, demographic and earnings data for the universe of
employees can be integrated with the ILBD files. 13 Integration of the employer,
nonemployer, and employee data will provide an unprecedented opportunity to study
firm, job and worker dynamics. For example, it will be possible to follow someone who
first works as an employee in a specific industry, then starts a small nonemployer
business on the side, and later opens an employer business. More generally, for questions
about where and how employer businesses originate, it will be very useful to know the
demographic characteristics of business founders and their previous histories as
employees and business owners.


7. Concluding Remarks
        It is tempting to think of the nonemployer business universe as a vast nursery for
employer businesses. According to this view, many nonemployers evolve into employers
and a few eventually grow into giant corporations that generate thousand of jobs.
However, as our results confirm, most nonemployer business are quite small and never
become employers. Indeed, it is misleading to think of all records in the nonemployer
universe as “businesses” in the usual sense. Many nonemployer records reflect side jobs,
hobby businesses or occasional consulting engagements that generate extra income for
households that depend primarily on wages. One goal of our research is to help the
Census Bureau develop algorithms that can distinguish hobby businesses, for example,
from other types of nonemployer businesses, including entrepreneurial undertakings that
might evolve into larger businesses with employees.


13
     Another important direction for future work is the integration of the Characteristics of Business Owners
      (CBO) and Survey of Business Owners (SBO) data sets into the ILBD. Holmes and Schmitz (1995),
      amongst others, have shown the rich analysis that can be conducted with the CBO.


                                                       21
    There is, however, a kernel of truth in the “vast nursery” view. Our evidence shows
that migrants from the nonemployer universe account for a sizable share of young
employers in the industries we study. These Migrants make up 28 percent of young
employers (zero to three years old) and account for 20 percent of their revenues. Their
importance varies considerably across industries. Among young employers, Migrants
account for 38 of revenues in Real Estate Agents and Managers, 35 percent in Taxicabs,
and 30 percent in Painting and Paper Hanging and Landscaping but only 11 percent in
Eating and Drinking Places. These figures probably understate the role of Migrants
because of our conservative matching algorithms. In any event, the results indicate that a
significant fraction of employers originate as nonemployer businesses.

    On the data front, this study takes important strides in developing an Integrated
Longitudinal Business-level Database. Considerable work lies ahead, but the ILBD is
already yielding useful information about the dynamics of young and small businesses.
Major strengths of the ILBD include comprehensive industry and geographic coverage,
longitudinal links for establishments and firms, linkability to the large number of
business surveys housed at Census and an integrated treatment of employer and
nonemployer business. The ILBD makes it possible to examine the behavior over time of
virtually all businesses in the U.S. economy, employers and nonemployers alike, with
robust samples and even entire populations.




                                            22
                                        References


Boden, Richard and Alfred Nucci, “Business Dynamics among the Smallest and Newest
      of Businesses: Preliminary Analyses of Longitudinally Matched Nonemployer
      and Business Register Data.” Annual Meetings, Eastern Economic Association,
      Washington, D.C. March, 2004.
Caves, Richard E., “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and
       Mobility of Firms” Journal of Economic Literature, 36 (4), 1998.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Flows” in Handbook of Labor
       Economics (Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.), North Holland, 1999.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction,
       MIT Press, 1996.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts and Larry Samuelson, “The Growth and Failure of U.S.
      Manufacturing Plants” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1989.
Holmes, Thomas and James Schmitz, "On the Turnover of Business Owners and
      Business Managers," Journal of Political Economy, October 1995.
Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, “The Longitudinal Business Database,” CES Working
       Paper, 2003.
Nucci, Alfred and Richard Boden, “Demography of Nonemployer Businesses --
       Preliminary Evidence from the United States.” Paper Presented at the
       Comparative Analysis of Enterprise (micro) Data Conference, London, England,
       September 15-16, 2003
Sutton, John, “Gibrat’s Legacy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35 (1), 1997.




                                           23
Table 1.A: Employer Business Register

                                                                                                                                                                                  Line
Variable                Source Type         Source Details                                                                                                                        Number
Name and Address        Survey              Physical address from Company Organization Survey, Annual Surveys, or Economic Censuses in Census years
                        Administrative      Beginning in 1998, physical address from form ss-4 for births; before 1998, mailing address from form ss-4                            4a,4b; 5a,5b
                                            Beginning in 1998, physical address from form 941 for all businesses; before 1998, mailing address from form 941 for all businesses   Top of form
                                            Beginning in 1998, physical address from IRS income tax form for all businesses; before 1998, mailing address from IRS income tax
                                            form for all businesses                                                                                                               Top of form
Industry                Survey              Reported industry code from Company Organization Survey, Annual Surveys, or Economic Censuses in Census years
                                            Derived from the 1992 Economic Census--respondent reported classification
                                            Derived from a current survey (County Business Patterns (CBP), Company Organization Survey (COS)/Annual Survey of Manufactures
                                            (ASM), Current Industrial Report (CIR), Business Sample Revision (BSR) CBP Safeguard Review or intercensal refiles
                        Administrative      Derived from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
                                            Derived from the Social Security Administration
                                            Derived from the Internal Revenue Service Principal Business Activity code, obtained from the Business Master File
Employment              Survey*             Company Organization Survey, Annual Surveys, or Economic Censuses in Census years
                        Administrative      IRS Form 941                                                                                                                          Line 1
                                            IRS FICA wages
                                            IRS total compensation
                                            Imputed
Payroll                 Survey*             Company Organization Survey, Annual Surveys, or Economic Censuses in Census years
                        Administrative      IRS Form 941                                                                                                                          Line 2
                                            IRS FICA wages
                                            IRS total compensation
                                            Imputed
Revenue                 Survey*             Company Organization Survey, Annual Surveys, or Economic Censuses in Census years
                        Imputed from EIN-
                        level data          1120 – Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                            Line 1c
                                            1120-A - Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                          Line 1c
                                                                                                                                                                                  Section II, line
                                            1120F - Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                           1a
                                            1120L - Gross income                                                                                                                  Line 9
                                            1120-PC - Gross income                                                                                                                Sch A: line 14
                                            1120-RIC - Total income                                                                                                               Line 8
                                            1120S - Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                           Line 1c
                                            1065 – Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                            Line 1c
                                            990 - Total revenue                                                                                                                   Line 12
                                            990-C - Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                           Line 1c
                                            990EZ - Total revenue                                                                                                                 Line 9
                                            990-PF - Total revenue                                                                                                                Line 12
                                            1040C - Gross receipts or sales less returns and allowances                                                                           Line 3
*Data for multi-unit firms disaggregated to the establishment level using survey information, except where the firm reports individual establishments under separate EINs.




                                                                                       24
Table 1.B: Nonemployer Business Register, Proprietors - SSN Records

                                           Source from IRS Form 1040 including
Variable                                   Schedule C
Name                                       Form 1040
Mailing Address                            Form 1040
Legal Form of Organization                 Implied by filing of IRS form 1040 Schedule C
Industry Code                              Line B
                                           Line 3: Gross receipts or sales less returns and
Revenue                                    allowances

Notes:
   1. All data for sole proprietors (including proprietorships jointly operated by
       husband and wife) are obtained form IRS form 1040 including Schedule C.
   2. Line B of Schedule C reports the “Principal business or profession, including
       product or service.” Based on this information, the IRS codes the Principal
       Business Activity (PBA) of the proprietorship. Based on the PBA code, the
       Census assigns a Tabulated Kind of Business (TKB) code. If the PBA is not
       reported on the tax form, then the Census uses the historic TKB code, if available.




                                             25
Table 1.C: Nonemployer Business Register, Partnerships and Corporations – EIN Records




Form Number                      Form Description                            Industry Code Source                   Revenue Source
                                                                                                                    Line 1c: Gross receipts or sales
Form 1065                        U.S. Partnership Return of Income           Line A (Principal Business Activity)   less returns and allowances
                                                                             Schedule K, Line 2a (Business          Line 1c: Gross receipts or sales
Form 1120                        U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return          Activity Code)                         less returns and allowances
                                                                             Part 2, line 1a (Business Activity     Line 1c: Gross receipts or sales
Form 1120A                       U.S. Corporation Short Form Tax Return      Code)                                  less returns and allowances
                                 U.S. Income Tax Return for an S                                                    Line 1c: Gross receipts or sales
Form 1120 S                      Corporation                                 Line B (Business Code)                 less returns and allowances


                                 U.S. Income Tax Return of a Foreign                                                Section II, 1c: Gross receipts or
Form 1120 F                      Corporation                                 Line F1 (Business Activity Code)       sales less returns and allowances
                                 U.S. Casualty and Property Insurance                                               Schedule A: line 14 (gross
Form 1120 PC                     Company income Tax Return                   Schedule I, Line 2                     income)
                                 U.S. Life Insurance Company Income Tax      Schedule M, 2a-c (Kind of
Form 1120 L                      Return                                      Company, Principal Business)           9 Gross Income
                                 U.S. Income Tax Return for Regulated
Form 1120 RIC                    Investment Companies                        Inferred by Form Type                  8: Total Income
                                   U.S. Income Tax Return for Real Estate
Form 1120 REIT                     Investment Trusts                                Inferred by Form Type                 8: Total Income
Notes:
    1. All data for these businesses are derived from IRS income tax returns filed by the businesses
    2. Name and Mailing Address taken from top of forms.
    3. Industry codes on Census Nonemployer database are IRS PBA codes obtained from the sources noted above and then converted to Census TKB
        codes. If the PBA is not available from the tax form, then the Census use the historic TKB code, if available.
    4. Legal form of organization implied by type of form submitted: 1065 filers are partnerships, all others are corporations.




                                                                                26
                  Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Employer and Nonemployer Business Universes, 2000
                               Nonemployer Business Universe                        Employer Business Universe
                                       All         40 Selected                            All
                                                                                                 40 Selected Industries
                                   Industries       Industries                        Industries
                                                              As                                                As
                                              Number or                                           Number or
                                                           Percent                                            Percent
                                               Revenue                                             Revenue
                                                            of All                                             of All
                             SSN                                             Single-
    # of Units (millions)             13.38       6.84        51                         5.26         1.9       36
                             Units                                            Unit
                             EIN                                             Multi-
                                       2.15       0.54        25                         0.18        0.06       31
                             Units                                            Unit
                              All     15.54       7.38        48               All       5.44        1.96       36
                             SSN                                             Single-
    Revenue (billions $)             459.53     199.87        43                       6,113.43     877.92      14
                             Units                                            Unit
                             EIN                                             Multi-
                                     251.74      55.58        22                      10,758.04     664.52       6
                             Units                                            Unit
                              All    711.26     255.45        36               All    16,871.47    1,542.44      9

                                                        Integrated Business Universe
                                         All Industries                         40 Selected Industries
                               Nonemployer                              Nonemployer
                                                Employer Businesses                      Employer Businesses
                                Businesses                               Businesses
                             EIN                 Single-   Multi-    EIN      SSN
                                     SSN Units                                        Single-Unit Multi-Unit
                             Units                Unit     Unit      Units    Units
Percent of Aggregate Revenue 1.43      2.61       34.77    61.19     3.09     11.12      48.83        36.96




                                                     27
Table 3: Summary Statistics for Selected Industries in the Integrated Business Universe, 2000
                                                                           Employers                              Nonemployers
                   Industry Description                          Firms        Payroll   Employment     Revenue         Firms     Revenue
Animal production support activities                                 1.5         156             7          664         37.7       1,462
Painting & wall covering contractors                               36.4        6,274           226       17,469        213.5       7,443
Carpentry & floor contractors                                      52.3        9,637           383       35,398        389.6      16,722
Roofing, siding, & sheet metal contractors                         27.6        8,143           264       27,315         86.5       5,047
Concrete contractors                                               24.5        5,092           178       18,185         42.6       2,567
Printing & related support activities                              23.2       14,226           420       41,613         26.7       1,486
Ship & boat building                                                 1.1       3,788           105       16,896           0.4         47
Gasoline stations                                                  52.2       12,282           837      187,841           9.4      1,682
Book, periodical & music stores                                      9.4       2,713           222       12,577         28.9       1,008
Florists                                                           20.7        1,645           123        6,417         22.7         869
Taxi & limousine service                                             5.1       1,206            65        3,451        117.6       3,419
Couriers                                                             2.3      15,654           550       18,610           1.1        111
Software publishers                                                  6.7      23,009           249       49,988           1.7        120
Agencies & other insurance related activities                     101.7       30,448           745       90,461        308.2      14,849
Offices of real estate agents & brokers                            50.0       11,504           297       46,826        476.6      22,952
Activities related to real estate                                  39.5       15,052           484       38,058        356.3      18,274
Consumer goods rental                                              13.7        3,483           236       11,391         16.0         768
Legal services                                                    147.7       58,514         1,055      149,400        206.3      11,626
Accounting, tax prep, bookkeep, payroll service                    76.9       21,273           765       42,205        294.5       6,059
Computer systems design & related services                         74.9       76,674         1,194      141,900        249.4       9,688
Management, sci & tech consulting services                         76.5       32,718           729       67,277        355.2      16,796
Travel arrangement & reservation services                          21.3        8,713           292       45,546         31.8       1,776
Services to buildings & dwellings                                 115.2       24,903         1,407       59,490        538.9      11,294
Offices of physicians                                             120.5       46,346         1,043      102,651        149.6      11,664
Offices of dentists                                                35.0        7,268           273       19,865         29.4       1,907
Offices of other health practitioners                              74.7        8,814           346       31,356        235.2       9,053
Individual & family services                                       21.1        9,411           478       11,919         65.3       1,096
Child day care services                                            39.2        9,747           691       14,125        516.6       6,263
Agents, managers for artists & public figures                        1.8         502            10        1,549         25.0         867
Independent artists, writers & performers                            8.9       2,272            38        4,461        465.1       9,631
Rooming & boarding houses                                            1.5         182            13          717           9.7        281
Full-service restaurants                                           91.9       20,908         1,863       47,763         29.0       3,308
Limited-service eating places                                      94.4       17,164         1,743       53,707         36.8       3,086
Special food services                                              11.2        8,314           563       17,466         68.5       2,014
Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)                              44.3        3,753           360       12,468         21.3       1,466
Automotive repair & maintenance                                    94.8       12,533           583       46,945        251.2      11,570
Personal & household goods R&M                                     22.4        2,337            98        8,685        247.9       6,147
Personal care services                                             59.8        4,109           303        9,770        552.4      11,776
Drycleaning & laundry services                                     30.8        6,613           373       17,731         33.0       1,650
Other personal services                                            16.0        3,688           173       12,288        835.8      17,609
Total Economy                                                 5,443.40     3,773,003       113,658   16,871,471    15,536.07     711,264
 Firms and employment in thousands. Payroll and Revenue in millions.




                                                                              28
   Table 4: Industry Revenue Shares and Business-Type Shares Within Industries, 2000
                                                                                                     Percent of
                                                                                      Industry
                                                                                                      Business
                                                              Industry Revenues,     Revenues,
                                                                                                     Entities in
                                                             Percent of Aggregate      Percent
NAICS                                                                                                 Industry
                                                               Business Revenue     Accounted for
 Code                 Industry Description                                                            that Are
                                                                                    by Employers
                                                                                                    Nonemployers
1152    Animal production support activities                        0.01                 31              96
2352    Painting & wall covering contractors                        0.14                 70              85
2355    Carpentry & floor contractors                               0.30                68               88
2356    Roofing, siding, & sheet metal contractors                  0.18                84               76
2357    Concrete contractors                                        0.12                88               63
3231    Printing & related support activities                       0.25                97               54
3366    Ship & boat building                                        0.10                100              26
4471    Gasoline stations                                           1.08                99               15
4512    Book, periodical & music stores                             0.08                93               75
4531    Florists                                                    0.04                88               52
4853    Taxi & limousine service                                    0.04                50               96
4921    Couriers                                                    0.11                99               32
5112    Software publishers                                         0.28                100              20
5242    Agencies & other insurance related activities               0.60                86               75
5312    Offices of real estate agents & brokers                     0.40                67               91
5313    Activities related to real estate                           0.32                68               90
5322    Consumer goods rental                                       0.07                94               54
5411    Legal services                                              0.92                93               58
5412    Accounting, tax prep, bookkeeping, payroll service          0.27                 87              79
5415    Computer systems design & related services                  0.86                 94              77
5416    Management, scientific & tech consulting services           0.48                 80              82
5615    Travel arrangement & reservation services                   0.27                 96              60
5617    Services to buildings & dwellings                           0.40                 84              82
6211    Offices of physicians                                       0.65                90               55
6212    Offices of dentists                                         0.12                91               46
6213    Offices of other health practitioners                       0.23                78               76
6241    Individual & family services                                0.07                92               76
6244    Child day care services                                     0.12                 69              93
7114    Agents, managers for artists & public figures               0.01                 64              93
7115    Independent artists, writers & performers                   0.08                32               98
7213    Rooming & boarding houses                                   0.01                72               86
7221    Full-service restaurants                                    0.29                94               24
7222    Limited-service eating places                               0.32                 95              28
7223    Special food services                                       0.11                90               86
7224    Drinking places (alcoholic beverages)                       0.08                89               32
8111    Automotive repair & maintenance                             0.33                80               73
8114    Personal & household goods R&M                              0.08                59               92
8121    Personal care services                                      0.12                 45              90
8123    Drycleaning & laundry services                              0.11                 91              52
8129    Other personal services                                     0.17                 41              98




                                                 29
       Table 5: Employer Links to Nonemployers by Size and Age of
       Employer, Employers in Selected Industries in 2000

(1) Firm Size   (2) Number    (3) Percent     (4) Number of     (5) Percent of    (6) Percent of   (7) Percent of
in 2000,        of firms in   of payroll in   firms with        firms in size     all backward     nonemployer
Number of       size class    size class      backward links    class with        links to         pre-link
Employees                                     to                backward          nonemployers     revenues
                                              nonemployers      links
a)1-4              1416292            9.81            200252              14.14            75.36           46.73
b)5-9               432027            9.02             34590               8.01            13.02           13.09
c)10-19             242636           10.58             16656               6.86             6.27           12.38
d)20-49             139368           13.43               9229              6.62             3.47            8.62
e) 50-99             36886            8.56               2526              6.85             0.95            6.18
f)100-249            16426            8.83               1362              8.29             0.51            4.48
g)250-499             4332            7.16                489             11.29             0.18            2.32
h) 500+               3103           32.62                634             20.43             0.24            6.20
Total              2291070          100.00            265738              11.60           100.00          100.00


(1) Firm Age    (2) Number    (3) Percent     (4) Number of     (5) Percent of    (6) Percent of   (7) Percent of
in 2000,        of firms in   of payroll in   firms with        firms in age      all backward     nonemployer
Years Since     age group     age group       backward links    group with        links to         pre-link
First                                         to                backward          nonemployers     revenues
Appearance                                    nonemployers      links
in Employer
Universe
0                   213292            2.28            35082              16.45             13.20           11.01
1                   190690            3.27            31314              16.42             11.78            9.08
2                   170091            3.40            27197              15.99             10.23            7.95
3                   153400            3.44            25244              16.46              9.50            6.46
4                   134315            3.40            20675              15.39              7.78            5.49
5                   117723            3.10            20615              17.51              7.76            4.48
6–7                 199523            5.61            24823              12.44              9.34           10.81
8+                 1112036           75.50            80788               7.26             30.40           44.74
Total              2291070          100.00           265738              11.60            100.00          100.00

       Note: Column (7) reports the pre-link percentage distribution of nonemployer revenues
       for nonemployers that link to firms in the employer universe. To calculate this
       distribution, we first express nonemployer revenues in 2000 dollars using the GDP
       deflator for all goods and services. Then, for each nonemployer that links to the
       employer universe, we take the value of its deflated revenue in the year prior to its first
       link to a firm in the employer universe. We sum these values across all nonemployers
       that link to the 2000 LBD for our selected industries. The percentages reported in the
       table are based on this total value of “year prior to link” nonemployer revenue.




                                                          30
Table 6.A: Migrants from the Nonemployer Population as a Percentage of Young
Employers (0 to 3 Years of Age) in 1997, Selected Industries

                                           Percentage of Young Employers
                                           Accounted for by Migrants from
                                           the Nonemployer Population
                   First Appearance in the 1994 or
                  Nonemployer Population: earlier     1995 1996 All
SIC             Industry Description
76    Farm labor and management services               24.5   13.1   15.8   53.5
78    Landscape and horticultural services             25.9    8.6    6.4   40.9
172   Painting and paper hanging                       24.0    8.1    6.9   39.0
175   Carpentry and floor work                         23.1    7.9    6.4   37.4
176   Roofing, siding, and sheet metal work            19.1    7.9    7.3   34.2
275   Commercial printing                              13.4    5.6    4.8   23.8
367   Electronic components and accessories             9.8    4.3    6.4   20.4
412   Taxicabs                                         15.7    7.4    7.7   30.8
421   Trucking and courier services, except air        20.4    7.5    6.8   34.6
472   Passenger transportation arrangement             14.6    6.6    6.9   28.0
554   Gasoline service stations                         8.4    3.6    3.5   15.6
581   Eating and drinking places                        8.5    4.5    4.3   17.3
621   Security brokers and dealers                     17.8    6.4    6.6   30.8
641   Insurance agents, brokers, and service           25.1    7.3    5.9   38.3
653   Real estate agents and managers                  22.3    7.2    6.8   36.4
721   Laundry, cleaning, and garment services          17.9    6.5    5.3   29.7
723   Beauty shops                                     19.2    8.4    6.2   33.8
729   Miscellaneous personal services                  22.2    8.4    7.2   37.8
737   Computer and data processing services             9.9    5.8    6.8   22.5
738   Miscellaneous business services                  16.5    6.9    6.7   30.1
753   Automotive repair shops                          19.0    7.4    5.5   31.9
784   Video tape rental                                16.0    7.1    6.3   29.5
792   Producers, orchestras, entertainers              15.5    6.2    6.6   28.2
799   Misc. amusement, recreation services             12.3    5.4    5.4   23.1
801   Offices and clinics of medical doctors           11.4    4.3    4.5   20.2
802   Offices and clinics of dentists                  17.2    6.6    4.9   28.7
803   Offices of osteopathic physicians                14.2    5.0    4.5   23.7
804   Offices of other health practitioners            18.4    6.8    5.9   31.1
811   Legal services                                   18.1    6.4    4.9   29.4
832   Individual and family services                   10.6    4.0    3.7   18.3
835   Child day care services                          21.9    8.0    6.0   35.8
872   Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping            21.8    6.4    5.1   33.2
874   Management and public relations                  12.3    5.6    6.6   24.5
      All Selected Industries                          16.1    6.3    5.7   28.1




                                                  31
Table 6.B: Migrants from the Nonemployer Population as a Percentage of Young
Employer Revenues in 1997, Selected Industries

                                           Percentage of Young Employer Revenues
                                           Accounted for by Migrants from
                                           The Nonemployer Population
                   First Appearance in the   1994 or
                  Nonemployer Population:     earlier     1995     1996    All
SIC             Industry Description
76    Farm labor and management services               20.3    18.9      19.2      58.4
78    Landscape and horticultural services             19.3     5.8       4.6      29.7
172   Painting and paper hanging                       17.7     6.3       6.1      30.0
175   Carpentry and floor work                         16.6     7.0       5.7      29.2
176   Roofing, siding, and sheet metal work            13.1     5.3       6.4      24.7
275   Commercial printing                               7.3     3.7       4.1      15.0
367   Electronic components and accessories             4.0     1.0       3.3       8.3
412   Taxicabs                                         18.2     7.3       9.0      34.5
421   Trucking and courier services, except air        16.6     7.9       7.1      31.6
472   Passenger transportation arrangement             12.0     5.1       6.8      23.9
554   Gasoline service stations                         6.5     2.8       2.6      11.8
581   Eating and drinking places                        5.6     3.0       2.8      11.4
621   Security brokers and dealers                      9.7     4.2       5.6      19.5
641   Insurance agents, brokers, and service           16.0     5.0       6.0      27.1
653   Real estate agents and managers                  18.6    10.8       8.9      38.3
721   Laundry, cleaning, and garment services          11.9     5.0       3.4      20.3
723   Beauty shops                                     15.4     6.4       4.8      26.5
729   Miscellaneous personal services                  15.3    15.5       6.1      36.9
737   Computer and data processing services             8.2     4.1       5.7      17.9
738   Miscellaneous business services                  12.1     4.9       7.7      24.7
753   Automotive repair shops                          12.0     5.2       3.4      20.6
784   Video tape rental                                10.9     4.3       4.1      19.3
792   Producers, orchestras, entertainers               9.8     4.8       6.8      21.4
799   Misc. amusement, recreation services              8.4     5.7       4.4      18.4
801   Offices and clinics of medical doctors            7.9     3.4       4.6      15.9
802   Offices and clinics of dentists                  13.8     5.1       3.8      22.8
803   Offices of osteopathic physicians                10.6     3.0       2.1      15.7
804   Offices of other health practitioners            12.9     5.3       5.1      23.2
811   Legal services                                   11.5     4.2       3.7      19.3
832   Individual and family services                    5.9     2.6       4.1      12.7
835   Child day care services                          12.8     4.5       4.1      21.4
872   Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping            12.5     3.7       7.0      23.2
874   Management and public relations                   7.7     4.7       7.3      19.8
      All Selected Industries                          10.4     4.8       5.2      20.4

Note: “Young Employers” in 1997 are businesses that first hire one or more paid
employees in 1995, 1996 or 1997. In this sense, they are 0 to 3 years of age as of 1997.


                                                  32
Table 7: Summary Statistics for Nonemployer Revenue Growth Rates by
Transition Status


                                Time                Continuers    Continuers
                              Interval   Migrants    and Exits      Only

                Mean           95-96       31%          23%          20%
              Median           95-96      15%            5%          5%
           10th percentile     95-96      -26%         -51%         -44%
           90th percentile     95-96      141%         193%         139%
         90-10 Differential    95-96      167%         244%         183%

                Mean           96-97      101%         -14%          6%
              Median           96-97      102%           0%          3%
           10th percentile     96-97       -5%        -197%         -59%
           90th percentile     96-97      200%          70%          76%
         90-10 Differential    96-97      205%         267%         135%



Notes:
   1. The analysis population contains all nonemployers in our selected industries with
       positive revenue in 1996 that are classified as either Migrants, Continuers or Exits
       based upon their 1996-97 transitions.
   2. Table entries report summary statistics for the distribution of annual revenue
       growth rates from 1995 to 1996 and from 1996 to 1997. The revenue growth rate
       is measured as the change in annual revenue from t − 1 to t divided by the simple
       average of revenue in t − 1 and t. All statistics are computed on a revenue-
       weighted basis.




                                            33
Figure 1: Age Distribution of Business Numbers and Revenues within Each Universe

            Revenue Shares for Nonem ployers by Age, 2000                        Revenue Shares for Em ployers by Age, 2000


  0.8                                                                  0.8
  0.7
  0.6                                                                  0.6
  0.5
  0.4                                                                  0.4
  0.3
  0.2                                                                  0.2
  0.1
    0                                                                   0
        0        1       2      3       4       5      6-7   8+              0    1        2       3       4        5         6-7   8+
                               Age in Years                                                       Age in Years




            Shares of Nonem ployer Businesses by Age, 2000                       Share of Em ployer Businesses by Age, 2000


  0.5                                                              0.5

  0.4                                                              0.4

  0.3                                                              0.3

  0.2                                                              0.2

  0.1                                                              0.1

   0                                                                    0
        0        1      2       3       4       5      6-7   8+              0    1       2        3       4        5         6-7   8+
                               Age in Years                                                      Age in Years




                                                                  34
Figure 2: Size Distribution of Business Numbers and Revenues with Each Universe

                Revenue Shares for Nonem ployers by Revenue Size                       Revenue Shares for Em ployers by Revenue Size Class,
                                   Class,2000                                                                  2000

  0.7                                                                       0.7
  0.6                                                                       0.6
  0.5                                                                       0.5
  0.4                                                                       0.4
  0.3                                                                       0.3
  0.2                                                                       0.2
  0.1                                                                       0.1
    0                                                                         0




                                                                                                                0
                                       0




                                                                                                                +
                                      +
                                      0

                                      0




                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                               0
                                     12
        <3




                                                                                                              12
                                     00




                                                                                                              00
                                                                                  <3
                 6

                        9




                                                                                          6

                                                                                                 9




                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                               0
                                      0

                                      0




                                                                                                              20
                                     20
                                    -3

                                    -9




                                                                                                             -3

                                                                                                             -9




                                                                                                            00
                                   00




                                                                                                            36

                                                                                                            60
                                   36

                                   60




                                                                                                            00
                                   00
              3-

                     6-




                                                                                       3-

                                                                                              6-
                                  12




                                                                                                           12
                                  9-




                                                                                                           9-




                                                                                                           -1
                                  -1
                                 12

                                 30




                                                                                                          12

                                                                                                          30
                                 -3




                                                                                                          -3
                                30




                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                         0-

                                                                                                         0-
                                0-

                                0-




                                                                                                        90
                               90




                               0-




                                                                                                        0-
                              00




                                                                                                       00
                                                                                                       12

                                                                                                       36
                              12

                              36

                             60




                                                                                                      60

                                                                                                     12
                            12
                            Annual Revenue, Thousands of Dollars                                     Annual Revenue, Thousands of Dollars



             Share of Nonem ployer Businesses by Revenue Size Class,
                                                                                       Share of Em ployer Businesses by Revenue Size Class,
                                       2000
                                                                                                               2000
  0.4
                                                                            0.4
  0.3
                                                                            0.3
  0.2
                                                                            0.2
  0.1                                                                       0.1
   0                                                                         0
                                       0




                                                                                                                0
                                       +




                                                                                                                +
                                      0

                                      0




                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                               0
                                     12




                                     00




                                                                                                              12




                                                                                                              00
        <3




                                                                                  <3
                 6

                        9




                                      0

                                      0




                                                                                          6

                                                                                                 9




                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                               0
                                     20




                                                                                                              20
                                   00




                                                                                                            00
                                    -3

                                    -9




                                                                                                             -3

                                                                                                             -9
                                   36

                                   60




                                                                                                            36

                                                                                                            60
                                   00




                                                                                                            00
              3-

                     6-




                                                                                       3-

                                                                                              6-
                                  12




                                                                                                           12
                                  9-




                                                                                                           9-
                                  -1




                                                                                                           -1
                                 12

                                 30




                                                                                                          12

                                                                                                          30
                                 -3




                                                                                                          -3
                                30




                                                                                                         30
                                0-

                                0-




                                                                                                         0-

                                                                                                         0-
                               90




                                                                                                        90
                               0-




                                                                                                        0-
                              00




                                                                                                       00
                              12

                              36




                                                                                                       12

                                                                                                       36
                             60




                                                                                                      60
                            12




                                                                                                     12
                            Annual Revenue, Thousands of Dollars                                     Annual Revenue, Thousands of Dollars




                                                                       35
Figure 3: Share of Revenues and Business Numbers Accounted for by Young Firms,
0 to 3 Years Old, in Selected 4-Digit NAICS Industries

                    Nonemployer Businesses
             .7

                                                                                                                                      5112
                                                                                                                                              4921
             .6
                                                                                                   7221
                                                                                                            3366
  Revenue Share




                                                                                                  7222
      .5                                                                          7224              5415


                                                                             6212                          6244
                                                                    4471     5322
      .4                                                                                        7223
                                                              5615        48535617               6241

                                                                4531
                                                          5416
                                                        5313               7114
                                                                        2357
                                                         8123 8121
                                                         8111              8129
                                              3231                   7213
                                                                       4512
                                                                   2356
      .3                                      5412
                                                            0
                                                         6213
                                                   6211
                                                 5411      8114
                                                           2352
                                                       2355
                                                     7115
                                      5312
                                       5242
      .2                                      1152

                       .2             .3                      .4 .5                                          .6                          .7
                                                      Share of Business Units
                       Source: Own Calculations from ILBD


                            Employer Businesses

                  .7

                  .6
                                                                                                                                      1152
                  .5
    Revenue Share




                                                      7213
                                                                                                  6212
                  .4                                                                     8121
                                                                                                          7221



                  .3                                                                              7115             5416
                                                                   7224    2357           7222             7114
                                                                                  8111
                                                                                  5313
                                                                    6211                                                       8129
                  .2                                           5412621381142352  2355 4853
                                                                              5312 5617
                                                           4531                                                                5415
                                                                          6244
                                                           6241
                                                          5242          5322
                                                                     2356
                                                                4471
                  .1                                     5615
                                                         54113231 8123                            7223
                                                                    0 4512
                                                             5112
                                                                             3366                                          4921

          0
                       0         .1             .2 .3        .4       .5                                                  .6                  .7
                                                    Share of Business Units
                       Source: Own Calculations from ILBD




                                                                     35
Figure 4: Share of Revenues and Business Numbers Accounted for by Small Firms,
Less than $90,000 Annual Revenue, in Selected 4-Digit NAICS Industries

                      Nonemployer Businesses
              1
                                                                                                                                                 6244

                                                                                                                                              8121
                                                                                                                                             4853
                  .
                                                                                                                                             6241
                  8
  Revenue Share




                                                                                                                                          8114
                                                                                                                                           5412
                                                                                                                                            5617
              .6                                                                                                                           8129
                                                                                                                                           7115
                                                                                                                                        7213
                                                                                                                                      2352
                                                                                                                                   6213
                                                                                                                                      7223
                                                                                                                             81234531
                                                                                                                                 2355
                                                                                                                            5312    4512
                                                                                                                               8111 1152
              .4                                                                                                              5242
                                                                                                                        5411 5416
                                                                                                                       7224
                                                                                                                                 5415
                                                                                                                                 53227114
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                          2356
                                                                                                                           3231
                                                                                                                     62127222
                                                                                                                         2357 5313

              .2                                                                                     4921
                                                                                                                     5112
                                                                                                                   6211        5615
                                                                                                                   7221
                                                                                                 3366
                                                                               4471


     0
                      0                .2                    .6.4         .8                                                                 1
                                                  Share of Business Units
                      Source: Own Calculations from ILBD


                          Employer Businesses

      .6

      .5
  Revenue Share




      .4

      .3

      .2
                                                                                                                                                 8121


      .1
                                                                       7224              8114               6244
                                                                                                         1152
                                                             4531            2352          56175412 4853
                                                            0 6213
                                                          8111      222 53128123 7213
                                                                   77114              71156241        8129
                                         4471 621123572356
                                       6212               5411 7221
                                                                  2355
                                                                  5242
                                                                4512
                                                                                     5322
                                                                              72234921
                                                                            5415
                                                                                      5416
                                                                                   5313
              0                                        3231
                                                         5615
                                                      3366        5112


                      0           .1                   .2 .3         .4                                              .5                    .6
                                                      Share of Business Units
                       Source: Own Calculations from ILBD




                                                                      36
Figure 5: Age Difference between Matched Employer and Nonemployer Records

                                                                        Nonemployer Age Minus Employer Age for Linked Records




                                   80000
  Number of Employers with Links




                                   70000
                                   60000
                                   50000
                                   40000
                                   30000
                                   20000
                                   10000
                                       0
                                   -10000
                                            -24 -23 -22 -21 -20 -19 -18 -17 -16 -15 -14 -13 -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   6




                                                                                                35
Figure 6


                   Three-Year Transitions for the 1994 Population of
                         Nonemployers in Selected Industry
   0.70                                                  0.62
                                                                0.58
   0.60
   0.50
                  0.38
   0.40
   0.30    0.26

   0.20
                         0.09
   0.10                         0.03   0.01 0.00                        0.01 0.00    0.01 0.00
   0.00
            Exits        Migrants       Other           Continuers     Persistent   Other Dual
                                       Transits                          Dual

                                 Revenue Share      Share of Business Units




                                                   35
Figure 7

                  Three-Year Transitions for the 1994 Population of
                            Nonemployers, SSN Cases

  0.70                                                    0.65
                                                                 0.58
  0.60
  0.50
                  0.37
  0.40
  0.30     0.24

  0.20
                          0.08
  0.10                           0.03                                                 0.02 0.00
                                         0.01 0.00                       0.01 0.00
  0.00
            Exits        Migrants         Other         Continuers      Persistent   Other Dual
                                         Transits                         Dual

                                 Revenue Share       Share of Business Units


                   Three-Year Transitions for the 1994 Population of
                              Nonemployers, EIN Cases

  0.60
                                                          0.51
  0.50            0.46
                                                                 0.43
  0.40     0.34

  0.30

  0.20                   0.14
                                 0.11
  0.10
                                         0.01 0.00                       0.01 0.00    0.00 0.00
  0.00
            Exits        Migrants         Other         Continuers      Persistent   Other Dual
                                         Transits                         Dual

                                  Revenue Share      Share of Business Units




                                                  36
Figure 8


           Three-Year Transitions for the 1994 Population of Employers
                              in Selected Industries

   0.800                                                  0.74
                                                                 0.68
   0.700
   0.600
   0.500
   0.400
                    0.27
   0.300     0.19
   0.200
   0.100                   0.02 0.02     0.01 0.01                       0.03 0.01
                                                                                      0.00 0.00
   0.000
               Exit        Migrant     Other Transit     Continuer      Persistent   Other Dual
                                                                          Dual

                               Revenue Share         Share of Business Units




                                                 37
Figure 9: Annual Revenue Growth by Business Type and Age


                     Net Revenue Growth Rates for Employers
                      and Nonemployers By Firm Age, 2000

   60
   50
   40
   30
   20
   10
    0
  -10      1         2              3        4          5           6-7   8+
                                         Firm Age

                Nonemployers(All)            Nonemployers(Survivors)
                Employers(All)               Employers(Survivors)




                                        38
Figure 10: Excess Revenue Reallocation by Business Type and Age



                Excess Revenue Reallocation Rates for Employers
                     and Nonemployers By Firm Age, 2000

  100
   80
   60
   40
   20
    0
           1           2             3        4          5           6-7   8+
                                          Firm Age

                 Nonemployers(All)            Nonemployers(Survivors)
                 Employers(All)               Employers(Survivors)




                                         39
Figure 11: Mean Revenue Growth by Business Type and Size

                             Net Revenue Growth for Employers
                              and Nonemployers By Firm Size

  180

  130

   80

   30

  -20   < $3   $3-6   $6-9     $9-12   $12-30 $30-90 $90-120 $120-   $360-   $600-   $1200- $3000+
                                                              360     600    1200     3000
  -70
                                               Firm Size



               Nonemployers(All)                  Nonemployers(Survivors)
               Employers(All)                     Employers(Survivors)




                                             40
Figure 12: Excess Revenue Reallocation by Business Type and Size


                Excess Revenue Reallocation Rates for Employers
                        and Nonemployers By Firm Size

  180

  130

   80

   30

  -20   < $3   $3-6   $6-9   $9-12 $12-30 $30-90   $90-   $120-   $360-   $600- $1200- $3000+
                                                   120     360     600    1200   3000
                                            Firm Size



               Nonemployers(All)             Nonemployers(Survivors)
               Employers(All)                Employers(Survivors)




                                             41
