NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE GROWTH UNDER THE AFRICAN GROWTH AND OPPORTUNITY ACT
Garth Frazer
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Working Paper 13222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13222

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Garth Frazer and Johannes Van Biesebroeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Growth under the African Growth and Opportunity Act
Garth Frazer and Johannes Van Biesebroeck
NBER Working Paper No. 13222
July 2007
JEL No. F13,F14,F15,O19
ABSTRACT
This paper explores whether one of the most important U.S. policies towards Africa of the past few
decades achieved its desired result. In 2000, the United States dropped trade restrictions on a broad
list of products through the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). Since the Act was applied
to both countries and products, we estimate the impact with a triple difference-in-differences estimation,
controlling for both country and product-level import surges at the time of onset. This approach allows
us to better address the "endogeneity of policy" critique of standard difference-in-differences estimation
than if either a country or a product-level analysis was performed separately. Despite the fact that
the AGOA product list as chosen to not include "import-sensitive" products, and despite the general
challenges of transaction costs in African countries, we find that AGOA has a large and robust impact
on apparel imports into the U.S., as well as on the agricultural and manufactured products covered
by AGOA. These import responses grew over time and were the largest in product categories where
the tariffs removed were large. AGOA did not result in a decrease in exports to Europe in these product
categories, suggesting that the U.S.-AGOA imports were not merely diverted from elsewhere. We
discuss how the effects vary across countries and the implications of these findings for aggregate export
volumes.
Garth Frazer
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
M5S 3E6
CANADA
gfrazer@chass.utoronto.ca
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
Institute for Policy Analysis, Suite 707
140 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G6
CANADA
and NBER
johannes.vanbiesebroeck@utoronto.ca

1

Introduction

The overwhelming challenge in improving the human condition today is the challenge of
development on the African continent. One of many factors cited for inhibiting the development of Africa and other low-income countries has been the trade barriers imposed by
high-income countries on the imports of commodities in which poor countries are likely to
have a comparative advantage: textiles and agricultural products in particular. This paper
explores whether these trade barriers have actually mattered–that is, where they have been
removed, have exports from Africa increased?
The paper takes advantage of a unilateral granting of trade concessions to the majority
of sub-Saharan African countries by the United States in the form of the African Growth
and Opportunity Act (2000). These trade concessions were uniform across all the African
countries that were deemed eligible for AGOA.1 The concessions fall into two categories:
apparel and non-apparel items; details on the implementation for each category will be described later. While the products allowed duty-free and quota-free access under AGOA were
uniform across eligible countries, the set of products was not comprehensive. Therefore, since
AGOA applied selectively to both countries and products, but not to all countries, nor to
all products, this implementation allows for triple diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimation of the
impact of the policy. As a result, we can muster a more robust defense to the endogeneity
critique that applies to some diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimation (Besley and Case, 2000).
To examine the benefits of triple-diﬀerence estimates, consider how the endogeneity critique would apply if either a country or a product-level analysis was performed separately. At
the country-level, suppose that countries were given AGOA-eligibility just as their economies
started to improve, for example when the normal state of aﬀairs is restored after a civil war.
This might result in an increase in U.S. imports from this country at the same time as the
country gained eligibility, although the imports might just result from the overall boost in
the exporter’s economy.2 The country-by-country diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimator would
erroneously attribute the positive export eﬀect to AGOA. At the product-level, suppose that
the U.S. granted AGOA product status to those products for which its demand was about
to increase.3 Here again, a product-by-product diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimator would at1
The main criteria for AGOA eligibility relate to a basic level of political and democratic freedom within the
country. Countries excluded from AGOA as of January 2, 2007 include: Zimbabwe, Cote d’Ivoire, Somalia,
Sudan, Central African Republic, Eritrea, Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Mayotte, Togo.
2
In practice, there was some variation across countries in eligibility date and even more so for the apparel
provision in AGOA.
3
To preview the results, U.S. worldwide imports of oil (a product given duty-free access under AGOA)
were considerably higher post-AGOA.

1

tribute a positive eﬀect to AGOA if the general import surge for eligible products simply
extended to countries that were included in the Act.
We will be able to address these critiques. The increase in imports into the U.S. of a
specific AGOA-eligible product from an AGOA-eligible country during the AGOA period will
be measured relative to: (i) the overall increase in imports from that country, (ii) the overall
increase in imports of that product, and (iii) the base level of imports of AGOA products
from AGOA countries. In fact, the preferred specification will be even more general than
this, allowing for a full set of country-product, country-year, and product-year fixed eﬀects.
While this product and country variation in eligibility clearly has its advantages in terms
of isolating the impact of AGOA, it also has its limitations. For example, suppose that the
U.S. administration chose to implement tariﬀ concessions on products that African countries would have little hope of exporting to the U.S. (e.g. because of a lack of comparative
advantage).

The AGOA legislation explicitly allows the President only to grant duty-free

treatment for non-apparel articles “after the U.S. Trade Representative and the U.S. International Trade Commission have determined that the article is not import sensitive when
imported from African countries,”4 which suggests that such selective implementation was
indeed possible. The eﬀect of tariﬀ concessions applied in such selective fashion will diﬀer
from a widespread free-trade agreement. For this reason, it is not self-evident that one would
find positive eﬀects from AGOA, and finding no eﬀect in this case cannot be interpreted more
generally as no eﬀect from broad trade liberalization.
A second reason why one might not expect positive eﬀects from AGOA is that many
have argued (see below) that trade restrictions are not the primary constraint on African exports. For example, Collier and Gunning (1999) identify the chief factors explaining Africa’s
poor economic performance as distorted product and credit markets, high risk, inadequate
social capital, inadequate infrastructure, and poor public services. External factors such as
developed countries’ trade restrictions are not considered as important. Therefore, the internal factors may continue to constrain African exports after the removal of the U.S. import
restrictions. Moreover, the largest expected benefit of AGOA was its reduction of apparel
tariﬀs and quotas, even though most African countries did not have apparel quotas for import
into the U.S. It is not clear that removal of the quotas would matter.
We find that AGOA has a large and robust impact, especially on apparel imports into
the U.S., but also for manufactured products treated by AGOA, and a smaller but significant impact for agricultural products. These import responses grew over time and were the
4

The quotation is taken from a summary of the AGOA Legislation at the U.S. Government AGOA website
at http://www.agoa.gov.

2

largest in product categories where the tariﬀs removed were large. AGOA did not result in
a decrease in exports to Europe in these product categories, suggesting that the U.S.-AGOA
imports were not merely diverted from elsewhere. When we estimate country-specific export
responses, we find a broad-based response to AGOA, particularly for manufactured products.
We also find that countries with high corruption or poor rule-of-law were equally able to take
advantage of AGOA as countries with low corruption and better institutions.
Finally, one reason that the impact of AGOA in apparel exports was expected to be
limited or short-lived was the phaseout of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) on January
1, 2005. At this point, import quotas for apparel imports were eliminated for competing
developing countries as well. Newspapers predicted that most apparel production would shift
to China.5 In addition, most analysts predicted that Chinese and other Asian competition
would overwhelm the less eﬃcient African apparel exporters and seriously damage African
apparel exports to the U.S. after this point (Harrison, Rutherford, and Tarr, 1997; Lall,
2005; Cling et. al., 2005; Nordås, 2004; Rivera, Agama and Dean, 2003; Mattoo et. al.,
2003; Gibbon, 2003). Our dataset extends until 2006, and perhaps surprisingly, we find that
AGOA had the largest eﬀect on apparel exports in the last two years of the sample.
The importance of African development has at diﬀerent times been emphasized by world
leaders, and this has led to a variety of policy statements and initiatives, including the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development and debt relief. AGOA was such an eﬀort, in this case
a unilateral eﬀort of the U.S. Administration under President Clinton, which has since been
renewed by the Bush Administration. This paper evaluates whether this initiative had any
impact.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives background

information on the U.S. system of trade preferences and discusses the relevant literature.
Details on the implementation of the Act are in Section 3.

The empirical specification is

introduced in Section 4 and the data in Section 5. Results are in Section 6 and robustness
checks follow in Section 7. Implications of the results are discussed in Section 8 and Section
9 concludes.

2

Background

This paper measures the impact of the expansion of U.S. trade preferences on exports from
African countries.

Other studies have explored the impact of both free-trade agreements

5

There are literally hundreds of newspaper articles on this specific issue. See for example “Thirty million
jobs could disappear with the end of apparel quotas,” Business Week, December 15, 2003, for a U.S. perspective, and “Textiles Trade Reform: Unstitched by China, WTO," Business Day, October 21, 2004 for a South
African perspective.

3

and expanded trade preferences, with varying conclusions.6 In the African context, Carrère
(2004) examines the impact of the five major African regional trade agreements and two major
currency unions in Africa over the period 1962 through 1996 and finds that they increased
trade between members.
Here, we evaluate the impact of non-reciprocal trade preferences rather than a reciprocal
free-trade agreement. One might expect a smaller trade liberalizing eﬀect, as the U.S. did
not obtain anything in exchange for its concessions, and as mentioned, the law required that
the items included on the AGOA list not be ‘import sensitive’. The major preference regime
oﬀered by most developed countries to imports from developing countries is the Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP)–the rule for eligibility is typically set by an income threshold.
Rose (2004) finds a significant eﬀect of the GSP on trade volumes, but an insignificant eﬀect
of the GATT/WTO. Romalis (2003) finds additionally that GDP growth rates of countries
most aﬀected by the establishment of the GSP increased significantly. AGOA involves the
addition of a large number of products to the U.S. version of the list of products that are
oﬀered duty-free access.
Hoekman et al. (2002) studies the potential eﬀects of the removal of tariﬀs on high-tariﬀ
items (above 15 percent) in the United States, Japan, Europe and Canada on exports from
least developed countries (LDCs). They predict large eﬀects on LDC exports, on the order
of 11 percent of total exports. Similarly, Ianchovichina et al. (2001) explores the potential
impact of preferential market access for a set of 37 Sub-Saharan African countries to the
European Union, Japan, the U.S. and Canada, and finds that African exports would increase
considerably, by approximately 14 percent, if such access were granted.

In contrast, the

products added to the GSP list under AGOA had an average tariﬀ rate of only 4.1% and the
expected impact is likely to be much smaller.7
Several other papers have suggested that the impact of AGOA could well be very limited.
As already noted, Collier and Gunning (1999) does not consider developed country tariﬀs
as significant impediments to growth in Africa.

Limão and Venables (2001) finds that

the relatively low level of African trade flows “is largely due to poor infrastructure.” (p.
451) Rodrik (1998) studies the possible causes of poor export performance in Africa, and
suggests that the dominant causes are low levels of per capita income, small country size,
6

For example, Romalis (2005), Trefler (2004), Burfisher et al. (2001), Clausing (2001), and Head and
Ries (1997) examine the North American Free Trade Agreement or the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement;
Greaney (2001) examines U.S.-Japan bilateral trade agreements, and Frankel et al. (1995) examines the impact
of regional trading blocs.
7
The tariﬀ rate is measured as an average of the ad valorem tariﬀ rate and the ad valorem equivalent for
specific tariﬀs.

4

poor geography, and domestic (African) trade policy.

Morrissey (2005) notes that "there

are many explanations as to why the export response to trade liberalisation in SSA has been
limited,” (p. 1145) and he highlights a few, including transport costs and natural barriers
to trade. Wang and Winters (1998), in summarizing a set of World Bank technical papers,
finds that “the evidence suggests that it is African countries’ own trade policies and not those
of their partners that must be changed in order to promote growth,” a view echoed by Yeats
et al. (1996).
Still, in one case where an African country has liberalized its trade policy, in Uganda,
it has not immediately led to expanded exports; see Morrissey and Rudaheranwa (1998).
Specifically, they find that despite the abolition of export taxes, significant liberalization
on imports, and the liberalization of the foreign exchange market, export earnings did not
increase. Milner et al. (2000) oﬀers a partial explanation, as they find that for Uganda even
after export taxes are abolished, transport costs remain a significant constraint on trade.
Overall, then, there are a number of reasons why AGOA might not have (much of) an impact
in the African context.
To our knowledge, Mattoo et al. (2003), Gibbon (2003), and Brenton and Ikezuki (2004)
are the only other studies of the impact of AGOA. Mattoo et al. (2003) predicted the eﬀects
ex ante using information on pre-AGOA tariﬀs and assumptions on supply responses. Their
conservative estimate was that AGOA would raise Africa’s non-oil exports by 8—11 per cent.
For a country like Mauritius they expected exports to rise by only 5% from 2001 to 2004.
Absent the rules of origin requirements on yarn, which Mauritius turned out to be exempted
from, an export increase of 36% was expected.

For a lesser developed country such as

Madagascar, they assumed a five times higher (export) supply response and predicted an
export increase for textiles of 92%.
Gibbon (2003) analyzes the initial AGOA response (in 2002) in the South African apparel
sector from a global commodity chain/global value chain (GCC/GVC) perspective, providing
an explanation within that context of the kind of enterprises that could take advantage of
AGOA. Brenton and Ikezuki (2004) advocate the renewal of the unrestricted fabric-sourcing
rules of AGOA that were set to expire when their paper was written–which did happen.
Using data up to 2002, they show increased exports of AGOA-eligible products for some
countries, but they also provide suggestive evidence that the rules-of-origin requirements
depress exports and lead to underutilization of existing preferences.

5

3

The Implementation of AGOA

When the Act was first implemented on October 2, 2000, it applied to 34 countries in SubSaharan Africa. By January 2, 2007, eight more countries had been added to the list, and
four countries had been removed. The newer countries, such as Sierra Leone, have generally
been admitted after government stability was achieved. Four countries, the Central African
Republic, Eritrea, Côte d’Ivoire, and Mauritania, have been removed from AGOA as a result
of failures regarding political or democratic freedoms.8
occurred during the period of our

The first three of these removals

dataset.9

The Act allows for duty-free imports under two broad categories: apparel and nonapparel. For non-apparel, approximately 1800 items were added to the list of products with
zero import duty under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). As a result, for AGOA
countries the number of goods on the U.S. GSP list expanded from 4600 to more than 6400
items, defined at the 8-digit HS (Harmonized System) level. We will refer to these items as
GSP products. As soon as a country is declared AGOA eligible, it can export any of these
items duty-free to the U.S.10
On the other hand, duty-free access for apparel exports from an African country is not
automatic as soon as AGOA-eligibility is granted. The first countries to be declared eligible
for the ‘apparel provision’ were Kenya and Mauritius on January 18, 2001, three months
after most countries were admitted to AGOA. Countries have been ‘admitted’ to the apparel
provision at various times over the subsequent years. The apparel provision allows for dutyfree and quota-free access to the U.S. market for most apparel products, provided that the
fabric (or yarn, or thread) comes either from the U.S. or an AGOA country.

While the

country-level quotas have been removed, a regional (AGOA) quota remains for apparel that
was initially set at 1.5% of U.S. imports, increasing to 3.5% over an 8 year period. These
caps were doubled under a set of amendments, called AGOA II, and the new set of caps have
not proved binding.
8
The Central African Republic (January 1, 2004) and Mauritania (January 1, 2007) were both removed
after coups. Eritrea (January 1, 2004) was removed after failing to implement elections and democratic
reforms. Côte d’Ivoire (January 1, 2005) was removed after failing to implement a peace plan.
9
In virtually all specifications, we will use country-product and country-year fixed eﬀects to control for
country-specific eﬀects.
10
For some of the ‘least developed beneficiary countries’, the pre-AGOA GSP list already contained a
number of the products added to the GSP list for all AGOA countries by the Act. We follow the more
conservative approach of including these product-country pairs as treated under AGOA. The alternative
approach, treating these product-country pairs as unaﬀected by AGOA, increases the point estimates of the
AGOA eﬀect by approximately one quarter. Also, some agricultural products subject to tariﬀ-rate quotas
remained subject to out-of-quota duties.

6

In addition to the governance provisions required for admission to AGOA, countries
seeking access to the apparel provision must prove to the U.S. that they have an eﬀective
visa system to verify and enforce the source of the fabric or yarn used in apparel production.
Once countries qualify for the apparel provision, they can also be considered for the ‘special
rule’ for apparel.

This special rule was designed to apply to ‘lesser developed’ AGOA

countries, and allowed them to source their fabric or yarn from anywhere in the world.11 As
of January 2, 2007, South Africa was the only country of the twenty-seven that were (or had
been) eligible for the apparel provision that did not qualify for the special rule (either by rule
or exception granted).

4

Empirical specification

We will examine whether AGOA–a trade liberalization in the form of unilateral trade concessions granted by the U.S. to a set of African countries–has had any impact on the volume
of African exports.

Any of the standard trade models would predict that if these conces-

sions were applied to products that African countries were either already exporting or to
products that they should export given their comparative advantage or factor endowments,
then the volume of these exports would increase under AGOA. Therefore, no formal model
is presented, as this prediction would apply to a wide class of models indeed.
The simplest (but most restrictive) triple-diﬀerence regression specification to measure
the size of the AGOA eﬀect is the following:
ln IM Pcpt = (α1 + β 1 Ineﬀectt ) ∗ AGOA_countryc ∗ AGOA_productp +

(1)

(α2 + α3 Ineﬀectt ) ∗ AGOA_countryc +
(α4 + α5 Ineﬀectt ) ∗ AGOA_productp +
α6 Ineﬀectt + εcpt ,
where the variables are defined as follows. The left-hand side variable refers to the imports
into the U.S. of product p from country c during period t. Since the paper is measuring the
impact of a U.S. policy, all trade volumes will be imports into the U.S., as reported by the
U.S. The variable AGOA_countryc is a time-invariant dummy that takes a value of one if
a country is ever declared AGOA-eligible. Similarly, the variable AGOA_prodp is a timeinvariant dummy that takes a value of one for products eligible for duty-free import under
11

Oﬃcially, the rule is defined as having a per capita GNP below $1500 in 1998 as measured by the World
Bank.

7

AGOA. The Ineﬀect t variable is a dummy that switches from zero to one–for all countries
and products–in 2001, when AGOA takes eﬀect.
The intuition behind this specification can best be seen when only two years are considered, one year prior to AGOA, say 1999, and a second year when AGOA is in eﬀect for
some countries and products, say 2003.
along three dimensions:

The implementation of AGOA contains variation

(i) between time periods (pre and post), (ii) between products,

and (iii) between countries. Therefore, if we define AP as an AGOA product and N P as a
non-AGOA product, the triple diﬀerence (DDD) used to measure the eﬀect of the Act is:
DDD =

AP
AP
NP
NP
((ln IM P03
− ln IM P99
) − (ln IM P03
− ln IM P99
))
|
{z
}

AP
−((ln IM P03

|

AGOA Country − DD
AP
NP
− ln IM P99
) − (ln IM P03

{z

Non−AGOA Country − DD

(2)

NP
− ln IM P99
))
}

The standard diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences approach, used for example when measuring the
eﬀect of tariﬀ preference given to a single country, is the first diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DD)
term, labelled AGOA Country−DD. This measures the diﬀerence in the pre-post diﬀerences
in imports between AGOA and non-AGOA products within an AGOA country. Implicitly,
the AGOA products are the treatment group, and the non-AGOA products the control group
of the first DD experiment. By comparing this first diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences within the AGOA
country to the equivalent diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences in a non-AGOA country (the second term)
we can additionally control for product-specific trends that are common to treated (AGOA)
and untreated countries.
Therefore, the simplest way of expressing the triple diﬀerence in (2) in regression form is
to regress imports on three dummy variables, one for each diﬀerence (Ineﬀect t for the AGOA
implementation period, AGOA_productp for AGOA products, and AGOA_countryc for
AGOA countries), as well as the three double interactions of these variables, and the single
triple interaction.

This is exactly the specification of (1).

The eﬀect of AGOA will be

measured by the triple interaction. However, this specification is very restrictive. It does
not allow for much country or product-level heterogeneity in the base-level of imports into
the U.S. All country-product combinations are lumped in four exclusive groups: ineligible
products from non-AGOA countries, eligible products from AGOA countries, eligible products
from non-AGOA countries, and ineligible products from AGOA countries.

Each group is

restricted to have a single base level of imports. In addition, it assumes that the post-AGOA
surge in U.S. imports was the same for all AGOA countries and for all eligible products.

8

Relaxing these assumptions, our preferred, entirely unrestrictive, specification is:
ln IM Pcpt = β 1 Ineﬀectt ∗ AGOA_countryc ∗ AGOA_productp +

(3)

+country/productcp + country/yearct + product/yearpt + εcpt .
The only coeﬃcient estimated (aside from all the fixed eﬀects) is the one of interest, namely
that on the triple interaction (Ineﬀect t ∗ AGOA_country ∗ AGOA_product). The double-

interaction terms of (1) are replaced with three sets of interactive fixed eﬀects, which allow

for heterogeneity in (i) the base level of imports of a specific product from a specific country
(country/prodcp ), (ii) the overall imports from a given country into the U.S. in a given year
(country/yearct ), and (iii) the overall imports of a particular product into the U.S. in a
given year (product/yearpt ).

Including these double-interaction fixed eﬀects obviates the

need for both the uninteracted variables (AGOA_productp , AGOA_countryc , and Ineﬀectt )
as well as the double-interaction terms in specification (1).12 For comparison purposes, we
also report results for more restrictive specifications, including that of (1), in the robustness
checks of Section 7.
Two further issues complicate the analysis. As mentioned before, AGOA treats apparel
products diﬀerently from all other products that fall under the Act. Therefore, it would be
implausibly restrictive to constrain the eﬀects to be of the same magnitudes for both groups
of products.13 Therefore, two sets of the variables in (3) are included in the full specification:
one for AGOA-GSP products14 (GSP ) and one for apparel products (AP P ). Second, while
for GSP products the Act came into eﬀect at approximately the same time for the vast
majority of countries, this is not the case for the apparel provision. In order to account for
the additional time-variation in country-eligibility for AGOA, the timing of the two Ineﬀect t
variables used in the interaction terms will be country-specific as well.
The full specification for the benchmark estimation is given by
ln IM Pcpt = β 1 Ineﬀect_GSPct ∗ GSP _countryc ∗ GSP _productp +

(4)

δ 1 Ineﬀect_AP Pct ∗ AP P _countryc ∗ AP P _productp +
+country/productcp + country/yearct + product/yearpt + εcpt .
12

In our notation, variables are preceded by a coeﬃcient (in Greek letters), while entries not preceded by
coeﬃcients indicate sets of dummies.
13
A further reason for a diﬀerential eﬀect for apparel products under AGOA is the removal of apparel quotas.
However, only two countries, Kenya and Mauritius, were subject to quota restrictions prior to AGOA.
14
Hereafter we will refer to the first group simply as GSP products. In the empirical implementation, we
will additionally allow for diﬀerent eﬀects across subcategories of the GSP products. For simplicity, that
discussion is postponed until Section 6.

9

Two time-invariant product dummies are now used, GSP _productp for the non-apparel
products added to the GSP list under AGOA, and AP P _productp for apparel. Two timeinvariant country dummies also distinguish between countries that at any point in time fall
under the Act (GSP _countryc ) and the subset of these countries that, at some point, were
additionally declared eligible for the apparel provision (AP P _countryc ).
In specification (4) the Ineﬀect t variable has been replaced by two separate variables,
which are made country-specific, i.e. Ineﬀect_GSPct and Ineﬀect_AP Pct . To measure the
eﬀect of AGOA on import growth for eligible products in eligible countries–the triple interaction term–the actual time the Act has been in eﬀect in each country is taken into account.
As outlined in the previous section, while 34 countries were admitted together on October 2,
2000, eight more countries were admitted more recently.15
The coeﬃcients of interest are β 1 and δ 1 . β 1 estimates the impact of non-apparel access
under AGOA and δ 1 estimates the impact of the apparel provision. Both triple interactions
are implictly measured relative to the three double interactions (country-time, product-time,
country-product), as well as the level eﬀects of the individual variables.

For example, β 1

measures the surge in imports for GSP products coming from AGOA eligible countries when
the Act was in eﬀect relative to a country-product specific base level of imports pre-AGOA.
The eﬀect is measured controlling for overall import surges from AGOA countries, and general
U.S. import surges for GSP products.16
The discussion thus far has focused on the response of import levels when products
become eligible for duty-free imports.

Products for which African countries have positive

export levels to the U.S. in spite of tariﬀs and quotas are likely to be products in which these
countries have a strong comparative advantage. Most countries do not export the majority
of products.

Undoubtedly this reflects to a large extent comparative advantage, but it is

also influenced by U.S. trade policy. The removal of import duties and quotas might lead
countries to start exporting a wider range of products to the U.S.
As we include zero import observations in the estimation of equation (4), the estimated
eﬀect of a change to duty-free status will include both the response at the intensive margin–
increased exports–and the extensive margin–starting to export. It is unlikely that both
eﬀects are of the same magnitude, which is implicitly assumed. We use a linear probability
model to isolate the extensive margin response of the export decision. The dependent variable
is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the country-product-time observation has
15

The eﬀect of the Act truly did not begin until 2001, as the President did not announce (and make oﬃcial)
the list of AGOA-GSP products until December 21, 2000, and, as noted, none of the countries were eligible
for the apparel provision until 2001.
16
In the more restrictive specification (1), the surges are captured by the α3 and α5 coeﬃcients.

10

positive imports into the U.S. and zero otherwise.

The right-hand side of equation (4) is

unchanged and estimation is still with least squares. The advantage of the linear probability
model is that we can keep the very general set of fixed eﬀects. The main disadvantage, that
predicted values are not restricted to lie on the (0,1) interval, is unlikely to be much of an
issue as all coeﬃcients are identified oﬀ the time variation within country-product categories.
Conditional on the country-product controls, the eﬀect of trade liberalization on the export
probability is likely to be relatively small.
A third variation on the benchmark specification is designed to measure the import
elasticity with respect to changes in tariﬀ rates. Import tariﬀs on all AGOA eligible products
are eliminated entirely, but initial rates of protection diﬀered widely by product. As a result,
the extent of trade liberalization also varies widely.
Multiplying the triple-interaction eﬀects in (4) by the pre-AGOA tariﬀ rates that the U.S.
applied to each country-product observation will allow us to recover the marginal response
of imports to changes in protection. The β 1 and δ 1 coeﬃcients in this specification measure
the percentage import response to one percentage point change in tariﬀs, instead of the full
import response from a change to duty-free status. We can look at the same eﬀect in the linear
probability regressions to measure the response to tariﬀ changes at the extensive margin.

5

Data

The trade data is taken from the U.S. International Trade Commission.

The dependent

variable for most of the analysis is the log import of a particular product from each country
in the world into the U.S., as reported by the U.S., in each year from 1998 to 2006. If nothing
is reported, imports are set to zero.17 For the regressions that look at the extensive margin
a dummy variable is created that takes the value of one if imports are positive.
The list of non-apparel products that are added to the GSP list by AGOA is published
by the U.S. Trade Representative, as is the list of apparel products eligible for AGOA treatment.18 The list of AGOA-eligible countries, including whether they qualified for the apparel
provision and the date they became eligible is available from the U.S. International Trade
Administration.19
We use the U.S. International Trade Commission import data and work at the HS 617
To create the dependent variable, we follow the usual practice of adding one unit (dollar) to all import
values before taking logarithms.
18
These lists are available on the U.S. Trade Representative web site at http://www.ustr.gov.
19
The list is available on the ITA-sponsored web site: http://www.agoa.gov.

11

digit level of aggregation.20

The Act defines apparel products treated under AGOA at

the HS 6-digit (or higher) level, while non-apparel product codes of the AGOA-GSP list
are at the 8-digit level. To capture this fact, the GSP _productp variable is not a dummy,
but varies continuously between 0 and 1.

It is constructed to represent for each 6-digit

product the fraction of underlying 8-digit products (by value) that are eligible for duty-free
imports. In the aggregation, eligibility dummies at the 8-digit level are weighted by the share
of U.S. worldwide imports in each subcategory in the pre-AGOA period.21 In contrast, the
AP P _productp variable is always a 0-1 dummy, as the products that fall under the apparel
provision are defined at an aggregation level of 6-digits or even higher.
The data on tariﬀs is taken from Feenstra, Romalis, and Schott (2002).22

The tariﬀ

rates are set at the 8-digit level and we aggregate them to the 6-digit level using the same
weights as for the AGOA-GSP eligibility dummies. As mentioned previously, the tariﬀ rates
are measured either as the ad valorem tariﬀ or the ad valorem equivalent for specific tariﬀs.
Summary statistics for 2000, the year before AGOA took eﬀect, are in Table 1. AGOA
countries export fewer products and smaller amounts than the average country, which is not
surprising given their small size and low level of development.

From the universe of 5120

products, the average AGOA country has positive exports in 102 and 28 fall under the Act.
The average AGOA country exports 14.02 of the 862 eligible GSP products, three quarters
of which are manufactures.

For apparel products, the average exposure is higher, 14.37

out of 239 products, but the set of apparel-eligible countries is smaller. The most prolific
exporter (South Africa) exports 120 apparel products and 232 of the GSP products. Average
trade-weighted tariﬀ rates are highest for apparel, at 13.1%. On the set of country-product
combinations with positive tariﬀ rates, protection was highest for manufacturers, at 8.5%,
followed by agricultural products, at 7.7%.

For GSP products, a number of the poorest

AGOA countries were already exempt from duties (see footnote 10).
⇒ [Table 1 approximately here] ⇐
In the robustness checks (discussed below), we estimate the equations without the large
set of fixed eﬀects. To control for some country heterogeneity, we use a number of standard
20

Note that at this level our preferred specification already requires approximately 1.2 million fixed eﬀects.
Working at an even more disaggregate level would introduce mostly zero-import observations for the African
economies.
21
In theory, aggregation will provide a consistent, if ineﬃcient, estimate of the eﬀects of AGOA-GSP. In
practice, the average of the GSP _productp variable for treated products is 0.74, with more than half taking on
the value of 1. Within the 6-digit categories, the treated 8-digit categories significantly outweigh the untreated
8-digit categories.
22
Considerable thanks are due to these authors for making this data available at http://www.nber.org/data.
As the tariﬀs drop to zero with AGOA, we only need the tariﬀs prior to the Act to analyze the eﬀect.

12

variables that have been found to predict trade volumes well in the gravity equation literature.
The distance between two countries is calculated as the great circle distance between capital
cities. Other country-level variables are taken from the 2006 World Development Indicators
database.

6

Results

The results for equation (4) with a full set of country-product, country-year, and product-year
fixed eﬀects, estimated on the full balanced panel of all countries worldwide for all products,
from 1998 to 2006 are in column (1) of Table 2. The coeﬃcient δ 1 on the triple-interaction
term for apparel measures the eﬀect of the apparel provision on imports into the U.S., and the
coeﬃcient β 1 measures the eﬀect of the non-apparel concessions under AGOA for products
added to the GSP list. The eﬀect is identified from the change in pre versus post-AGOA
import levels for each country/product category, controlling for the baseline import level and
general country and product import surges that can vary by year. The estimates indicate
that the apparel provision in AGOA is associated with a 53% increase in imports into the
U.S. For GSP products, AGOA raises imports by 14%.
⇒ [Table 2 approximately here] ⇐
To compare, the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences results are presented in columns (2) through (4).
In column (2), the sample is limited to just AGOA countries, and so focuses on the diﬀerence
between AGOA and non-AGOA products (the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences in the first line of
equation (2)).

As in the triple-diﬀerence estimation, a full set of country-product fixed

eﬀects is included.

Country-year dummies are also included, to allow for the diﬀerential

timing of AGOA across countries, but we have to omit the product-year dummies.

This

estimator identifies the AGOA eﬀect solely from the relative import growth for AGOA and
non-AGOA products. The apparel eﬀect is slightly overestimated at 57% instead of 53%,
indicating that U.S. import demand for apparel products increased for non-AGOA countries
as well. The AGOA-GSP eﬀect is underestimated at -2.2%, indicative of an inverse U.S.
demand eﬀect for these products.
The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences method can also be implemented by restricting the sample
to AGOA treated products, but including all countries. We examine GSP products separately
from apparel because the set of countries qualifying diﬀers.

13

This way, we use the treated

products in untreated countries as control group.23

The full set of country-product and

product-year fixed eﬀects are included, but now we have to omit the set of country-year
dummies. The apparel eﬀect, in column (3), becomes 38% and is still significant; the AGOAGSP eﬀect, in column (4), becomes 0.4% and insignificant. Both of these underestimate the
impact of AGOA, as the estimates fail to take into account the overall drop in U.S. imports
from AGOA countries, for AGOA and other products alike.
Finally, in the last column in Table 2 we report the eﬀects of AGOA on the probability
that an eligible country exports a product to the U.S. For products under the apparel
provision the probability is increased by 3.0% in the post-AGOA period. In terms of economic
magnitude, this eﬀect is large compared to an average probability of 23.5% for all countries
worldwide and 6.0% for AGOA countries prior to the Act. The GSP eﬀect is also positive
and significant. The probability that an AGOA country exports a GSP product to the U.S.
is increased by 1.0%; again an extremely large change relative to an average probability of
9.8% for all countries worldwide and 1.6% for AGOA countries prior to the Act.
The results of Table 2 measure the average eﬀect of AGOA in the years following its
implementation. We examine the timing of the eﬀects by interacting the triple interaction
with year dummies for each of the AGOA years, separately for apparel and GSP products.
The results of this estimation are in Table 3. Most AGOA countries are eligible for duty-free
treatment on GSP products at the outset of AGOA in January of 2001, and so the progress of
the AGOA-GSP eﬀect can be measured over the six years 2001 through 2006. On the other
hand, since twelve of the twenty-six countries ever declared eligible for the apparel provision
are declared such in the latter half of 2001 and the first half of 2002, we chose 2002 for
the average onset of the apparel provision.24 Therefore, there are only five years of AGOA
apparel implementation to consider.
For both sets of products, the impact of AGOA grows significantly over time, from 24.6%
to 57.1% for apparel products, and from 6.6% to 26.9% for GSP products. Again, this can
be the result of starting to export in new product categories or expanding exports within the
existing categories. Results in the second column indicate that there is an important change
at the extensive margin. The increase in the probability of exporting a product rises over
time, from 1.8 to 3.0% for apparel, and from 0.5 to 1.9% for GSP products. Especially for
23

In the triple-diﬀerence results of column (1), the ‘control’ group for both apparel and GSP products is
the set of non-apparel, non-GSP products. In columns (3) and (4), we perform the analysis separately for
GSP and apparel products. Otherwise, we would lump import changes for apparel and GSP imports from
non-AGOA countries together in the control group.
24
Of the remaining thirteen, just five were declared eligible in the first half of 2001, with the remaining eight
declared eligible later than 2002.

14

the last category, this response is extremely large. From 2000 to 2006 the probability a GSP
product is exported to the U.S. approximately doubles.
For apparel products, the major expansion in product lines happened in the first two
years, and has not increased since then, although the volume in these product lines has
continued to increase.

For GSP products, the estimate of the AGOA impact in the final

year of our sample (26.9%) is considerably larger than the average eﬀect captured over the
six years of AGOA impact (13.5% from Table 2). The eﬀect also keeps growing over time,
consistent with the large response at the extensive margin for these products.
The apparel results are most striking when they are placed in context of the dismantling
of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA) quotas on January 1, 2005 (Year 4 of the apparel
implementation), as described earlier.

Only two African countries, Kenya and Mauritius,

had been subject to these quotas before they were dropped for AGOA countries at the
outset of AGOA. The primary eﬀect of the end of the MFA was expected to be increased
competition from Asia, particularly China.
apparel exports in 2005.

Nevertheless, AGOA countries increased their

Although exports dropped slightly in 2006, the AGOA apparel

eﬀect remained larger than for 2004 or earlier years of the program.
⇒ [Table 3 approximately here] ⇐
To this point, we have assumed that the impact of AGOA treatment is the same across
subcategories of GSP products. We now relax this assumption. The 1835 8-digit HS products
added to the GSP list under AGOA can be categorized as agricultural (617 products), minerals (4), petroleum and related products (11), and manufacturing, including chemicals (1203).
The rules and timing of the trade liberalization are identical for each subcategory. Allowing heterogeneous AGOA-treatment eﬀects for these subcategories simply requires replacing
the GSP _productp term in equation (4) with 4 terms–one for each of the subcategories:
agriculture, minerals, petroleum, and manufacturing.
Table 4 repeats the triple-interaction specifications of Table 2, allowing for heterogeneous
eﬀects. Obviously, the eﬀect on apparel exports does not change, but for the GSP subcategories there are considerable diﬀerences. The petroleum and mineral eﬀects are insignificant.
Most of the AGOA-GSP products were agricultural products (617) or manufactured products
(1203), and we find that both the agricultural and manufactured product category eﬀects are
positive and significant. AGOA resulted in a 8.3% increase in imports for GSP-Agricultural
products, and a 15.7% increase for GSP-Manufactured products.
⇒ [Table 4 approximately here] ⇐
15

The second column explores the eﬀect of AGOA on the probability of exporting a particular product. Here, the signs, significance, and relative magnitude of the eﬀects mirror the
results in the first column, but some of the absolute magnitudes are surprisingly large. The
probability that an AGOA country exports a GSP-Agriculture product increases by 0.7%,
relative to a baseline percentage for AGOA countries for these products of only 1.3% (and
7.4% in this category for all countries) prior to AGOA. That is, the probability of exporting
these agricultural products rises by more than one half for AGOA countries. For minerals,
the AGOA-related increase is 1.5%, relative to a baseline of 0 (only 4 products here) prior
to the Act for AGOA countries, and 1.6% for all countries prior to the Act.

The point

estimate for GSP-Petroleum products is large, but estimated highly insignificantly.

For

GSP-Manufactures, the probability of exporting increased by full 1.2% as a result of AGOA,
relative to a baseline of 1.8% for AGOA countries prior to the Act. A two-thirds increase!
In sum, we find that the Act increased apparel trade very substantially, while the import
responses of manufactured products in particular are relatively large as well. While AGOA
countries export notably fewer products than most other countries, this gap decreased tremendously following the Act.

The large increase in the probability of exporting is consistent

with the AGOA eﬀect growing over time, especially for GSP products.
Next, we additionally multiply the triple-interaction term by the pre-AGOA U.S. tariﬀ
rates. Estimates in Tables 2, 3 and 4 measured the import growth resulting from the elimination of tariﬀ rates, a 100% reduction. The estimates in Table 5 can be used to predict
import responses to smaller reductions in tariﬀ levels as well. We find that every percentage
point reduction in tariﬀ rates is associated with 3.6% higher imports of apparel, 0.9% higher
imports for GSP-Agricultural products, and 0.8% higher imports for GSP-Manufactured
products.

The minerals coeﬃcient is again insignificant, while the petroleum eﬀect inex-

plicably turns negative. Given that the average pre-AGOA tariﬀ for textiles is 13.1%, 3.7%
for GSP-Agricultural products, and 4.4% for GSP-Manufactured products, the eﬀect of the
elimination of tariﬀ rates evaluated at the mean comes to a 46.9% increase for apparel, a
3.5% increase for GSP-Agricultural products, and a 3.4% increase for GSP-Manufactured
products. These estimates are somewhat lower, especially for manufactured products, than
the results of Table 4.25
⇒ [Table 5 approximately here] ⇐
25
Similar estimates using the logarithm of the tariﬀ rate in the regression, which assumes a constant tariﬀ
elasticity, are even closer to the results in Table 4 for agricultural and manufacturing products, but diﬀer more
for apparel (results available upon request).

16

The results for the probability of importing, in column (2), follow roughly the same
pattern.

Each percentage point decrease in apparel tariﬀs is estimated to increase the

probability of apparel imports by 0.26%. For GSP-Agricultural and Manufactured products,
a similar tariﬀ reduction would on average result in a 0.08% and 0.06% increase in the
probability of importing these products. The average elasticity at the extensive margin that
these responses to absolute reductions in tariﬀs imply, at the top of Table 5, line up well with
the total eﬀect estimated in Table 4 for apparel, but are again lower for GSP-Agricultural
and Manufactured products.
One distinct possibility is that the eﬀect of tariﬀ reductions is non-linear. Diﬀerential
eﬀects by initial tariﬀ levels can be explored by interacting the triple-interaction eﬀect in
equation (4) with dummies for diﬀerent tariﬀ classes. As such, we allow for a diﬀerent
responses by initial rate of protection. For apparel products we use eight tariﬀ classes and
for GSP products (pooling all subcategories), which are on average subject to lower tariﬀs,
five.26
The point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for all triple-interaction eﬀects are
plotted in Figure 1 for apparel, and in Figure 2 for GSP products. For apparel, the estimated
coeﬃcients on the two lowest tariﬀ brackets are insignificant.

For the other brackets, the

estimates exceed 0.18 and are significantly diﬀerent from zero. Import responses for small
or moderate tariﬀ reductions appear small in comparison to the responses in the high-tariﬀ
brackets. The eﬀect of a tariﬀ reduction of more than 30% is a 7-fold increase in apparel
exports.27 The GSP coeﬃcients are smaller but the non-linear eﬀect is still clearly present.
The point estimate for tariﬀ cuts of more than 30% is more than triple any other estimate,
indicating a 55% increase in exports, but the confidence interval is very wide as well, and
includes zero.

In general, the removal of the highest tariﬀ rates is clearly associated with

the largest import responses.
⇒ [Figures 1 and 2 approximately here] ⇐

7

Robustness Checks

Control group
26
The lowest tariﬀ class dummy for apparel takes the value of one if pre-AGOA tariﬀs were between 0 and
3% and zero otherwise. Subsequent tariﬀ classes use the following tariﬀ brackets: 3—6%, 6—10%, 10—15%,
15—20%, 20—25%, 25—30%, and higher than 30%. For GSP products, the tariﬀ brackets employed are: 0—5%,
5—10%, 10—20%, 20—30%, and 30% and higher.
27
The width of the confidence intervals tend to vary inversely with the number of products that fall in each
tariﬀ bracket.

17

All results to this point have used all non-AGOA countries worldwide as the implicit
control group for the AGOA eﬀect. Given that the African countries’ export composition is
likely to diﬀer substantially from more developed countries, we also report results excluding
the OECD countries from the control group.

These results are in column (2) of Table 6,

with the benchmark results repeated in column (1).

The estimated impact of AGOA is

very similar for the three categories of interest: slightly larger for agriculture, and slightly
smaller for apparel and manufactures. Each of the AGOA eﬀects remain positive and highly
significant.
⇒ [Table 6 approximately here] ⇐
Self selection
The apparel eﬀect measures the trade response for those countries that become subject
to the apparel provision of AGOA. Because this provision needed to be applied for, the experiment is not as clean as that on agricultural or manufactured goods. Countries that could
foresee no AGOA-apparel eﬀect could choose not to apply for the apparel provision, leading
us to overestimate the average apparel eﬀect across all AGOA countries.

An extremely

conservative estimate of the lower bound of the AGOA-apparel eﬀect can be obtained by
treating all AGOA countries as eligible for the apparel provision beginning at the outset of
AGOA in 2001, whether or not they were actually ruled eligible (which can only happen after
an application).28
The results are in column (3) of Table 6; the AGOA-GSP eﬀects are essentially unchanged.

The apparel eﬀect drops from 53% to 23%, but remains statistically significant,

and still represents an economically large increase. Interpreted most conservatively, the 53%
figure only represents the eﬀect of AGOA on those countries that were subject to the apparel
provision. The 23% figure is a lower bound of the average eﬀect of AGOA on apparel imports
across all AGOA countries. It assumes that AGOA countries not under the apparel provision
actually did have access to this provision, and for the entire AGOA period.
Treatment window
To estimate the impact of AGOA, we faced a trade-oﬀ in selecting the post-AGOA
period. On the one hand, a shorter window has the benefit of cleaner identification because
28
As of January 2, 2007, 27 of the 42 countries ever eligible for AGOA were also eligible for the apparel
provision.

18

fewer other changes can take place. On the other hand, it requires time for firms to fully
exploit the newly obtained market access, especially if new trade is created and not merely
diverted from elsewhere.

In addition, the impending abolishment of the MFA lead many

observers to expect any AGOA eﬀect to be short-lived. The timing eﬀects in Table 3 already
illustrated that the response on the extensive margin contributes to a growing eﬀect over
time.
As a further robustness check, we also estimated each specification in the paper for a
shorter treatment window of three years pre and three years post-AGOA, 1998—2003 (full
results available upon request).
somewhat smaller in this period.

Note that the set of countries qualifying for the Act is
In column (4) of Table 6 we report the results for the

benchmark specification (4), corresponding to the results in column (1). The point estimate
remains remarkably similar for apparel. For manufactures, the estimate is still significant,
and as expected, somewhat lower. For agriculture, the estimate is now insignificant.
Trade diversion
To this point, we have tested whether or not AGOA has resulted in a significant increase
in imports from eligible countries into the U.S. From a policy perspective, it is important to
diﬀerentiate whether this increase was the result of new export creation or merely a diversion
of exports from elsewhere. The most straightforward approach to answer this question would
be to run a similar set of regressions using AGOA country exports to the rest of the world
as dependent variable. The U.N. Comtrade database contains all bilateral trade flows, not
limited to the U.S. Unfortunately, African countries only report exports sporadically. At
most nine AGOA countries would remain in the sample for such an analysis.

Moreover,

trade statistics tend to be collected less accurately on the export than on the import side,
which is likely to introduce measurement error.
Instead, we consider the sum of imports into the U.S. and into the 25 countries of the
E.U. as a proxy for total exports, as these are Africa’s main trading partners. Trade diversion
is also most likely from export destinations with similar tastes and level of development. We
then test whether or not the Act had an eﬀect on the exports from AGOA countries to the
E.U., using a regression of the form of equation (4), but with E.U. imports as dependent
variable.

If AGOA merely resulted in attracting imports to the U.S. that had previously

been going to Europe, we should expect negative coeﬃcients on precisely the same variables
for which we estimated positive coeﬃcients in the benchmark (U.S.) equation.
Our data set of E.U. imports is comparable to the U.S. data, but limited to the years
1999, 2000, 2002, and 2003.

For comparability, we report the U.S. results estimated for
19

these four years in column (5) of Table 6. The results are generally similar to the nine-year
benchmark estimates in Column (1). The apparel estimate is somewhat higher, while the
eﬀect on manufactures is smaller, and the agriculture eﬀect is now insignificant. The impact
of AGOA on E.U. imports is in column (6). The eﬀects for most product categories are not
significantly diﬀerent from zero.29 Perhaps surprisingly, where the eﬀect is significant, it is
positive. For example, E.U. imports of GSP-Manufactured products, are found to increase by
4%. A potential explanation (among many) could involve spillover eﬀects from the increased
U.S. imports.

The experience of exporting to the U.S. could make it easier to export to

the E.U., for example if infrastructure or logistics costs can be shared across destinations.
The results clearly indicate that the large U.S. import responses found earlier are not merely
trade diversion from the E.U.
Fewer controls
The specification with country-product, country-year, and product-year fixed eﬀects, in
equation (4), is very general but requires an enormous number of controls. Over the sample
period, the U.S. reports imports from 207 diﬀerent countries and 5120 diﬀerent products at
the 6-digit HS classification. This results in more than one million dummies. To check the
robustness of the findings, we limit the number of controls.
The results for the diﬀerent specifications of Table 7 include various combinations of the
fixed eﬀects–the benchmark results are again repeated in the first column.

Whenever a

fixed eﬀect is removed, say for example the product-year fixed eﬀects, then the product-year
double-interaction–the term α5 Ineﬀectt ∗ AGOA_productp in (1)–is re-introduced into the

equation. Therefore, all estimated eﬀects in Table 7 are still triple-diﬀerences. The number

of controls goes down in columns further to the right. The final column of this table, which
corresponds to the estimation of equation (1), is very restrictive, omitting all fixed eﬀects.
To at least control for some country-heterogeneity, we introduce a set of control variables that
are generally found to have strong predictive power for trade flows in the gravity equation
literature.
29

It should be noted that at roughly the same time as AGOA, Europe was implementing its “Everything
But Arms” initiative for Least Developed Countries (LDCs). There are 49 LDCs, of which 33 are in subSaharan Africa. The portion of this initiative that overlapped with our time period was the removal of some
European agricultural tariﬀs on products from LDC countries (industrial tariﬀs had by this point already been
removed for all LDC imports) in March of 2001. To the extent that these agricultural tariﬀs overlap with
those removed under AGOA, we should measure a reduced eﬀect of AGOA on agricultural products, as well
as a positive impact of AGOA on the European agricultural imports. While the GSP-Agriculture coeﬃcient
in this regression is not significant in column (6) of Table 6 (although it is positive), it remains possible that
the EBA initiative reduces the estimated AGOA eﬀect on agricultural products. It should have no eﬀect,
however, on either the GSP-Manufactures or apparel results.

20

⇒ [Table 7 approximately here] ⇐
The coeﬃcient on the Ineﬀect_AP Pt ∗ AP P _productp double-interaction makes it clear

why the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimate in column (3) of Table 1 overestimates the eﬀects of

the AGOA apparel provision. The positive coeﬃcient of 13% (exp(0.126)-1) reveals that there
was a general surge in U.S. apparel imports during the AGOA period. The simple diﬀerencein-diﬀerences specification cannot control for this and lumps this worldwide surge with the
AGOA eﬀect. Similarly, the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences specifications in columns (4) and (5) of
Table 2 fail to take into account the drops in overall import levels from AGOA countries, as
evidenced by the negative Ineﬀect∗GSP/AP P _countryc double-interaction variables. This
leads to incorrect estimates of the AGOA eﬀect.
Even with fewer controls, the significance and relative magnitude of the key triple interaction (apparel and manufactures) variables are preserved across these various specifications.
In all specifications but the final column, apparel imports increase by between 40% and 53%
as a result of AGOA.30 The GSP-Manufactures eﬀect lies between 6% and 16%, depending on the specification used, and is always highly significant. The GSP-Agriculture eﬀect
becomes insignificant in the more restrictive specifications, suggesting that this eﬀect is less
robust.

8

Implications

Heterogeneous eﬀects
One might wonder whether the large and robust eﬀects identified earlier apply to all countries
or whether they are driven by outliers.

We can evaluate the impact of AGOA at a more

disaggregate level by estimating the category-specific triple-interaction eﬀects separately for
each country. Estimation is as before, but the GSP _countryc and AP P _countryc variables
in equation (4) are replaced with the full set of country dummies (for eligible countries).
For the three categories of interest–Apparel, GSP-Manufactures, and GSP-Agriculture–
the average country-specific estimates are 0.409, 0.128, and 0.082. This lines up quite closely
with the results in Table 4 that force the same eﬀect on all AGOA countries; estimates there
were 0.426, 0.127, and 0.080. All coeﬃcients are reported in Table A.1 in the Appendix.
The dispersion across countries is substantial for apparel, more moderate for GSPAgriculture, and even smaller for GSP-Manufactures. For agriculture, 24 of the 26 significant
30
The 99% increase in apparel exports predicted by the extremely restrictive specification of the final column
does not allow for any heterogeneity across products or countries.

21

coeﬃcients are positive, suggesting that in almost one third of the AGOA countries, there
was an increase in agriculture exports.31

The average coeﬃcient among these countries

was 0.109. For manufactures, all of the significant coeﬃcients are positive, with 35 of the
41 countries show a positive eﬀect of AGOA on GSP-manufactures exports.

Within this

set, the average coeﬃcient was 0.168, only slightly above the aggregate coeﬃcient of 0.146,
suggesting that the impact of AGOA on manufactures was broadly based.
For apparel, the dispersion of the point estimates is much larger. Five of the twenty-six
countries show a negative impact, although only two are significant–with an average eﬀect
of -0.117 (-11.0%). One is for Côte d’Ivoire, which only joined the apparel provision in 2004
and was forced to leave after one year; the second country is Senegal. The positive estimates
are significant in 14 of the 21 cases, and the average is 0.759 (+114%), but the range, even
among the significant coeﬃcients, is large, between 0.086 and 2.075.
The correlation between the logarithm of the initial apparel export level and the AGOA
eﬀect is large, 0.58, and highly significant. Countries that were already exporting considerable
quantities of apparel reaped the largest benefits from the U.S. trade liberalization.

This

pattern is illustrated in the top graph of Figure 3, showing a positive slope on the predicted
regression line for the AGOA coeﬃcient estimate on the initial export level. For the GSP
categories, there is no strong relation between initial export volumes and AGOA eﬀects.32
⇒ [Figure 3 approximately here] ⇐
The country-specific diﬀerences are also not random. When we regress the estimated
triple-interaction coeﬃcients on variables that have proven to predict trade well in the gravity
equation literature, most signs are intuitive. We include the same variables in the regression
as Rose (2004) and add the time and time-squared that a country has enjoyed duty-free access,
but omit the English language dummy and the remoteness variable to conserve degrees of
freedom.33 The precision, the inverse of the standard deviation for the coeﬃcient estimates,
is used as weight. Results are in Table 8.
⇒ [Table 8 approximately here] ⇐
31

The two significantly negative coeﬃcients are for Central African Republic and Eritrea, which were both
removed from the program on January 1, 2004 for political reasons outlined earlier.
32
The regression lines in Figure 3 are estimated weighing countries by the precision of their estimates. The
respective t-statistics for apparel, agriculture and manufacturers are 2.78, 1.18, and -0.78. While the South
African point estimate for manufacturing is large and negative, it is estimated very imprecisely.
33
The t-statistics on these variables never exceed 0.5.

22

Distance to the U.S. is a negative and significant predictor for the agriculture and manufactures eﬀect, and the coeﬃcient on the GDP variable is positive and significant, as expected.
The population density, country population divided by area, is negative and significant for
both agriculture and manufactures.34 The eﬀect of time is significant and convex, suggesting
that the impact on GSP imports grows more strongly over time. The landlocked dummy is
never significant. The gravity variables have been surprisingly eﬀective in predicting trade
volumes and here they (along with time) explain more than 60 percent of the country variation in the response to trade liberalization for the GSP products as well. In contrast, none
of the coeﬃcients are significant in the apparel regression.

This may be partly related to

the smaller number of coeﬃcient observations in the regression, but may also reflect that the
apparel responses appear well explained by the pre-AGOA levels of apparel exports, as noted
earlier
In contrast, there is virtually no relationship between the estimated trade responses and
a number of governance indicators. The negative impact of corruption on growth has been
studied extensively and is now widely acknowledged.

The evidence across countries, e.g.

Mauro (1995), has been confirmed by firm-level evidence, e.g. Fisman and Svensson (2006).
The two leftmost panels in Figure 4 plot the estimated coeﬃcients for GSP-products (at the
top) and for apparel (bottom) against the widely-used World Bank indicator of corruption.35
The cloud of estimates does not reveal a distinct pattern and the slopes of the two regression lines are insignificant in both panels.

While countries with less corruption, positive

indicators, have done somewhat better on average, the range of the estimates for countries
with widespread corruption is very wide. In particular, two of the countries with the largest
apparel eﬀects, Kenya and Madagascar, are also among the most corrupt.
An equally large literature studies the relationship between growth or development and
the quality of institutions or the protection of investors’ property rights.

In particular, a

number of authors have investigated the relative importance of institutions versus trade as
an engine of growth.

While Dollar and Kraay (2003) finds both factors to be important,

trade especially in the short run, Rodrik, et al. (2004) finds that institutions ‘trump’ all
other eﬀects. Given that countries with better institutions also trade more, see Dollar and
Kraay (2003) for evidence, it is interesting to verify in the African case whether countries
with better institutions are also better able to take advantage of the U.S. trade liberalization.
34
Since population is typically negative in gravity equations (which is equivalent to stating that GDP per
capita is positive, controlling for GDP), and land area is typically negative, our priors on the sign of this
variable were not as strong.
35
The governance indicators are available online at http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/data.
There is no relationship either with other measures capturing economic or political freedom and government
eﬀectiveness or regulation.

23

The rightmost panels in Figure 4 plot the estimated AGOA-eﬀects against the World
Bank indicator of “rule of law”. The estimates are all over the place and, similarly as for
corruption, neither of the regression lines is significant. Overall, then, although others have
demonstrated the ability of less corrupt countries with better institutions to grow faster, here
we find that more corrupt or more unruly countries appear equally likely to benefit from
improved market access granted to them.
⇒ [Figure 4 approximately here] ⇐
Aggregate trade eﬀects
The analysis thus far has focused on African exports for narrowly defined product categories.

We have documented very large percentage changes, but obviously the aggregate

importance depends on the initial level of exports for the products aﬀected most. The impact
of AGOA is placed in the context of the aggregate export level in Table 9.
The first column indicates total AGOA country exports to the U.S. in the key product
categories–apparel, agriculture, and manufactures–averaged over the three years prior to
the Act.36

These exports of selected AGOA products comprised 24% (1304/5472) of non-

oil exports to the U.S. prior to the Act.37

In the following years, the export increase in

these three product categories was large, with a 94% or $1.2b increase overall, as noted in
percentage and absolute terms in columns (2a) and (2b).

The increase was particularly

large for apparel, at 120%. These AGOA products accounted for fully 49% (1225/2517) of
the total increase in non-oil exports following the Act, twice as high as their initial share of
non-oil exports. As a result, their average share in the 2002/2006 period increased to 32%
((1304+1225)/(5472+2517)).
The observed aggregate increases do not account for worldwide surges in these product
categories during the AGOA time period, or for price changes within the product categories,38
which are among the reasons that we estimated the triple-diﬀerence coeﬃcients to measure
the AGOA impact. The eﬀects we estimated before, repeated in column (3a), suggest that
36

We focus on these categories since the petroleum eﬀect is only significant for petroleum-exporting countries,
and insignificant overall. The minerals category, while positive and significant, is limited to a very small number
of products, and we hesitate to draw broader conclusions from this.
37
It is also clear from the table that oil dominates African exports to the U.S. before the Act. We are
interested in the changes once oil is netted out, and so the total non-oil exports serve as the denominator for
most reported changes.
38
The import values have been deflated to 2000 $US using U.S. import price indices available at the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics website (www.bls.gov). However, this does not account for the detailed withinproduct-category price changes that are handled using the triple-diﬀerencing.

24

only a fraction of the observed export increase can be attributed to the Act. Multiplying the
percentage changes by the pre-AGOA export levels of the first column provide an estimate
of the AGOA-induced increase in exports, reported in absolute terms in column (3b). The
absolute export increase attributed to AGOA totals $439m, most of which is in apparel. It
represents 8% of the total initial non-oil export level (in column (3c)) and 17.4% of the total
export growth in the post-AGOA period (in column (3d)).
To place this figure in a slightly wider context, the AGOA-induced increase amounts to
approximately 0.15% of the AGOA countries’ GDP in 2000. While this number is modest,
it is not trivial.

Moreover, it is reflective of the modest nature of the program, especially

for goods other than apparel. As mentioned previously, the average tariﬀ rate on the GSP
products for which the Act abolished tariﬀs were 4.1% (overall), 3.7% (agricultural goods),
and 4.4% (manufactures). The average tariﬀ rates on the goods not included in the Act were
3.9% (overall), 10.4% (agriculture), and 2.8% (manufactures). Moreover, current imports of
non-oil products not included in the Act are approximately four times larger than the non-oil
imports that fall under the Act. It suggests that there remains scope for liberalizing imports
from Africa further, particularly in agriculture.39 Even further unilateral action by the U.S.
could multiply the current impact on these countries’ GDP.
Other Issues
General equilibrium considerations imply that good prices will adjust after the trade
liberalization.

In the U.S., the eﬀect is likely to be minor, as AGOA imports are only a

tiny fraction of total U.S. imports. For apparel, the Act explicitly specifies a limit on the
AGOA import share in order for products to remain exempt from tariﬀs and quotas. By the
end of 2006, the cap was around 6% and even that proved non-binding. Price eﬀects in the
AGOA countries are also likely to be minor for domestic consumers as most export products,
especially those that saw tariﬀs drop significantly, are specialized for export markets. For
exporters, on the other hand, a fraction of the AGOA eﬀect we estimate may represent a
higher price they fetch for their products as our trade values are CIF, i.e. exclude duties.40
The quantity response is thus likely to be smaller than the total response we estimate. For
African exporters, the extent to which they now receive a higher price for their products (the
full world price) the Act represents a pure welfare gain.
39

It is worth remembering, as well, that in addition to these tariﬀs, significant non-tariﬀ barriers remain,
for example in the form of production subsidies for agricultural products.
40
Note that through the product-year fixed eﬀects, we are implicitly controlling for changes in the world
price within product categories.

25

If the better export opportunities led to higher production, we should subtract the
opportunity cost of the resources involved to net welfare gains from output gains. Obviously,
that analysis is beyond our data, but it is worthwhile to point out that the export response
rises disproportionately with the rate of protection–Figures 1 and 2. Production distortions
are most likely for the most protected products. Moreover, we found no evidence of trade
diversion from Europe, which might be the first expected margin of adjustment for resource
use.
An additional benefit of the Act that has been documented by several observers, see
for example Lall (2005) and Roberts and Thoburn (2003), is the attraction of foreign direct
investment (FDI) to aﬀected sectors, apparel in particular.

Anecdotal evidence suggests

that new foreign firms that enter these countries brought better technology and organization,
boosting domestic performance. It has also led many firms to upgrade capital equipment,
raising output further. Even at the aggregate level the increased FDI is apparent. Statistics
in Table 10 compare the level of inward FDI flows prior and post the onset of AGOA, columns
(1) and (3). Inflows increased by 77% in the AGOA countries, while the rest of the world
saw a drop in FDI following the stockmarket crash of 2000-01 and post 9/11. The increase
for other developing countries was to a large extent driven by the accelerating FDI flows
to China.

In contrast, the average FDI flow into AGOA countries rose from $7.1b (1999-

2000 average) to $12.5b (2004—2005 average).

The bottom line in Table 10 indicates that

the acceleration was not limited to oil-producing AGOA members.

Inflows also increased

relative to the outstanding stock of FDI, a trend that is limited to the AGOA countries.
⇒ [Table 10 approximately here] ⇐
A large literature investigates the potential beneficial eﬀects of FDI inflows: improved
productivity, increased capital stock, spillover eﬀects on local firms. These eﬀects are not
necessarily limited to the sectors directly aﬀected by the Act. In addition, there is evidence
that exporting entails sunk entry costs, see for example Roberts and Tybout (1997). If export
opportunities are improved for one set of goods, firms will be more willing to investment in
export activities, e.g. transport infrastructure, financial institutions, overseas contacts and
distribution.

To the extent that these investments can be shared by other products, not

directly aﬀected by the Act, the impact will be enhanced. To the extent that other products
benefit, we will have underestimated the eﬀect of AGOA as the triple-diﬀerence estimate is
relative to a country-baseline export performance.

26

9

Conclusion

This paper has evaluated the impact of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA),
enacted unilaterally by the United States at the end of 2000. The approach we have used
allows us to control very generally for country-product specific baseline levels of imports
and for country-specific and product-specific import trends in the post-AGOA period. As a
result, we can be fairly confident that the results we estimate are directly tied to the Act.
Our findings highlight the importance of using triple-diﬀerence estimation. Results obtained
on the same sample using standard diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences approaches that focus only on
AGOA products or only on AGOA countries over- or underestimate the impact.
The import responses to AGOA that we estimate are very large for apparel products:
imports increase on average by 53%.

While this might overestimate the average eﬀect

of the provision across all AGOA countries–as countries could voluntarily opt out of the
apparel provision–even including countries never subject to the apparel provision results in
a precisely-estimated lower bound for the apparel eﬀect of 23%. The 53% estimate is at the
upper range of predictions pre-AGOA, see for example Mattoo et al. (2003). The eﬀect on
AGOA-GSP products was also significant with AGOA raising U.S. imports by an average of
13% across all AGOA-GSP products, including an 8% increase in GSP-Agriculture, and a
larger and more robust 16% increase in GSP-Manufactured products. In addition to larger
exports levels, we also estimated that the Act led to more products being exported to the
U.S. This eﬀect was particularly large for agricultural and manufactured products that saw
the probability of exporting increase by more than half.
The eﬀect has been increasing over time, particularly for the GSP products.

More-

over, the eﬀect on apparel exports outlasted the end of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement on
January 1, 2005.

The years 2005 and 2006, when these African exporters faced increased

competition in the U.S. market from China and other Asian countries, were the years with
the largest impact on apparel exports. The continuing duty preferences oﬀered to African
countries under AGOA could be suﬃcient to oﬀset any relative competitive advantage of
the Asian countries.41 AGOA had a disproportionate impact for products that enjoyed the
largest tariﬀ reductions, particularly for apparel.

Moreover, we find no evidence that the

increase in AGOA exports is a diversion of exports from Europe, Africa’s other major export
destination.
Allowing for diﬀerential impacts of AGOA by country, we explored the characteristics of
41

Africa’s comparative advantage can result from political actions (such as U.S. ‘safeguard’ actions), as
well as a desire to diversify the source of apparel imports, in addition to more traditional forms of cost
considerations.

27

the countries that were associated with the largest export eﬀects from AGOA. For apparel
exports, countries that were already significant exporters to the U.S. prior to AGOA were
best poised to take advantage of AGOA. In contrast the eﬀect of AGOA on manufactures and
agricultural products appears to be well-explained by gravity variables.

However, neither

the apparel nor the GSP-product increases were correlated in any way with measures of
corruption or rule-of-law; countries with widely varying levels of corruption and institutional
quality were able to take advantage of the Act.
While exports in the key AGOA product categories (apparel, agriculture, manufactures)
increased 94% in the post-AGOA period relative to pre-AGOA, we estimate more conservatively, using the triple-diﬀerence method, that the causal impact of AGOA within these
product categories was a 34% increase.42 While AGOA resulted in an 8.0% increase in total
non-oil exports from Africa, this translates into a relatively modest impact on African GDP.
Of course, the program itself was quite modest, with the exception of the provisions for apparel. The remaining tariﬀs on agricultural products are on average three times as high as
the agricultural tariﬀs that were removed under the Act.
A further conclusion can be made from this study. In the context of the preferences offered under AGOA, none of the other limitations frequently cited in the African context–poor
infrastructure, distorted product and credit markets, high risk, inadequate social capital, and
poor public services–proved to be binding constraints to expanding exports under AGOA.
While this might seem like a fairly modest statement, the literature summarized in the paper
suggests, in the African context, it is not.
42

From Table 9, take 439/1304.

28

References
[1] Anderson, James E. and Eric Van Wincoop. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
Border Puzzle.”American Economic Review, March 2003, 93(1), pp. 170-192.
[2] Besley, Timothy and Case, Anne. “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence
of Endogenous Policies.” Economic Journal, November 2000, 110, pp. F672-F694.
[3] Brenton, Paul and Takako Ikezuki, “The Initial and Potential Impact of Preferential
Access to the U.S. Market under the African Growth and Opportunity act,” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3262, April 2004.
[4] Burfisher, Mary E.; Robinson, Sherman and Thierfelder, Karen. “The Impact of NAFTA
on the United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2001, 15(1), pp.
125-44.
[5] Carrère, Céline. “African Regional Agreements: Impact on Trade with or without Currency Unions.” Journal of African Economies, June 2004, 13(2), pp. 199-239.
[6] Cling, Jean-Pierre; Razafindrakoto, Mireille and Roubaud, Francois. 2005. “Export
Processing Zones in Madagascar: a Success Story under Threat?” World Development, 33(5), pp.785-803.
[7] Collier, Paul and Jan Willem Gunning. 1999. “Explaining African Economic Performance.” Journal of Economic Literature, March 1999, 37, pp. 64-111.
[8] Clausing, Kimberly A. “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in the Canada-United
States Free Trade Agreement.” Canadian Journal of Economics, August 2001, 34(3),
pp. 677-696.
[9] Dollar, David and Aart Kraay, “Institutions, Trade, and Growth.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, January 2003, 50(1), pp. 133-162.
[10] Feenstra, Robert C.; Romalis, John and Schott, Peter K. “U.S. Imports, Exports, and
Tariﬀ Data, 1989-2001.” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA)
Working Paper No.9387, December 2002.
[11] Fisman, Raymond and Jakob Svensson “Are Corruption and Taxation Really Harmful
to Growth? Firm Level Evidence.” Journal of Development Economics, May 2007,
83(1), pp. 63—75.
[12] Frankel, Jeﬀrey; Stein, Ernesto and Wei, Shang-jin. “Trading blocs and the Americas:
The Natural, the Unnatural, and the Super-Natural.” Journal of Development Economics, 1995, 47, pp. 61-95.
[13] Gibbon, Peter. “The African Growth and Opportunity act and the Global Commodity
Chain for Clothing.” World Development, 31(1), pp. 1809-1827.
[14] Greaney, Theresa M. “Assessing the Impacts of US-Japan Bilateral Trade Agreements,
1980-1995.” World Economy, February 2001, 24(2), pp. 127-157.
[15] Harrison, Glenn W., Thomas F. Rutherford, and David G. Tarr. “Quantifying the
Uruguay Round,” Economic Journal, September 1997, 107(444), pp. 1405-1430.
[16] Head, Keith and Ries, John. “Market-Access Eﬀects of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
from the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,” in Robert C. Feenstra, ed., The Eﬀects
29

of U.S. Trade Protection and Promotion Policies. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1997, pp. 323-342.
[17] Hoekman, Bernard; Ng, Francis and Olarreaga, Marcelo. “Eliminating Excessive Tariﬀs
on Exports of Least Developed Countries.” World Bank Economic Review, 2002,
16(1), pp. 1-21.
[18] Ianchovichina, Elena; Mattoo, Aaditya and Olarreaga, Marcelo. “Unrestricted Market Access for Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of African Economies, December 2001,
10(4), pp. 410-432.
[19] Lall, Sanjaya. “FDI, AGOA And Manufactured Exports From A Land-Locked, LeastDeveloped African Economy: Lesotho,” Journal of Development Studies, August
2005, 41(6), pp. 998-1022.
[20] Limão, Nuno and Venables, Anthony J. “Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvantage,
Transport Costs and Trade.” World Bank Economic Review, 2001, 15(3), pp. 451479.
[21] Mattoo, Aaditya; Roy, Devesh and Subramanian, Arvind. “The Africa Growth and
Opportunity Act and its Rules of Origin: Genersoity Undermined?” World Economy,
June 2003, 26(6), pp. 829-851.
[22] Mauro, P. “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110, pp.
681—712.
[23] Milner, Chris; Morrissey, Oliver and Rudaheranwa, Nicodemus. “Policy and Non-Policy
Barriers to Trade and Implicit Taxation of Exports in Uganda.” Journal of Development Studies, December 2000, 37(2), pp. 67-90.
[24] Morrissey, Oliver. “Imports and Implementation: Neglected Aspects of Trae in the Report of the Commission for Africa,” Journal of Development Studies, August 2005,
41(6), pp. 1133-1153.
[25] Morrissey, Oliver and Rudaheranwa, Nicodemus. “Ugandan Trade Policy and Export
Performance in the 1990s.” University of Nottingham, CREDIT Research Paper
98/12, 1998, (CDP006).
[26] Nordås, Hildegunn Kyvik. 2004. “The Global Textile and Clothing Industry post
the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing,” WTO Discussion Paper No. 5. Geneva,
Switzerland.
[27] Rivera, Sandra A, Laurie-Ann Agama and Judith Dean. 2003. “Africa Beyond 2005: Understanding the Impact of Eliminating NTBS and tariﬀs on Textiles and Clothing,”
mimeo, International Trade Commission.
[28] Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical
Model of Entry with Sunk Costs.” American Economic Review, September 1997, 87,
pp. 545-64.
[29] Roberts, Simon and John Thoburn. “Adjusting to Trade Liberalisation: The Case of
Firms in the South African Textile Sector,” Journal of African Economies, 2003,
12(1), pp. 74—103.

30

[30] Rodrik, Dani. “Trade Policy and Economic Performance in Sub-Saharan Africa,” National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.6562, May
1998.
[31] Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian, and F. Trebbi. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of
Economic Growth, June 2004, 9(2), pp. 131—165.
[32] Romalis, John. “Would Rich Country Trade Preferences Help Poor Countries Grow?
Evidence from the Generalized System of Preferences,” mimeo, University of Chicago,
2003.
[33] Romalis, John. “NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s Impact on International Trade,” National
Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 11059, January
2005.
[34] Rose, Andrew K. “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?” American
Economic Review, March 2004, 98(1), pp. 98—114.
[35] Trefler, Daniel. “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.” American Economic Review, September 2004, 94(4), pp. 870-895.
[36] Van Biesebroeck, Johannes. “Exporting Raises Productivity in sub-Saharan African
Manufacturing Firms,” Journal of International Economics, December 2005, 67(2),
pp. 373-391.
[37] Wang, Zhen Kun and Winters, L. Alan. “Africa’s Role in Multilateral Trade Negotiations: Past and Future.” Journal of African Economies, Supplement 1 June 1998,
7(0), pp. 1-33.
[38] Yeats, Alexander J., Azita Amjadi, Ulrich Reincke, and Francis Ng, “What Caused
Sub-Saharan Africa’s Marginalization in World Trade?” Finance and Development,
December 1996, pp. 38-41.

31

Figure 1: (log) Import response by pre-AGOA tariff class for
apparel products
3

Triple-difference coefficient estimate
(with 95% confidence interval)

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0-0.03

0.03-0.06

0.06-0.10

0.10-0.15

0.15-0.20

-0.5

Pre-AGOA tariff class

0.20-0.25

0.25-0.30

0.30-0.35

Figure 2: (log) Import response by pre-AGOA tariff class for
AGOA-GSP products

Triple-difference coefficient estimate
(with 95% confidence interval)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0-0.05

0.05-0.10

0.10-0.20

-0.2

Pre-AGOA tariff class

0.20-0.30

0.30-0.40

Figure 3: Country and category-specific AGOA effects and initial export levels

0
0

.1

.2

GSP-Agriculture

.2

GSP-Manufactures

-.2

0

Estimated triple-difference trade effects

1

2

Apparel

5

10

15

20

Initial export level (in logs)
Graphs by Category
Notes: Each country is one data point. On the vertical axis are the country-specific triple-difference
estimates for each of the three product categories. On the horizontal axis is the logarithm of the preAGOA export volume (averaged for 1999-2000). The lines represent the predicted values from separate
OLS regressions of the estimated AGOA effects on the initial (log) export levels (using the inverse of the
standard deviation of each coefficient estimate as weight).

Figure 4: Correlation between country-specific export responses and governance indicators
GSP products
.2

SEN

ZMB TCD
UGA BFA
RWA CPV
NGA
GNB GHA GMB
TZANER
MLI MOZ
BEN
ETHSYC
BDIDJI
STP
COG
COD
GIN MWI
LSO
AGO
CMR MDG
GAB

MUS
BWA

COD

.1

.1

.2

SEN

TCD BFA
ZMB
RWA UGA
NGA
GNB
GMB GHA
NER
MOZ SYCTZA
MLI
BEN
ETH
BDI
DJI
STP
COG
GIN
LSO
AGO
MDGMWI
CMR
GAB

CPV
MUS
BWA

NAM
SLEMRT
CIV

NAM
MRT

SLE

SWZ

SWZ

0

0

CIV

CAF

CAF

Apparel
2

2

Apparel
KEN
MDG

KEN
MDG

SWZ

1

1

SWZ

ETH

LSO

ETH
NAM

MWI

BEN

UGA
GHA
BEN
CIV

SEN

-1

NAM
BWA

ZAF
SLE
NER
TCD

CIV

-1.5

LSO

MWI

BWA

0

ZAF
UGA
SLE
NER TCD GHA

0

Estimated triple-difference trade effects

GSP products

-.5

SEN

0

Corruption

.5

1

-2

-1.5

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

Rule of Law

Note: On the vertical axes are the country-specific triple-difference estimates for GSP-products (top panels) and apparel (bottom panels). On the
horizontal axes are two of the governance indicators, on a scale of -2.5 to +2.5, taken from the World Bank web site. Only countries with a t-statistic
above 1 are plotted. The predicted regression lines are for least squares regressions, weighing all estimates by the inverse of their standard deviation.

Table 1: Summary statistics (2000)
Number of products and U.S. import values by country:
AGOA countries (41)
Mean
All products

non-AGOA countries (166)

Standard
deviation

5120

All products (Import>0)

Mean

Standard
deviation

5120

102

(250)

694

(1050)

28

(57)

174

(222 )

log Imports (all)

0.208

(.544)

1.616

(2.627)

log Imports (Import>0)

9.938

(1.029)

10.732

(1.200)

AGOA-eligible products (Import>0)

Limited to AGOA countries:
Number of AGOA products
Import>0
(maximum)
120

Mean
(all goods)
13.1%

Mean
(if positive)
13.1%

Apparel

239

Import>0
(mean)
14.37

GSP (all)

862

14.02

232

4.1%

8.2%

GSP - Agricultural

282

3.61

51

3.7%

7.7%

4

0.00

0

1.7%

6.1%

2
574

0.44
9.98

2
180

0.4%
4.4%

1.0%
8.5%

By AGOA country:

GSP - Mineral
GSP - Petroleum
GSP - Manufacturing

All products

Initial tariffs on AGOA products

Table 2: Benchmark results for the AGOA effect
dependent variable

ln IMP

sample

full

method

triple-diffs
(1)
53.1%
13.5%
0.426
(8.03)**
0.127
(10.56)**

Marginal Apparel Effect
Marginal GSP Effect
APP: Ineffect * Ctry * Prod
GSP: Ineffect * Ctry * Prod

fixed effects

ln IMP

diff-in-diffs
(2)
57.1%
-2.2%
0.452
(8.09)**
-0.022
(2.60)**

9538560
1107783

diff-in-diffs
(3)
38.4%

diff-in-diffs
(4)

1889280
210289

full

0.004
(0.31)
country/product

country/product

0.4%
0.325
(6.01)**

country/product

import dummy

triple-diffs
(5)
3.0%
1.0%
0.030
(7.21)**
0.010
(10.16)**

country/year

product/year

Observations
Number of fixed effects

ln IMP

only AGOA only AGOA- only AGOAcountries APP products GSP products

country/product country/product
country/year

ln IMP

country/year
product/year

product/year

product/year

400086
46605

1442988
168090

9538560
1107783

Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors are
robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity, and also allow for intragroup correlation within product category.
The marginal effects are calculated as 'exp(β 1 or δ 1 )-1 ' if the dependent variable is lnIMP.
Controls in columns (1) and (5) include country-year, product-year, and country-product interaction dummies.
Controls in column (2) include country-year and country-product interaction dummies.
Controls in columns (3) and (4) include country-product interaction and year dummies and dummies for free-trade
agreements that came into effect during the study period, as well as changes in trade relations (into and out of
MFN and into and out of GSP eligibility).

Table 3: Timing the Impact of AGOA
ln IMP

import dummy

sample

full

full

method

triple-diffs

triple-diffs

dependent variable

(1)

(2)

Marginal Apparel Effect
2002 (t*)
2003 (t*+1)
2004 (t*+2)
2005 (t*+3)
2006 (t*+4)

24.6%
51.9%
54.3%
62.4%
57.1%

1.8%
3.2%
3.0%
3.1%
3.0%

Marginal GSP Effect
2001 (t*)
2002 (t*+1)
2003 (t*+2)
2004 (t*+3)
2005 (t*+4)
2006 (t*+5)

6.6%
4.6%
12.2%
15.5%
23.4%
26.9%

0.5%
0.4%
0.9%
1.1%
1.7%
1.9%

0.220
(4.71)**
0.418
(7.08)**
0.434
(7.44)**
0.485
(7.19)**
0.452
(7.23)**

0.018
(4.12)**
0.032
(6.46)**
0.030
(6.35)**
0.031
(5.59)**
0.030
(5.53)**

0.064
(6.10)**
0.045
(3.04)**
0.115
(7.07)**
0.144
(9.10)**
0.210
(12.40)**
0.238
(13.50)**

0.005
(4.83)**
0.004
(3.02)**
0.009
(6.73)**
0.011
(8.42)**
0.017
(12.04)**
0.019
(13.04)**

9,538,560
1,107,783

9,538,560
1,107,783

APP: Ineffect * Country * Product
2002 (t*)
2003 (t*+1)
2004 (t*+2)
2005 (t*+3)
2006 (t*+4)
GSP: Ineffect * Country * Product
2001 (t*)
2002 (t*+1)
2003 (t*+2)
2004 (t*+3)
2005 (t*+4)
2006 (t*+5)

Observations
Number of fixed effects

Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity, and also allow for intragroup
correlation within product category.
Controls include country-product, country-year, and product-year interaction dummies.
The year t* indicates the onset of the AGOA trade liberalization for the majority of the
countries, 2001 for GSP products and 2002 for apparel.

Table 4: Benchmark results for the AGOA effect - Disaggregated Categories
dependent variable
sample
method
Marginal Apparel Effect
Marginal GSP Effect
Agriculture
Minerals
Petroleum
Manufactures
Ineffect * Country * Product Interaction
APP
GSP-Agriculture
GSP-Minerals:
GSP-Petroleum:
GSP-Manufactures:
Observations
Number of fixed effects

ln IMP
full
triple-diffs

import dummy
full
triple-diffs

(1)

(2)

0.531

3.0%

0.083
0.181
1.162
0.157

0.7%
1.5%
4.0%
1.2%

0.426
(8.03)**
0.080
(4.48)**
0.166
(2.03)*
0.771
(0.93)
0.146
(10.13)**

0.030
(7.21)**
0.007
(4.29)**
0.015
(2.50)*
0.040
(0.99)
0.012
(9.52)**

9,538,560
1,107,783

9,538,560
1,107,783

Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity, and also allow for intragroup
correlation within product category.
Controls include country-year, product-year, and country-product interaction dummies.

Table 5: Response of imports to tariff level changes and implied mean elasticities
dependent variable
sample
method
imp. elast. wrt tariffs (APP)
imp. elast. wrt tariffs (GSP-Agriculture)
imp. elast. wrt tariffs (GSP-Minerals)
imp. elast. wrt tariffs (GSP-Petroleum)
imp. elast. wrt tariffs (GSP-Manufactures)
Ineffect * Country * Product * Pre-AGOA Tariff Rate
APP
GSP-Agriculture
GSP-Minerals:
GSP-Petroleum:
GSP-Manufactures:

Observations
Number of fixed effects

ln IMP
full
triple-diffs
(1)

import dummy
full
triple-diffs
(2)

46.9%
3.5%
0.4%
-46.7%
3.4%

3.3%
0.3%
0.1%
-3.3%
0.3%

3.575
(8.33)**
0.948
(2.42)*
0.236
(0.34)
-107.251
(16.84)**
0.780
(4.18)**

0.255
(7.70)**
0.079
(2.26)*
0.059
(0.95)
-7.614
(14.72)**
0.060
(3.65)**

9,526,005
1,106,388

9,526,005
1,106,388

Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors
are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity, and also allow for intragroup correlation within product category.
Controls include country-year, product-year, and country-product interaction dummies.
The "implied elasticities with respect to the tariff reduction" at the top of the table are evaluated at the mean
of the pre-AGOA tariff level for each category.

Table 6: Robustness checks I: control-group, self-selection, treatment window, and trade diversion
dependent variable
sample

Marginal Apparel Effect
Marginal GSP-Agriculture Effect
Marginal GSP-Manufactures Effect

ln IMP
1998-2006
(1)
benchmark

1998-2006
(2)
control group

ln IMP
1998-2006
(3)
self-selection

ln IMP
1998-2003
(4)
window

53.1%
8.3%
15.7%

49.9%
9.1%
13.1%

22.5%
8.4%
15.7%

53.6%
2.7%
11.1%

58.4%
-0.4%
6.4%

2.2%
4.0%
4.1%

0.405
(7.72)**
0.087
(5.36)**
0.207
(2.40)*
0.254
(0.46)
0.123
(11.32)**

0.203
(6.13)**
0.081
(4.50)**
0.166
(2.03)*
0.771
(0.93)
0.146
(10.16)**
9,538,560
1,107,783

0.429
(7.52)**
0.027
(1.52)
0.183
(2.99)**
0.601
(0.98)
0.105
(7.58)**

0.460
(7.35)**
-0.004
(0.21)
0.094
(1.32)
0.903
(1.02)
0.062
(4.38)**
3,706,880
947,924

0.022
(0.58)
0.039
(1.53)
-0.072
(0.28)
1.498
(2.31)*
0.040
(2.07)*
3,706,880
947,924

Ineffect * Country * Product Interaction
APP
0.426
(8.03)**
GSP-Agriculture
0.080
(4.48)**
GSP-Minerals:
0.166
(2.03)*
GSP-Petroleum:
0.771
(0.93)
GSP-Manufactures:
0.146
(10.13)**
Observations
9,538,560
Number of fixed effects
1,107,783

ln IMP

8,432,640
979,344

6,359,040
1,091,802

ln (US IMP )
ln (EU IMP )
1999-2000 and 2002-2003
(5)
(6)
benchmark trade-diversion

Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity, and also allow for intragroup correlation within product category.
Controls in all columns include country-product, country-year, and product-year interaction dummies.
Column (2) does not include observations from OECD countries.
In column (3) all AGOA countries are considered as 'treated' by the apparel provision, whether or not it was granted to them. That is, as soon as
a country is declared eligible for AGOA (for most countries at the outset of 2001), it is also considered to be 'treated' under the apparel provision.
Column (4) limits the sample to 3 years pre and 3 years post AGOA.
Columns (5) and (6) use data for the years 1999, 2000, 2002 and 2003. (We only have data available for the European Union countries for those
years.) Column (5) is for the same specification as in column (1); in column (6) the dependent variable is log E.U. imports.

Table 7: Robustness checks II: estimation with fewer controls
dependent variable

ln IMP
(1)

ln IMP
(2)

ln IMP
(3)

ln IMP
(4)

Marginal Apparel Effect
Marginal GSP-Agriculture Effect
Marginal GSP-Manufactures Effect

53.1%
8.3%
15.7%

39.8%
-0.6%
7.0%

40.8%
-0.6%
5.8%

98.8%
-1.3%
6.0%

0.426
(8.03)**
0.080
(4.48)**
0.166
(2.03)*
0.771
(0.93)
0.146
(10.13)**

0.335
(6.24)**
-0.006
(0.32)
0.091
(1.16)
0.994
(0.92)
0.068
(4.32)**

0.342
(6.52)**
-0.006
(0.35)
0.088
(1.22)
0.575
(0.79)
0.056
(4.08)**

0.687
(7.82)**
-0.013
(0.65)
0.052
(0.89)
0.564
(0.53)
0.058
(3.58)**

Ineffect * Country * Product Interaction
APP
GSP-Agriculture
GSP-Minerals:
GSP-Petroleum:
GSP-Manufactures:
Ineffect * Country Interaction
APP

-0.003
(0.78)
-0.037
(7.58)**

GSP
Ineffect * Product Interaction
APP

0.204
(34.28)**
-0.011
(1.92)
0.126
(3.83)**
-0.004
(0.18)
-0.049
(1.23)
-2.750
(1.21)
-0.080
(4.89)**

GSP-Agriculture:
GSP-Minerals:
GSP-Petroleum:
GSP-Manufactures:
Country * Product Interaction
APP

-1.449
(14.51)**
1.096
(17.83)**
1.532
(26.46)**
-0.310
(0.27)
0.167
(2.75)**

GSP-Agriculture:
GSP-Minerals:
GSP-Petroleum:
GSP-Manufactures:
Country Dummy
APP

0.109
(11.07)**
-1.082
(53.14)**

GSP
Product Dummy
APP

1.892
(13.20)**
-1.153
(17.56)**
-1.644
(31.50)**
4.769
(3.02)**
-0.162
(2.39)*

GSP-Agriculture:
GSP-Minerals:
GSP-Petroleum:
GSP-Manufactures:
fixed effects

Observations

0.249
(6.37)**
-0.018
(0.71)
-0.077
(1.62)
-3.093
(1.19)
-0.104
(5.04)**

country/product
country/year
product/year

country/product

9,538,560

8,570,880

country/product
country/year

year

9,538,560

5,923,840

product/year

Notes: Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity, and also
allow for intragroup correlation within product category. All results are for triple-difference effects estimated on the full sample.
Controls in column (1) include country-product, country-year, and product-year interaction dummies.
Controls in column (2) include country-product and product-year interaction dummies and dummies for free-trade agreements that came into effect during the
study period, as well as changes in trade relations (into and out of MFN and into and out of GSP eligibility).
Controls in column (3) include country-product and country-year interaction dummies.
Controls in column (4) include year dummies, dummies for free-trade agreements that came into effect during the study period, as well as changes in trade
relations (into and out of MFN and into and out of GSP eligibility), and gravity variables (landlocked, English-speaking, GDP, population, distance to the USA,
and land area).

Table 8: Gravity equation variables predict effects for GSP-products well
dependent variable: triple-interaction coefficient estimate
Distance to U.S.
ln GDP
Population density
Landlocked dummy
Time in AGOA
(Time in AGOA)
Constant
observations
2
R

2

Apparel

GSP-Agriculture

GSP-Manufactures

0.398
(0.357)
-0.049
(0.083)
0.077
(0.789)
-0.084
(0.136)
0.093
(0.100)
0.044
(0.037)
-2.463
(3.698)
26
0.198

-0.099***
(0.032)
0.018**
(0.007)
-0.210**
(0.085)
-0.005
(0.015)
0.054***
(0.010)
0.018***
(0.004)
0.732**
(0.326)
41
0.663

-0.084**
(0.031)
0.019**
(0.007)
-0.174**
(0.084)
-0.001
(0.015)
0.057***
(0.011)
0.014***
(0.004)
0.624**
(0.302)
41
0.633

Notes: OLS regression of country and product-category specific triple-interaction coefficients
(estimated as in Table 2) on gravity-model variables. The inverse of the standard deviations
of the coefficient estimates are used as weights. * Significant at the 10% level, ** 5%, *** 1%.

Table 9: Estimated AGOA impact and actual increase in exports to the United States
Pre-AGOA
Exports

Actual Increase

Estimated AGOA Impact

(1998-2000) (1998/2000 - 2002/2006)

Apparel
GSP-agricultural
GSP-manufactures
Total for (selected) AGOA
Total non-oil exports
Total exports

(1998/2000 - 2002/2006)

(1)

(2a)

(2b)

(3a)

million
USD

as % of
pre-AGOA
exports

million
USD

Estimated
coefficient

656
154
495

120.4%
54.1%
71.3%

789
83
353

1,304

93.9%

1,225

5,472
17,813

53.1%
8.3%
15.7%

(3b)

(3c)

(3d)

as % of
as % of
million total non-oil total non-oil
USD export level export growth

348
13
78

6.4%
0.2%
1.4%

13.8%
0.5%
3.1%

439

8.0%

17.4%

2,517
17,137

Notes: Own calculations based on U.S. ITC dataset and coefficient estimates from Table 4. All values are in millions of
US dollars.

Table 10: FDI inflows

World
Developing countries
Developing countries w/o China
AGOA countries
AGOA without oil producers

pre-AGOA
(1999-2000)

post-AGOA
(2004-05)

million USD % of FDI stock

million USD % of FDI stock

1254744
241155
200590
7085
3731

23.4%
14.8%
14.0%
6.9%
5.6%

813516
290453
223886
12518
7358

Notes: Own calculations based on Unctad World Investment Report 2006
Latest year available for FDI statistics is 2005

change
8.2%
11.8%
10.3%
7.9%
7.1%

USD

-35.2%
20.4%
11.6%
76.7%
97.2%

Table A.1: Country-specific AGOA effects
Apparel
Angola
Benin
0.086*
Botswana
0.522**
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
-0.063
Cape Verde
0.055
Central African Republic
Chad
0.157**
Republic of Congo
Cote d'Ivoire
-0.187*
Democratic Republic of Congo
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopia
0.845**
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
0.199
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
2.075**
Lesotho
0.851**
Madagascar
1.737**
Malawi
0.631**
Mali
-0.015
Mauritania
Mauritius
0.214
Mozambique
0.071
Namibia
0.724**
Niger
0.159*
Nigeria
0.049
Rwanda
0.017
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
-0.336**
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
0.273**
South Africa
0.502**
Swaziland
1.712**
Uganda
0.353**
Tanzania
0.032
Zambia
-0.033
average
aggregate estimate

0.409
0.426

GSP (all) Agriculture Manufactures Petroleum

Minerals

0.119**
0.154**
0.136**
0.185**
0.151**
0.116**
0.172**
-0.011
0.186**
0.138**
0.068*
0.132**
0.145**
-0.001
0.152**
0.111**
0.167**
0.170**
0.126**
0.167**
0.037
0.122**
0.118**
0.123**
0.158**
0.088**
0.153**
0.161**
0.100**
0.162**
0.172**
0.174**
0.139**
0.225**
0.156**
0.085**
-0.129
0.074*
0.179**
0.163**
0.185**

0.117**
0.074
0.080**
0.145**
0.150**
0.009
0.144**
-0.037**
0.092**
0.107**
0.050
0.093**
0.076**
-0.036**
0.201*
0.076**
0.096**
0.086
0.066*
0.101**
0.021
0.059**
0.045
0.018
0.102**
0.026
0.007
0.105**
0.038
0.064*
0.128**
0.109**
0.111**
0.175**
0.088**
0.068
0.116
0.076
0.151**
0.077*
0.080

0.139**
0.204**
0.149**
0.179**
0.144**
0.190**
0.172**
-0.003
0.180**
0.176**
0.094*
0.173**
0.165**
0.013
0.115**
0.155**
0.189**
0.224**
0.162**
0.179**
0.031
0.139**
0.140**
0.160**
0.171**
0.121**
0.211**
0.174**
0.137**
0.217**
0.220**
0.191**
0.151**
0.237**
0.175**
0.081**
-0.231
0.061
0.180**
0.191**
0.223**

-3.432
-1.949
2.842
1.941
1.585
-3.826
2.844
0.579
10.298**
-4.359
-3.142
-3.857
2.850
0.583
2.794
-5.265
2.755
-4.190
-2.143
4.292**
2.741
2.823
2.803
2.842
2.876
-0.290
2.804
2.862
-1.348*
-1.324
-4.990
2.869
0.477
2.883
2.862
2.680
-3.608**
2.746
2.854
2.851
2.892

0.070
0.161**
0.119*
1.776
0.146
0.060
0.121*
0.050
0.131*
0.147**
0.023
0.082
0.127*
0.055
0.071
0.119*
0.106
1.050
0.517
0.140**
0.018
0.100
0.080
0.119*
0.153**
0.062**
0.081
0.139*
0.106
0.138*
0.124*
0.147**
0.153**
0.160**
0.139*
0.032
-0.076
0.023
0.131*
0.128*
0.169**

0.128
0.127

0.082
0.080

0.146
0.146

0.793
0.771

0.176
0.166

Notes: The statistics are triple-difference coefficient estimates of individual country effects in a
regression like (4). ** Indicates significance at the 1% level; * at the 5% level.

