NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE IN CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT
Mark Bils
Yongsung Chang
Sun-Bin Kim
Working Paper 13231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13231

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

We thank Evgenia Dechter for her excellent research assistance; we thank Mark Aguiar, Ricardo Lagos,
and Randy Wright for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Mark Bils, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Comparative Advantage in Cyclical Unemployment
Mark Bils, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 13231
July 2007
JEL No. E2,E24,E32,J6,J63
ABSTRACT
We introduce worker differences in labor supply, reflecting differences in skills and assets, into a model
of separations, matching, and unemployment over the business cycle. Separating from employment
when unemployment duration is long is particularly costly for workers with high labor supply. This
provides a rich set of testable predictions across workers: those with higher labor supply, say due to
lower assets, should display more procyclical wages and less countercyclical separations. Consequently,
the model predicts that the pool of unemployed will sort toward workers with lower labor supply in
a downturn. Because these workers generate lower rents to employers, this discourages vacancy creation
and exacerbates the cyclicality of unemployment and unemployment durations. We examine wage
cyclicality and employment separations over the past twenty years for workers in the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP). Wages are much more procyclical for workers who work more.
This pattern is mirrored in separations; separations from employment are much less cyclical for those
who work more. We do see for recessions a strong compositional shift among those unemployed toward
workers who typically work less.
Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu
Yongsung Chang
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and Seoul National University
yohg@snu.ac.kr

Sun-Bin Kim
Department of Economics
Korea University
Anam-dong Seongbuk-gu
Seoul Korea, 136-701
sunbink@korea.ac.kr

1. Introduction
Many authors have emphasized the role of wage rigidities in business cycle ‡uctuations. Most
recently, Shimer (2004), Hall (2005a), and Gertler and Trigari (2006) show how restricting
wage responses in a model with search frictions can greatly magnify cyclical ‡uctuations in
unemployment. This work is motivated by …ndings, particularly in Shimer (2005a), that a
calibrated Mortenson-Pissarides (1994) model with ‡exible wages yields much less cyclicality
in unemployment and unemployment durations relative to wages than seen in the data. But
judging the empirical rigidity of wages relative to model predictions is precarious. The prediction
that wages are strongly procyclical assumes: (a) that the shocks driving labor ‡uctuations act
largely by shifting labor demand, and (b) that workers do not easily substitute between market
and non-market activities. These assumptions are not readily tested.1 Most acutely, testing
the model prediction relies on having a genuine measure of cyclical movements in the price of
labor. Although measured aggregate real wages are relatively acyclical, wage rates for new hires
are much more procyclical, as we document below. The key measure of labor cost for vacancy
creation is the anticipated value of wages over the life of the employment match. If wages are
smoothed relative to the shadow price of labor (e.g., Hall, 1980), this cost can vary considerably
without corresponding movements in aggregate real wages.2
A more robust prediction of wage ‡exibility is that employment decisions are driven by
comparative advantage. For this reason, we focus on our model’s prediction for wage and employment cyclicality across workers. More precisely, we introduce worker heterogeneity in labor
supply into a business cycle model of separations, matching, and unemployment under ‡exible
wages. Workers with relatively high skill or low assets are predicted to have low reservation
match qualities in order to stay in an employed match; these are workers with high labor supply.
Recessions are times of longer unemployment duration. A worker who desires high labor supply will avoid separating into unemployment during these downturns–entering unemployment
when unemployment duration is long is antithetical to high labor supply. This yields our key
model predictions: Workers with high desired labor supply will exhibit more cyclical wages and
1

Related to (a) a number of potential cyclical shocks, for instance investment-speci…c technology shocks (e.g.,
Fisher, 2006), act in general equilibrium by shifting marginal rates of substitution as much as through labor’s
marginal product. Related to (b) Hagedorn-Manovski (2005) discuss parameterizing the Mortenson-Pissarides
model, especially valuing payo¤s to non-market activities such that the model matches the relative volatilities of
unemployment and wages.
2
Kudyak (2006) illustrates this point based on regressions estimated on NLSY data that specify wages, as
in Beaudry and DiNardo (1991), to be a function of the unemployment rate when starting a job or the lowest
unemployment rate since starting a job.

1

less cyclical separations. We examine these predictions for workers in the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP). As predicted by our model, wages are much more procyclical for workers who work more with this pattern mirrored by separations that are much less
countercyclical.
As in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), we model employment matches as facing changes
in match quality, with bad draws possibly leading to endogenous separations. We depart from
Mortensen and Pissarides in two important ways. We allow for diminishing utility in market
goods, imperfect insurance as in Aiyagari (1994), and for leisure from not working; as a result,
the incentive to trade work for search is increasing in a worker’s wealth. We also depart from
Mortensen and Pissarides by allowing for worker heterogeneity: Workers di¤er in assets, re‡ecting
past work histories, and di¤er in human capital.
Once a role for labor supply is allowed in separations, it naturally leads to di¤ering separation decisions along the lines of comparative advantage. In our model, these di¤erences take two
forms. Workers with lower savings, and therefore lower consumption, are less willing to separate
in the face of high unemployment. We reinforce this impact of savings by constraining allowable
borrowing. Secondly workers with higher human capital are modeled to have a comparative advantage in market work, making them less willing to separate into unemployment. These factors
of low savings and high market skill, ones associated with high labor supply in settings without
search frictions, produce a comparative disadvantage in separating to unemployment during a
recession. Our model employs ‡exible wage setting. Workers with higher labor supply, say due
to lower savings, are more willing to take a wage cut in recessions to maintain employment. This
generates a prediction for wages that inversely mirrors that in separations–workers with higher
labor supply should exhibit more cyclical wages as well as less cyclical separations.
Shimer (2005a), Hall (2005a), and Costain and Reiter (2003) have each argued that reasonable calibrations of standard search and matching models with ‡exible wages yield predictions
dramatically at odds with the data–the models generate much more procyclical wages and much
less procyclical job …nding rates than observed. Wage-setting rigidities can mute the inducement from lowered wages to create vacancies during recessions. Our model, despite ‡exible wage
setting, produces an e¤ect that, qualitatively like wage rigidity, suppresses vacancy creation in
recessions. When unemployment duration increases in a downturn this shifts separations, and
thereby the pool of unemployed, toward workers with low labor supply. Creating vacancies for
these workers is less attractive because their employment generates smaller expected surplus.
For our model calibrations we …nd this cyclical sorting can contribute importantly to cyclicality

2

in unemployment and unemployment durations. In the SIPP data, especially for men, we do
see a strong compositional shift during recessions among the unemployed toward workers who
typically work less independently of the stage of the cycle. We see a similar cyclical compositional shift among the set of workers transiting from unemployed to employed. Thus the data
support our model’s prediction that during recessions vacancies must draw from workers who
exhibit lower labor supply.
After brie‡y discussing selected related work, we present the model in the next section. In
Section 3 we calibrate the model to mimic average separation and unemployment rates observed
across skill groups. Results of model simulations are given with a focus on cyclicality of wages
and separations across workers by skill and assets. Our model generates considerable cyclical
sorting into unemployment by workers’reservation match qualities (labor supply). This sorting,
together with the accompanying cyclicality of separations, exacerbates unemployment volatility
by a factor of about one-third. In Section 4, we introduce the SIPP data and illustrate how
separations behave cyclically. In Section 5 we compare cross-worker patterns in wage cyclicality
and cyclicality of separations to those predicted by the model. We do see patterns consistent
with our model of comparative advantage. In particular, wages are more cyclical and separations
from employment less cyclical for workers who work more. Similarly consistent with the model,
workers with few assets relative to earnings show more cyclical wages and less cyclical employment separations, though this latter e¤ect is only marginally signi…cant. Unlike our simulated
model, we …nd that higher-wage workers actually show more cyclical employment separations.
The concluding section discusses possible interpretations of this …nding.
Key to our model is that, because workers exhibit diminishing marginal utility in consumption and face imperfect insurance, the match-separation decision depend on a worker’s wealth as
well as match quality. Cyclicality of separations then hinges on the cross-sectional distribution of
reservation match qualities, re‡ecting individuals’savings and skills, which cannot be addressed
in a representative agent construct. In a related model that abstracts from search frictions,
Chang and Kim (2006, 2007) show that the cross-sectional distributions of wealth and productivity play a critical role in determining the elasticity of aggregate labor supply in a competitive
equilibrium. Nakajima (2007) and Shao and Silos (2007) have also recently adopted diminishing marginal utility in consumption and imperfect risk sharing into the Mortenson-Pissarides
model.3 However, Nakajima does not allow for heterogeneous productivity; and neither paper
3

Other papers that entertain wealth e¤ects in modeling search include Pissarides (1987), Gomez, Greenwood,
and Rebelo (2001), and Hall (2006).

3

allows for bargaining between individual workers and …rms or endogenous separation. These
elements give us a much richer set of predictions for cyclicality in wages and separations across
workers and generate our result that unemployment sorts toward workers with lower labor supply in a downturn, magnifying cyclicality in vacancies and unemployment. Previous papers have
argued that lower job-…nding rates during recessions may re‡ect a compositional shift toward
workers who display lower job-…nding rates regardless of the stage of the cycle. Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant (1985) and Baker (1992) focus on a possible role for increased separations for
prime-age males during recessions. Pries (forthcoming) considers the possibility that low-skilled
workers exhibit, exogenously, separations skewed more toward recessions. (He also explores how
this a¤ects vacancy creation.) Unlike these earlier papers, our shift in unemployment toward
workers with low labor supply, high reservation matches, is predicted by the model rather than
imposed exogenously. More importantly, we show in the SIPP data a strong compositional shift
during recessions toward workers who work less independently of the business cycle. By contrast,
Shimer (2005b) reports no systematic cyclical shifts in the age or skill of the unemployment pool
based on CPS data. (Nor do we see any from the SIPP data.) Finally, our empirical work contributes to the literatures on the cyclical behavior of real wages and employment separations.
Our focus, motivated by our model predictions, is how this behavior di¤ers across workers. To
our knowledge, we are the …rst to examine how wage cyclicality depend on workers’long-term
labor supply and assets.4 Several studies of household data have suggested that separations are
relatively less cyclical than job …nding rates.5 Our …ndings support this picture while showing important di¤erences across workers, notably that workers who work less show separations
skewed toward recessions.

2. Model
We develop a variant of the Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). Our model departs from MortensenPissarides in three important ways. First, workers are risk averse. Second, they face a borrowing
constraint. Third, workers are heterogenous in their ability to produce in the market.
4

We also examine how wage cyclicality varies by a worker’s long-term wage and by whether the worker is newly
hired. Several papers, including recently Castro and Coen-Pirani (2007) examine wage cyclicality by schooling
levels. Our results that wages are much more cyclical for new hires reinforces …ndings by Bils (1985), Beaudry
and DiNardo (1991), and Haefke, Sonntag, and van Rens (2007).
5
Examples are Sider (1985), Baker (1992), Nagypal (2004), Shimer (2005a), and Hall (2005b). Fujita and
Ramey (2006) …nd an important cyclical role of ‡uctuations in both separation and …nding rates.

4

2.1. Environment
There are H types of workers whose earnings ability in the market (human capital) is denoted by
h. For each type h, there is a continuum of in…nitely-lived workers with total mass equal to one.
We assume that the markets are segmented by h; but the economic environment is comparable
across markets. A worker’s market productivity is proportional to h. Here we describe the
economic environment of one market without explicitly denoting h.6
Each worker has preferences de…ned by

E0

1
X
t=0

where 0 <

t

8
< c1

9
=
1
+ B lt ;
;

t

: 1

< 1 is the discount factor, and ct (> 0) is consumption. The parameter B denotes

the utility from leisure when unemployed. lt is 1 when unemployed and otherwise zero. In
Mortenson and Pissarides (1994), and many extensions, there is no valuation of leisure; so a
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure is not de…ned. Here the marginal
rate of substitution (c

=B ) is decreasing in c. This provides the basis for a worker’s reservation

match quality to be increasing in consumption and thereby savings.
Each period a worker either works (employed) or searches for a job (unemployed). A worker,
when working, earns wage w. If unemployed, a worker receives an unemployment bene…t b.
Each can borrow or lend at a given real interest rate r by trading the asset a. But there is a
limit, a, that one can borrow; that is at > a. Real interest rate r is determined exogenously to
‡uctuations in this particular economy (small open economy).
There is also a continuum of identical agents we refer to as entrepreneurs (or …rms). Entrepreneurs have the ability to create job vacancies with a cost

per vacancy. Entrepreneurs

are risk neutral (diversifying ownership of their investments across many vacancies and across
economies) and maximize the discounted present value of pro…ts:
E0

1
X
t=0

1
1+r

t
t:

There are two technologies in this economy, one that describes the production of output by
a matched worker-entrepreneur pair and another that describes the process by which workers
6

When considering di¤erences in human capital, this environment is extended to allow the cost of posting
a vacancy and unemployment income to depend on the worker’s human capital. This is described in detail in
calibrating.

5

and entrepreneurs become matched. A matched pair produces output:
yt = zt xt h
where zt is aggregate productivity and xt is idiosyncratic match-speci…c productivity. Both
aggregate productivity and idiosyncratic productivity evolve over time according to the Markov
process P r[zt+1 < z 0 jzt = z] = D(z 0 jz) and P r[xt+1 < x0 jxt = x] = F (x0 jx), respectively. For
newly formed matches, idiosyncratic productivity starts at the mean value of the unconditional
distribution, which is denoted by x. In addition to productivity shocks, each matched pair faces
a probability of destruction of match

at the end of period.

In each skill market, the number of new meetings between the unemployed and vacancies is
determined by a matching function
m(v; u) = u1

v

where v is the number of vacancies and u is the number of unemployed workers for that skill
market. The matching rate for an unemployed worker is p( ) = m(v; u)=u =

, where

= v=u

is the vacancy-unemployment ratio, the labor market tightness. The probability that a vacant
job matches with a worker is q( ) = m(v; u)=v =

1

.

A matched worker-…rm constitutes a bilateral monopoly. We assume the wage is set by
bargaining between the worker and …rm over the match surplus. This is discussed in the next
subsection. The match surplus re‡ects the value of the match relative to the summed worker’s
value of being unemployed and the entrepreneur’s value of an unmatched vacancy (which is zero
in equilibrium). There are no bargaining rigidities; separations are e¢ cient for the worker-…rm
pair, occurring if and only if match surplus falls below zero.
The timing of events can be summarized as follows:
1. At the beginning of each period, matching outcomes from the previous period’s search
and matching are realized. Also aggregate productivity z and each match’s idiosyncratic
productivity x is realized.
2. Upon observing x and z; matched workers and entrepreneurs decide whether to continue
(or commence) as an employed match. Workers breaking up with an entrepreneur become
unemployed. (There is no later recall of matches.)
3. For employed matches, production takes place with the wage re‡ecting worker-…rm bar6

gaining. Also at this time, unemployed and vacancies engage in the search/matching
process.
4. After production, a fraction

of employed matches are destroyed.

It is useful to consider a recursive representation. Let W , U , J, and V respectively denote
the values of employed, unemployed, matched job, and vacancy. All value functions depend
on the measures of workers. In each labor market, two measures capture the distribution of
workers:

(a; x) and

(a), respectively, represent the measures of workers engaged in work and

unemployed engaged in search during the period.7 The evolution of these measures is given by
T, i.e., ( 0 ;

0

) = T( ; ; z). For notational convenience, let s = (z; ; ).

>From the model discussion, it follows that the worker’s value of being employed is:
8
<
W (a; x; s) = max
u(ce ) +
a0e :
+ (1

E U (a0e ; s0 )j z

)E maxfW (a0e ; x0 ; s0 ); U (a0e ; s0 )gj x; z

subject to
ce = (1 + r)a + w
a0e

9
=

(2.1)

;

a0e

a:

The value of being unemployed, recalling that p( ) is the probability that an unemployed worker
matches, is:

8
<
U (a; s) = max
u(cu ) + (1
a0u :

p( (s)))E U (a0u ; s0 )j z

+ p( (s))E W (a0u ; x; s0 )jz

subject to
cu = (1 + r)a + b
a0u

9
=

(2.2)

;

a0u

a:

7

Let A and X denote sets of all possible realizations of a and x, respectively. Then
-algebra of A X while (a) is de…ned over -algebra of A.

7

(a; x) is de…ned over

For an entrepreneur the value of a matched job is:
J(a; x; s) = zxh
+ (1

w(a; x; s)
)E maxfJ(a0e ; x0 ; s0 ); V (s0 )gj x; z +

V (s0 ):

(2.3)

The value of a vacancy is:
V (s) =

+ q( (s))

Z

E J(a0u ; x; s0 )jz d e (a0u ) + (1

q( (s)))V (s0 );

(2.4)

where recall that is the vacancy posting cost and q( ) is the probability that a vacancy is
…lled. e (a0u ) denotes the measure of unemployed workers at the end of a period after the asset
accumulation decision is made.
2.2. Wage Bargaining
There is a setting for bilateral bargaining between a matched vacancy and worker. We follow
much of the literature in assuming that wages re‡ect a Nash bargaining solution, such that
argmax

W (a; x; s; w)

U (a; s; w)

1
2

J(a; x; s; w)

V (s; w)

1
2

(2.5)

w

subject to
S(a; x; s) = W (a; x; s)

U (a; s) + J(a; x; s)

V (s);

for all (a; x; s). Rubinstein (1982) demonstrates in a stationary environment that the Nash
solution can be interpreted as the outcome of a noncooperative game with sequential o¤ers. In
our stochastic setting without linear utility this interpretation does not literally hold (Coles and
Wright, 1998.) We adopt the Nash solution, however, partly for comparability with the related
literature.
The Nash solution can generate a wage that is increasing in a worker’s assets, re‡ecting that
the value being unemployed is less painful for a worker with greater assets. (Below see Figure 1.)
In turn, this makes the vacancy creation decision depend on the assets of the unemployed and,
more generally, any characteristic a¤ecting the reservation wage for the pool of unemployed. We
believe these features potentially generalize to settings with wage posting by …rms and directed
search by workers. For instance, Acemoglu and Shimer (1999) model directed search by risk
averse workers. They show that if workers are less risk averse the distribution of posted wages
exhibits a higher mean as well as longer queues, as a worker is less willing to take a lower

8

wage in order to raise the probability of employment. We would expect increased assets for the
unemployed, for given risk aversion, to exhibit comparative statics in this same direction in their
setting.
2.3. Evolution of measures
The two measures, (a; x) and
0

0

0

(A ; X ) = (1

)

(a), evolve as follows.

Z

Z

1fx0

0
x (a0 ;s0 );a0 =a0e (a;x;s)g dF (x jx)d

(a; x)da0 dx0

A0 ;X 0 A;X

+ p ( (s))

Z Z

(2.6)

1fx0 =x;a0 =a0u (a;s)g d (a)da0 dx0

A0 A
0

0

(A ) = (1

+

)

Z Z

A0

Z Z

1fx0 <x

(a; x)da0

A0 A;X

1fa0 =a0e (a;x;s)g d (a; x)da0

A;X

+ (1

0
(a0 ;s0 );a0 =a0e (a;x;s)g dF (x jx)d

p ( (s)))

Z Z

(2.7)

1fa0 =a0u (a;s)g d (a)da0

A0 A

for all A0

A and X 0

X.

2.4. Equilibrium
In each market, for worker skill h, the equilibrium consists of a set of value functions, W (a; x; s),
U (a; s), J(a; x; s), a set of decision rules for consumption ce (a; x; s), cu (a; s), asset holdings
a0e (a; x; s), a0u (a; s), and separating x (a; x; s), the wage schedule w(a; x; s), the labor-market
tightness (s), and a law of motion for the distribution, ( 0 ;

0

) = T( ; ; z). Equilibrium is

de…ned by the following.
1. (Optimal Savings): Given , w,

,

, and T, a0 solves the Bellman equations for W , U ,

J and V in (2.1), (2.2), (2.3), and (2.4).
2. (Optimal Separation): Given W , U , J, V , ,

, and T, x satis…es S(a; x ; s) = 0.

3. (Nash Bargaining): Given W , U , J and V , w satis…es (2.5).
4. (Free Entry): Given w, x ; J, ,

, and T, the vacancies are posted until V = 0.

5. (Rational Expectations): Given a0e , a0u and x , the law of motion for distribution ( 0 ;
T( ; ) is described in (2.6) and (2.7).
9

0

)=

3. Model Predictions
We calibrate our model in order to present its predictions for business cycle ‡uctuations. For
expositional purposes, we proceed in two steps. We …rst calibrate the model for an economy
with a single human capital level. We display the steady-state properties of the model, in
particular showing how assets of the unemployed a¤ect their reservation wages and the value
to …rms of hiring. We examine business cycles generated by the model, emphasizing the role
of cyclical sorting into unemployment by reservation wage. Secondly, we calibrate the model
across multiple skill groups. We examine how this a¤ects predicted aggregate ‡uctuations. We
particularly focus on predictions for cyclicality of wages and separations across workers by labor
supply (reservation match quality). We do so in anticipation of our analysis of the micro SIPP
data.
3.1. Calibration for benchmark economy
We …rst illustrate the model for a single human capital level. In addition to targeting the level of
unemployment, we target that the standard deviation of unemployment be about ten times the
standard deviation in productivity to re‡ect the ratio of these standard deviations reported by
Shimer (2005a). Note that, since we calibrate to match the relative volatilities of unemployment
and productivity, we are clearly not claiming that the model, independently calibrated, generates
the volatility of unemployment and related moments highlighted by Shimer. Instead we study
from the model simulations how shutting down our model’s systematic separations by low laborsupply workers in recession a¤ects our ability to match these moments. We do …nd that our
model captures considerable volatility from its endogenous separations.
Starting with preferences, we assume a relative risk aversion
discount factor

equal to one. We choose a

so the model economy displays an average level of assets equal to 18 months

of labor earnings. This is about the median ratio of net worth to family earnings reported in
the SIPP data. For our model simulations, we assume an annualized real interest rate of 6
percent. The monthly discount factor

of 0.99481 achieves a average asset-earnings ratio of

18. The borrowing constraint has a relatively small impact on average asset holdings. We set
the borrowing constraint to six times the worker’s human capital, so approximately six month’s
labor income, as we see few households in the SIPP with unsecured debt exceeding this amount.
The key outcomes we target are the level and cyclical volatility of the unemployment rate.
We target an average unemployment rate of 6 percent . We choose a monthly separation rate
of 2 percent. This is roughly consistent with rates we report for the SIPP data below. We

10

assume that half of separations are exogenous, so

= 0:01.8 Given an unemployment rate of 6

percent, the separation rate of 2 percent implies a steady-state job …nding rate, of 0.313. This
is consistent with hazards reported by Meyer (1990). The vacancy posting cost

is chosen so

that the vacancy-unemployment ratio ( ) is normalized to 1 in the steady state. The matching
technology is Cobb-Douglas; m(v; u) = :313 v u1

hits the steady-state …nding rate. We set

the matching power parameter, , to 0.5.
For aggregate productivity shocks we use

z

= 0:95 and

z

= 0:0037. This yields a time series

for (logged) TFP with autocorrelation of 0:965 and standard deviation, after HP …ltering, of
1%. This is smaller than the standard deviation reported by Shimer for U.S. labor productivity,
but is fairly consistent with the standard deviation for labor productivity of 1.2% measured
for 1984-2003 corresponding to the years of the SIPP data. Moreover, we focus on discussing
relative volatilities and correlations in describing the model results.
Remaining to calibrate are the returns received when unemployed and the magnitude of
match-speci…c shocks. Both are key factors in determining the cyclical volatility of separations
and unemployment. When unemployed, persons receive the utility B from leisure as well as
unemployment insurance b. These parameter values de…ne the surplus value of employment.
If unemployment is made more attractive, everything else equal, this clearly leads to higher
separation and unemployment rates. The return while being unemployed is also key in generating
unemployment volatility in the Mortensen and Pissarides framework (Hagedorn and Manovski,
2005, and Mortensen and Nagypal, 2005)–higher values for b or B increase cyclical volatility
of vacancies and unemployment. By contrast, greater volatility of match-speci…c productivity
(higher

x)

has opposite impacts on the level versus cyclical volatility of unemployment. Greater

match shocks create more separations and higher average unemployment, but actually reduce
the cyclical volatility of separations and unemployment. With greater match-quality shocks,
workers become sorted over time into matches with signi…cant match surplus. This makes their
separations less responsive to cyclical ‡uctuations in productivity.
Turning to these parameters, …rst consider unemployment insurance, b. Shimer (2005a)
8

Den Haan, Ramey and Watson (2000) employ a breakdown of about two-thirds of separations being exogenous.
They base this on data suggesting that about two-thirds of separating workers attribute the separation to a quit;
and they choose to classify worker-labeled quits as exogenous separations. For the last two panels of the SIPP,
conditional on an individual separating from a job, the worker reports a reason for the separation. We also see
about two-thirds of separations are labeled by the worker as quits. But many of these quits are to take another
job, which does not speak to the model breakdown of exogenous versus endogenous. Another important category
of quits re‡ect workers saying they did not like the pay or hours, which would better …t deciding an endogenous
separation. So we believe it is conservative to label half of separations as endogenous.

11

uses b = 0:4; but for his calibration, with linear utility, b should also capture utility bene…ts
associated with unemployment from leisure or home production. Hall (2005b) shows that the
replacement rate has been about 10 to 15 percent in recent years. We set b = 0:25. We view
this as capturing partly unemployment insurance and partly home production that substitutes
nearly perfectly with purchased goods. We set the persistence of the match-speci…c shock to be
quite high,

x

= 0:97. Finally, we vary the leisure value of unemployment B and the volatility

of innovations to match shocks

x

to be consistent with both an average unemployment rate

of 6 percent (re‡ecting an endogenous, as well as exogenous, separation rate of 1 percent) and
a standard deviation of unemployment that is ten times that of productivity. This nails down
these parameters because, as just discussed, the level of unemployment is increasing in both B
and

x,

but its cyclicality responds oppositely to the two parameters. This is achieved by the

combination of values B = 0:66 and

x

= 0:0058.

An unemployed person would receive the same bene…t from consuming leisure of B = 0:66
together with consumption of b = 0:25 as having no leisure and consumption of b = 0:48.
This might make it seem that we have calibrated the value of being unemployed comparably
to Shimer’s replacement rate of 40 percent. But this understates the relative consumption of
the unemployed, as the unemployed will consume from decumulating assets. As a result, the
surplus value of employment is smaller for our calibrated economy than for Shimer’s. A good
way to compare across models with linear utility, such as Shimer’s, and our model without
linear preferences is to look at the cost of a vacancy implied by the model. In equilibrium this
cost re‡ects the surplus value of employment in output units. For our benchmark economy
the expected cost of hiring a worker is equal to one week’s output. So for a worker with
earnings of $50,000 per year this translates into only about $1,000 per hire. By our calculations,
the comparable hiring cost from Shimer would be about double this; so employment generates
notably less surplus here. Related to this point, when we calibrate our model with only exogenous
separations, as in Shimer, we get a standard deviation of (ln)unemployment that is 3.7 times that
of productivity, whereas in Shimer’s model calibration (ln)unemployment is less volatile than
productivity. As a second point of caution, we note that a standard deviation of innovations to
x of

x

= 0:0058 yields relatively little dispersion in match quality as it implies, unconditional

on selection, a standard deviation of x of only 2.4%. Selection reduces this dispersion across
actual employments even further. In other words, we are able to calibrate our model to mimic
realistic levels and volatilities of unemployment, but only if hiring costs and match rents are
fairly low. We believe this is the right context, however, to judge our model’s predictions. The

12

key feature of our model is that longer unemployment durations during recessions a¤ect workers
di¤erently depending on that worker’s reservation match quality; so it is useful to judge the
model in the context of empirically relevant ‡uctuations in unemployment and unemployment
durations. Table 1 summarizes the parameter values for the benchmark economy with h = 1.
3.2. Steady-state results
Some key model steady-state results that determine how our benchmark economy responds to
aggregate shocks are presented in Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 displays the values of the wage,
W U; and J as functions of a worker’s assets for each of …fteen potential values for match quality
x. Higher values of match quality are directly associated with higher wages and capitalized value
of employment W , while irrelevant for U . So both W

U and J correspondingly increase with

x. Focusing on assets, both W and U increase with assets. But having low assets particularly
lowers the value of being unemployed, resulting in a lower bargained wage. Figure 1 displays
this positive relation between assets and wages. Both W

U and J (re‡ecting the higher wage)

decrease in worker assets.9 The sharpest positive relation of the wage to assets, and opposite
reaction in J, is concentrated at the very low end of assets, near or below zero. But, as we see
next, there is a very little mass at the these very low asset levels.
Figure 2, top left, shows the density of assets for workers at each of three levels for match
quality

(a; x). For low match qualities, the distribution of assets is sharply truncated–only

matches with workers with low assets survive match qualities that low. Complementing this
result, endogenous separations skew the distribution of match qualities toward higher values
of match quality. This is shown in the lower-left panel of Figure 2. In particular, virtually no
workers remain in matches where x has fallen below 0.97. Combining these …rst two panels yields
the distribution of assets across all workers. This is shown in the upper-right panel together
with the density of assets for the unemployed, (a). The dispersion in assets is fairly small–both
densities are largely contained between asset levels of 5 and 30 months of earnings. The …nal
panel of Figure 2 displays how a worker’s critical value for match quality x depends on assets.
This threshold for separating increases notably with assets at all asset values; but the key for the
response of separations to aggregate shocks is its responsiveness for assets from 5 to 30 months
earnings where the density is concentrated.
9
J, equaling W U times consumption, decreases less than W U with assets. This is more relevant at low
asset levels, where consumption responds more to assets. For instance, for x = 1, an increase in assets from 0 to
5 yields a 33 percent smaller drop in J than in W U .

13

3.3. Business cycle predictions
We next characterize the business cycles properties of the model in response to shocks to productivity. With aggregate ‡uctuations, productivity z, and the measures of workers,

and

, are

state variables for agents’optimization problems, as separation decisions depend on subsequent
matching probabilities. These, in turn, depend on the next period’s measures of workers. Because it is not possible to keep track of the evolution of these measures, we employ Krusell and
Smith’s (1998) “Bounded Rationality” method which approximates the distribution of workers
by a limited number of its moments. In particular, we assume that agents make use of the
average asset holdings of the economy and the fraction of workers who are employed. (The computational appendix gives some more detail.). To produce business cycle statistics, we generate
12,000 monthly periods for a model economy. After dropping the …rst 3,000 observations, we log
and HP …lter the data (with smoothing parameter 900,000 to be comparable to Shimer, 2005)
and generate business cycle statistics.
A sample portion of the cyclical simulation is displayed in Figure 3. Separations are countercyclical. They also clearly lead the cycle, which is consistent with …ndings by Fujita and
Ramey (2006). We see that, consistent with the data, the model generates strikingly opposite
movements in unemployment and the job …nding rate.
Some key statistics are highlighted in Table 2. Results for our benchmark model with
endogenous separations are given in Column 2. For comparison, the …rst column reports model
statistics when we shut down all endogenous separations. (Innovations to match quality are
eliminated, while the exogenous destruction rate is doubled to 2%.) Also for comparison, the
last column reports the comparable statistics contained in Shimer (2005) for quarterly U.S. data
for 1951-2003, where note that all standard deviations are expressed relative to that for labor
productivity.
Shimer points out that the natural log of unemployment series exhibits volatility, measured
by standard deviation, that is 9.5 times that in labor productivity, whereas in his calibrated
model with constant exogenous separations the unemployment series displays lower volatility by
a factor of about one half. By contrast the version of our calibrated model with only exogenous
separations generations a standard deviation of unemployment that is 3.7 times that in productivity. The considerably greater volatility for unemployment here largely re‡ects a lower surplus
value of employment for our model. Thus it is important to frame any contributions to unemployment volatility from the mechanisms in our model relative to the results with exogenous
separations in Column 1, rather than the larger disparities framed by Shimer’s calibration.
14

Turning to our model with endogenous turnover, by construction the model generates observed volatility. In fact, its standard deviation of ln(unemployment), 10.5 percent, actually
exceeds that in the data, 9.5 percent.10 (This occurs because we trade o¤ generating excess
volatility here versus generating not quite the observed volatility for the economy with multiple skill groups discussed below.) Our model generates nearly three times the volatility in
unemployment compared to its calibration with constant separation rate. The endogenous separations generate much more cyclical volatility for two reasons. For one, the model generates
countercyclical separations, correlation of 0:32 with unemployment, that are quite volatile with
a standard deviation slightly larger than that for ln(unemployment). Secondly, the model generates considerable cyclical selection into separating to unemployment by worker assets. Consider
the model with exogenous separations, Column 1. There the correlation between the unemployment rate and the assets of unemployed relative to employed is

0:48, re‡ecting the drop in

assets with longer unemployment durations during recessions. With endogenous sorting this is
reversed. The correlation between the unemployment rate and the relative assets of unemployed
is 0:77. This shift toward workers with higher assets and higher reservation wages in recessions
drives down the value of vacancy creation.
To separately quantify the impact of countercyclical separations and cyclical sorting by
asset position, we construct a version of our calibrated model where separations are exogenous,
but these exogenous separations display the same time series properties as our model with
endogenous separations. To achieve this we …rst estimate a two-variable VAR for productivity
and the separation rate on data simulated from our model with endogenous separations, where
the separation rate depends on current and lagged productivity as well as its own lag. We then
employ the estimated VAR process to generate shocks for separations as well as productivity for
the model simulations. Moments from these model simulations appear in Column 3 of Table 2.
The model with purely exogenous separations does generate considerably greater volatility than
the model with constant exogenous separations, by a factor greater than two. By comparison,
the cyclical sorting into unemployment by assets plays a more modest role. It does, however,
increase the volatility of ln(unemployment) by nearly 25 percent, from standard deviation 8.5
percentage points to 10.5.
Cyclical sorting into unemployment also serves to generate realistic cyclicality in the …nding
10

The model also generates highly persistent ‡uctuations in unemployment and the …nding rate with respective
autocorrelations, even after the series are HP …ltered, of 0:94 and 0:93. The predicted separation rate is much
less persistent, with autocorrelation of 0:26:

15

rate. Our model with endogenous separations exhibits a standard deviation of the …nding rate
(5.6%) that is greater than either that for the model with constant separations (4.3%) or with
exogenous cyclical separations (4.4%) percent, and much closer in line with the data. Our model,
like the data, also displays a much stronger negative correlation between unemployment and the
…nding rate than the models with exogenous separations. Furthermore, the model with cyclical,
but exogenous separations, actually generates a positive correlation between unemployment
and vacancies of 0.28. This is opposite in sign to that of the Beveridge empirical relation
between unemployment and vacancies. Our model does generate a negative correlation, though
at

0:16 it is far weaker than observed in the data. It also generates a negative correlation

of the separation and …nding rates ( 0:35), though not as negative as reported by Shimer
( 0:57).A particular empirical shortcoming to note for our model of endogenous separations is
that it generates less volatility in vacancies than observed for unemployment, whereas empirical
measures for vacancies appear to suggest a time series as volatile as unemployment.
3.4. Calibrating across skill groups
We next extend the model simulations to consider three human capital levels: h = 0:75; 1; 4=3.
Each skill group forms matches in a distinct market. (These markets are independent given
constant returns to scale in production and an exogenous real interest rate.) We then aggregate
across the three groups to generate aggregate model statistics.
We calibrate several model parameters to depend on worker skill. A key parameter is how
the unemployment income bene…t varies with respect to h. Anderson and Meyer report the level
of unemployment bene…ts by wage decile based on the 1993 panel of the SIPP data. Bene…ts,
as a share of earnings, are much lower at higher wages. But unemployment is also greatly
skewed toward lower wage workers. If the breakdowns in bene…ts by wage from Anderson and
Meyer are viewed together with the breakdown in unemployment by wage we report below,
this suggests an elasticity of unemployment bene…ts with respect to wage that is close to one.
There are arguments for the elasticity being less than literally one. Most states cap the size
of unemployment insurance bene…ts. Secondly, not all the bene…t b should be interpreted as
unemployment insurance. If unemployed workers can engage in home activities that substitute
for market purchases (e.g., sealing their own driveway), this component of non-market time acts
like a substitute for market income. Presumably skill at such home tasks exhibits an elasticity
with respect to market ability of less than one. Based on these considerations, we set the
elasticity of b with respect to h at 0:75.

16

We let the recruitment cost depend on, but be less than proportional to, human capital,
= h0:5 . (A recruiting cost proportional to human capital generates counterfactual. lower
…nding rates for high-skilled workers.)
Given that model asset holdings partly re‡ect precautionary savings, and unemployment is
greater among low-skilled workers, the model, with a common discount factor, would incorrectly
predict higher assets for low-skilled workers. To o¤set this, we employ a slightly higher discount
rate for lower-skilled workers so as to yield assets equal to about 18 month’s wages for each skill
group. The required di¤erences in

are very small, with annualized discount rates respectively

of 6:45%, 6:24%, and 6:18% ( = 0:99464; 0:99481; 0:99486) for skill groups h = 0:75; 1; 4=3.
With only these di¤erences by skill group, the model economy exhibits unemployment rates
that vary only modestly by skill (unemployment rates of 6:9%, 6:0%, and 5:3% respectively for
h = 0:75; 1; 4=3). But we show below that lower-wage workers have much higher separation
and unemployment rates. To be consistent with that evidence, we target unemployment rates
for our three skill groups of respectively 10%, 6%, and 5%. To achieve this we allow for lower
wage workers to exhibit a higher rate of exogenous job separations and greater variability of
match-quality shocks. We target that half of separations be exogenous regardless of skill group.
This requires respective values of

of 1:8%, 1%, and 0:9% from low to high skill. To achieve the

observed dispersion in unemployment by skill also requires higher endogenous separations for
the low-wage group of workers, dictating values of

x

of 0:98% for h = 0:75, with

x

retaining

the value of 0:58% for h = 1 and 4=3.11
An alternative for generating much higher separation and unemployment rates for less-skilled
workers is to raise their relative value of income when not employed. But we see this as unattractive for several reason. For one, it requires setting the elasticity of unemployment bene…ts with
respect to h down to 0:2, which is very counterfactual. Secondly, it generates much lower …nding
rates for less-skilled workers, which is not consistent with the data as discussed below. Finally,
it generates much less wage cyclicality and much more cyclicality in separations for less-skilled
workers. Both these predictions are counter what we see in the data.
3.5. Business cycles predictions across skill groups
We present model business cycle results with heterogeneous skill groups in two parts. We …rst
examine predicted aggregate business cycle. We then use the model to generate a panel data set
11

Higher match volatility for less skilled workers implies that they exhibit more wage volatility, independent of
aggregate ‡uctuations. In the SIPP data we do, in fact, see greater wage volatility for workers with lower average
long-term wages.

17

of workers’wages and separation decisions. From this arti…cial data we illustrate how cyclicality
of wages and separations predictably di¤er across workers’assets and skill levels.
The …rst three columns of Table 3 present predictions for business cycles for each of the three
skill groups (h = 0:75, 1 and 4=3). The fourth column gives statistics for the aggregated model
economy, that is an economy that aggregates the three groups. Looking …rst at the steady-state
properties, the calibrated model generates considerable heterogeneity in separation rates and
unemployment rates by skill. Comparing the highest h group to lowest, the average wage is
higher by 58 percent, the unemployment and separation rates are lower by 75 and 58 percent
respectively, with the …nding rate 24 percent higher. These di¤erences are fairly close to the
cross-sectional di¤erences we report below for the SIPP data.
Our calibrated model generates similar volatility in unemployment across the skill groups.
The natural log of unemployment rate is 8.0, 10.5, and 9.3 times as volatile as productivity
for h = 0:75, 1 and 4=3. Note that this does not imply that employment is equally cyclical
across the groups. The least-skilled group has a standard deviation of employment that is
double that of the high-skilled. The lower cyclical volatility of ln(unemployment) for the leastskilled group re‡ects, not smaller percentage point movements in their unemployment rate, just
smaller movements relative to their much higher average unemployment. Their lower cyclicality
of ln(unemployment) partly re‡ects the larger match-quality shocks they face. By creating a
greater dispersion in match quality, these shocks create greater rents to employment matches.
As a result, separations are less responsive to the cyclical movements in aggregate productivity.
The model generates roughly similar volatility in other dimensions across the skill groups. Each
shows similar cyclical ‡uctuations in the …nding rate that move nearly perfectly opposite the
unemployment rate. The prediction that workers with higher assets, and higher reservation
matches, sort into unemployment during recessions is strongest for the middle skill group; but
it is strong for three. The most striking di¤erence in the model predictions by skill, besides
the relative volatilities of employment, is that we predict a much stronger Beveridge curve for
the least-skilled group, with vacancies and unemployment correlated

0:49, than for the higher

skill groups. This re‡ects the predictions that the ln(separation rate) is least volatile for the
least-skilled group, while the ln(vacancy rate) is most volatile for this group.
When the groups are aggregated, Column 4, the low-skill group contributes a disproportionate weight to the volatility of unemployment, as their average unemployment share is nearly
equal to that of the other two groups combined. As a result, the aggregated model economy
shows less unemployment volatility than does the benchmark one-skill economy. The model

18

economy generates a standard deviation of log(unemployment) that is 8:6 times that of productivity. Recall that Shimer(2005a) reports a ratio of 9.5 for the U.S. data. (As with Table
2, select data statistics from Shimer appear in the last column of Table 3.) The model economy generates a higher standard deviation for separations and lower standard deviation of the
…nding rate than Shimer reports. However, given the lower correlation of separations with unemployment for the model, the implied projections of the separation and …nding rates on the
unemployment rate are fairly close to those for the data. As discussed in connection to Table
2, the biggest shortcoming of our model is its failure to predict vacancies that are as volatile
or as cyclical as have been estimated in the data. When the skill groups are aggregated, the
model produces a standard deviation for vacancies one-third that reported by Shimer. There is
a stronger negative correlation of vacancies with the unemployment rate now,

0:33, than with

the benchmark single-skill economy, re‡ecting the disproportionate weighting of the less-skilled
workers; but its magnitude falls short of the negative correlation reported by Shimer ( 0:89).
Lastly we take the model simulations and generate a panel of individual wages, asset, and
separation outcomes. We anticipate cyclicality in wages and separations to di¤er by worker
labor supply (reservation match quality)–workers with higher reservation match quality should
exhibit less cyclical wages, but more cyclical separations. The arti…cial data panel allows us
to estimate regressions of wages and separations on the unemployment rate interacted with the
worker’s reservation match quality or the characteristics, human capital and assets, that determine reservation match quality. We do so in anticipation of reporting comparable regressions
on the SIPP data in Section 5. The simulated data pools the three skill groups. For each skill
level 2000 worker histories of 360 months each is constructed.
Table 4, Column 1, reports the results of regressing a worker’s log real wage on the unemployment rate in percentage points. Estimation allows for an individual worker …xed-e¤ect. The
wage, not surprisingly, is markedly procyclical, with a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate associated with a drop in real wage of 1:4 percent. More relevant to our model,
Column 2 adds an interaction of the unemployment rate with the worker’s reservation match
quality. The interaction e¤ect is clearly signi…cantly positively–higher x predicts a smaller
negative wage response to the unemployment rate. The magnitude of this e¤ect on wages is not
so large. The standard deviation of the reservation match quality, x , in the arti…cial panel is
about 1:5 percent. So increasing x by this standard deviation reduces the predicted wage drop
in response to a percentage point increase in the unemployment rate from 1:4 percent to 1:3
percent. The third column of Table 4 interacts the unemployment rate with the worker’s human

19

capital, ln(h), and current assets relative to human capital, ln(a=h). These are the factors that
dictate a worker’s reservation match quality. As anticipated, higher skill is associated with more
cyclical wages, while higher assets are associated with wages that are less cyclical.
Columns 4 to 6 of the table conduct the same exercise but for the separation rate, entering as
a zero/one dummy, as the dependent variable. Separations are countercyclical. A one percentage
point increase in unemployment rate increases the rate of separations by 0.22 percentage points
(Column 4). Mirroring the results for wages, separations are signi…cantly more cyclical for
workers with lower labor supply, as captured by a higher reservation match quality (Column 5).
This e¤ect is fairly sizable: Increasing x by its standard deviation increases the magnitude of the
e¤ect of unemployment on separations by 50 percent. The table’s last column relates cyclicality
in separations to a worker’s human capital and assets. Separations are particularly cyclical,
increasing with the unemployment rate, for workers with higher assets relative to long-term
wage. For a given skill group, the standard deviation of ln(a=h) is 54 percent; so the regression
implies that a worker with asset position one standard deviation above the mean would display
a response of separations to the unemployment rate of 0:36 percentage points instead of 0:21.
The model generates less cyclicality in the level of separations for workers with higher human
capital. But this e¤ect is small relative to the impact of human capital on wage cyclicality and
not statistically signi…cant. The weak association of skill with separations re‡ects the greater
shocks to match-speci…c productivity calibrated for the lowest skill group. Although the model
predicts these workers display less cyclical wages (Column 3), rents from match quality insulate
lower-skilled workers somewhat from separations in response to aggregate productivity shocks.
The net e¤ect is the weak relationship between cyclicality of separation rates and human capital.

4. Cyclicality in Employment and Separations
4.1. SIPP Data
The SIPP is a longitudinal survey of adults in households designed to be representative of
the U.S. population. It consists of a series of overlapping longitudinal panels. Each panel is
about three years in duration, though this varies somewhat across panels. Each panel is large,
containing samples of about 20,000 households. Households are interviewed every four months.
At each interview, information on work experience (employers, hours, earnings) are collected for
the three preceding as well as most recent month. The …rst survey panel, the 1984 panel, was
initiated in October 1983. Each year through 1993 a new panel was began. New, slightly longer,
panels were initiated in 1996 and again in 2001. In our analysis we pool the 12 panels, with the
20

exception of the panel for 1989, which is very short in duration. Given the timing of panels, the
number of households in our pooled sample will vary over time, with a gap of zero observations
during part of 2000.
For our purposes the SIPP has some distinct advantages. Compared to the CPS, its panel
structure allows us to compare workers by long-term wages or hours. It has additional information on income, assets, and employer turnover. Unlike the CPS, respondents who change
household addresses are followed. The SIPP has both a larger and more representative sample
than the PSID or NLS panels. Individuals are interviewed every four months, rather than annually, so respondents’recall of hours, earnings, and employment turnover since the prior interview
should be considerably better. Information on income and assets is also collected with greater
frequency. For instance, information on assets is only collected about every …ve years in the
PSID. For most SIPP panels, lasting about three years, it is collected twice.
We restrict our sample to individuals between the ages of 20 and 60. Individuals must not be
in the armed forces, not disabled, not be attending school full-time, and must have remained in
the survey for at least a year. We further restrict the analysis to those who worked at least two
separate months with reported hours and earnings during their interview panel. Our resulting
pooled sample consists of 153,322 separate individuals, representing 1,175,945 interviews, with
data on employment status for 4,368,272 monthly observations. Wage rates re‡ect an hourly
rate of pay on the main job. More than sixty percent report a wage in this form. For the rest
we construct an hourly rate from hours and earnings information for that month based on how
the hourly wage projects on these variables for those reporting an hourly wage. The statistics
on employment and wages do not re‡ect self employment.
We report statistics separately for men and women. Men and women show comparable averages in age, 37.5, and years of schooling, just over 13. (All statistics re‡ect SIPP cross-sectional
sampling weights that adjust for non-interviews.) Men’s average wage is 25 percent higher than
women’s (respectively $15.03 and $11.70 in December 2004 dollars); and their average workweek
is 16 percent higher (corresponding to 42.9 hours for men and 36.6 hours for women).
4.2. Employment Cyclicality
Our …rst look at employment transitions is based on changes in a worker’s monthly employment
status. We classify a worker as employed if the worker reports having a job for the entire month,
no time searching or on layo¤, and at most two weeks in the month not working without pay.
Note that it is possible such a worker changes employers during the month. These transitions

21

rates based on employment status gives us the broadest sample coverage. Among those not
employed, we distinguish two groups: those who say they searched during the month and those
who do not. We are careful here not to refer to transitions out of employment as separations
because, as demonstrated below, many exiting workers return to the same employer. Similarly
we do not refer to transitions into jobs as job …nding, as these could be workers returning to an
employer. We turn to separations based on employer transitions directly below.
Results are reported separately for men and women in Table 5, Columns 1 and 3. 7.1
percent of men are not employed; of these, two-thirds (4.7 percentage points) report searching.
For women the comparable numbers are 12.2 percent not employed, with about one-third of these
(3.8 percentage points) reporting searching. Average monthly transition rates out of employment
equal 1.7 percent for men and 2.3 percent for women. Rates of transition from not employed to
employed equal 23.4 percent for men and 17.1 percent for women. These rates are somewhat
lower than sometimes cited. But keep in mind that, especially for women, these rates re‡ect
many persons who say they are not searching.
Cyclicality in the employment rates and transition rates are reported in Columns 2 and
4 of Table 5. The measure of cyclicality re‡ects regressing the individual outcome (e.g., not
employed, searching) on the level of the national unemployment rate. In addition to the unemployment rate, the regressors include linear and quadratic time trends and seasonal dummies.12
Standard errors are corrected for clustering by monthly time period. For men the percent that
are not employed and searching responds almost one percentage point for each percentage point
increase in the unemployment rate. For women the fraction reporting searching is also very
countercyclical, but only moves by 6 tenths of a percentage point for each percentage point
increase in unemployment. For both men and women the fraction not working, not searching is
nearly acyclical. Shimer (2005a) and Hall (2005b), among others, have noted that the transition
rate from employment to non-employment (separation rate) is less cyclical than the rate from
non-employment to employment (…nding rate). Our results very much reinforce this picture.
For both men and women the transition rate from employment to not employed increases only
slightly, and not statistically signi…cantly, with the national unemployment rate. By contrast,
the rate of transition from not employed to employed is very procyclical, particularly for men.
12
All regressions also include controls for an individual’s years of schooling, age, age2 , and marital status and
dummies for whether the observation is from panels 1984-1988, 1990-1993, or 1996/2001. The panel dummies are
included to capture any changes in methods across the SIPP panels. These changes are not very important for
the employment-based variables. They are more relevant for measures of employer turnover analyzed below as
methods for matching employer ID’s were re…ned for the later years of the SIPP.

22

For men a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate decreases transitions to
employment by 10 percent of its average rate of 23 percentage points.13
Table 6 examines employment and transition rates by long-term wages, where long-term wage
is the average (ln)observed for the individual across all months employed.14 Men and women
are divided into three equal-sized groups with the lowest, middle, and highest long-term wages.
Looking at the …rst row of the table, for both men and women, workers in the top third of wages
earn about a 90 percent higher wage than those in the bottom third. The lower-wage workers are
much more likely to be out of employment. Comparing the bottom third of the wage distribution
to the top third, the rate of non-employment is three times higher for the lower-wage workers
among men and four times higher for lower-wage workers among women. Most of the lower
employment rate for lower wage workers can be accounted for by their relatively high separation
rates: for both men and women, workers in the bottom third of wages exit employment at a rate
twice that of workers in the middle third of wages, and three times greater than those in the top
third. By contrast, low and high-wage workers di¤er much less in their rates of transiting from
non-employment to employment; for men these di¤erences are particularly small. The table also
reports the ratio of family net wealth to family income across the three groups. This ratio is
somewhat higher for the higher-wage workers, especially among men.
Table 7 presents the cyclicality of employment versus non-employment across the same wage
groups. Employment is considerably more cyclical for lower-wage workers. For men, a one
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with an increase in the nonemployment rate of respectively 1.5, 0.9, and 0.6 percentage points respectively for workers
with low, medium, and high wages. For women the comparable numbers are 1.2, 0.4, and 0.2
percentage points. The second row of Table 7 expresses these percentage point changes as a share
of that wage-group’s average employment rate. For men the low-wage group exhibits percent
‡uctuations in employment that are one-and-half to two time greater than for the middle13
We also estimated cyclicality of employment and transitions with the SIPP data aggregated and HP-…ltered.
The cyclicality of the employment and transition rates are very similar to those reported in Table 5. This is not
surprising as the HP-de…ned trend in the unemployment rate for 1983-2003 projects almost entirely on a linear
and quadratic trend.
With these aggregated series we also examined non-contemporaneous correlations between unemployment and
transition rates out of employment. Fujita and Ramey (2006) …nd that employment separations measured from
CPS data are signi…cantly negatively correlated with subsequent industrial production. For men in the SIPP we
also clearly see transitions from employment to non-employment that lead the cycle. The correlation between
a three-month average of the rate of employment exits and the unemployment rate a year later is 0.4, though
contemporaneously is only 0.1.
14
Workers’ relative wages are judged after removing the e¤ects of dummy variables for the workers’ panel of
observation separately. A worker’s wage is also adjusted for the stage of business cycle that each wage is observed.

23

wage group, and three times that for the high-wage group. For women, though employment
‡uctuations are smaller, these ‡uctuations are even more skewed toward the low-wage workers.
This greater employment volatility for lower-wage workers does not, however, imply that
lower wage workers make up a bigger share of those not employed in recessions. This is shown in
the …nal row of Table 7, which expresses the percentage point response in non-employment for
each group as a share of its average out-of-employment rate. Comparing the lowest wage group
of men to the highest we see that, in percent terms, the fraction unemployed actually responds
more for the high-wage group to a percentage point increase in the national unemployment rate
(14.0 percent response compared to 12.6 percent). This re‡ects that, even though the response
in percentage points unemployed is 2.7 times as large for the low wage group (1.53 points versus
0.56), their average level of unemployment is three times larger (12.2 points compared to 4.1).
For men the middle wage group actually shows the largest percent response in fraction not
employed to the national unemployment rate (17.7 percent). For women the percent response
in fraction not employed is much smaller than for men, with this response slightly higher for
lower wage workers (4.3 percent) than for middle (3.9 percent) and high-wage (4.1 percent). A
good summary, both for men and women, is that the percent response in fraction not-employed
is roughly the same across all wage groups.
4.3. Cyclicality in separations
We turn now to measures of employer separations that re‡ect whether workers change employers.
A major advantage of the SIPP for tracking turnover is that each job is associated with an
employer ID. Our broadest measure of separation includes moves to a new employer or to nonemployment. In principle, this separation status could be determined monthly for each worker.
But workers are much more likely to report changes in employer ID across interviews than across
the four months covered within each interview. (This is referred to as the SIPP seam e¤ect;
see Gottschalck and Nielson, 2006.). For this reason, we construct trimester separation rates
by comparing the employer for those employed at an interview to the employer and employer
status at the next interview four months later. If the worker has the same employer at the
subsequent interview with no period out of work between the interviews, we treat this as no
separation. If the worker changes employer at the next interview with no period out of work,
we label this a job-to-job separation. If the worker experiences a period out of work (de…ned
by positive weeks on layo¤ or searching, or three or more weeks in a month with no pay), but
returns to the same employer by the subsequent interview, then we treat this as a temporary

24

separation. The remaining separations are non-temporary separations to unemployment. Note
some of these workers report new employers at the next interview; some do not.
The relative sizes for each transition group are reported for men and women in Columns
1 and 3 of Table 8. The trimester separation rate for men is 12.8 percent. But nearly half of
these, 6.2 percentage points, re‡ect job-to-job changes. This …nding is consistent with estimates
in Nagypal (2005). The trimester rate of separations with exit from employment is 6.6 percent.
Of these slightly over half, 3.5 percentage points, are temporary, with return to the employer. So
the trimester separation rate out of employment, without return the next interview, is only 3.1
percent. For women the rates of separation out of employment, both with and without return
to the employer, are higher, together totalling 9.2 percent. This is consistent with the higher
rate of not employed for the sample of women.
Columns 2 and 4 display cyclicality in the separation rates. The measure of cyclicality re‡ects regressing the individual observation on the zero/one variable for turnover on the level of
the national unemployment rate. In addition to the unemployment rate, the regressions again
include trends and other controls as in Table 5. For men job-to-job separations are clearly
procyclical, a one percentage point increase in unemployment decreases job-to-job separations
by 0.51 percentage points, which is eight percent of its mean value of 6.2 percentage points.
Temporary and other separations out of work are countercyclical; but this cyclicality is small
and not statistically signi…cant. For women the patterns are similar, with job-to-job movements
procyclical and other separations nearly acyclical. But the job-to-job separations only respond
by half as much to the unemployment rate as the response for men. We also examined results
splitting samples by employment in a cyclical industry, where cyclical industries are manufacturing, construction, and transportation. Cyclicality in separations are remarkably similar across
the split, with job-to-job separations clearly procyclical and separations out of employment
modestly countercyclical for men and acyclical for women.

5. Cyclicality in Wages and Separations across Workers
Our model predicts that workers with higher desired labor supply will exhibit more cyclical
wages and thereby less cyclical separations. We compare these predictions here to …ndings
across workers in the SIPP data. We …rst stratify workers based on how much they work during
their approximately three years in the SIPP panel. We also examine how cyclicality di¤ers across
workers based on their long-term wages and a measure of their asset position.

25

5.1. Wage cyclicality
Table 9 examines the response of individual hourly wages to the unemployment rate. Only
survey month observations on real wages are included. To control for heterogeneity, we estimate
allowing for individual …xed e¤ects. With …xed e¤ects, cyclicality is measured by the monthly
unemployment rate relative to the average for that individual over the approximately three years
the person is sampled. We also allow for seasonals and an individual’s age and age squared as
regressors. Standard errors are corrected for clustering by monthly time period.
For both men and women real wages are procyclical, but only modestly. For men, from
the …rst column, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rates is associated with
real wages reduced by 0.5 percent, for women, Column 4, by only 0.3 percent. This fairly weak
cyclicality hides the fact that real wages are sharply procyclical for new hires. Columns 2 and
5 of the table presents results only for those workers who were hired at that employer within
the last year. (Workers returning to an employer are not treated as new hires.) For new hires
wages are much more cyclical. For men a one percentage point increase in the unemployment
rate is associated with a 1.8 percent lower wage; for women it is associated with a 1.2 percent
lower wage. For both men and women this impact is estimated fairly precisely, with standard
error of about 0.2 percentage points. By contrast Columns 3 and 6 report that, for workers not
identi…ed as new hires, the wage is not cyclical.15 For men the modest e¤ect of a percentage
point increase in the unemployment rate, a fall of 0.3 percent in the wage, is only marginally
signi…cant; for women it is insigni…cant. The …nding of greater wage cyclicality for new hires is
consistent with earlier …ndings from other data sets by Bils (1985) and Beaudry and DiNardo
(1991). Models incorporating wage rigidity into cyclical matching models (e.g., Hall, 2005) stress
the wage setting of new hires, as the discounted value of wages is central to the value of vacancy
creation. But we …nd wages of new hires are very cyclical.
We next ask if the cyclicality in wages di¤ers for workers by their longer-run labor supplied.
We do so because our model predicts workers with high desired labor supply (low reservation
match quality) should exhibit more cyclical wages and less cyclical separations. For each worker
we sum the fraction of weeks worked during their panel of observations and the average log
of hours worked when employed. For any monthly observation we eliminate the six months
surrounding that month. That is for month t, the …xed e¤ects in labor excludes the two months
prior to t, t, and the three months after t. To put variations in fraction of weeks worked in
15
The groups identi…ed as other workers (Columns 3 and 6) may include workers who joined the employer at a
date 4 to 11 months prior, if that date is prior to the worker joining the data panel.

26

percent terms, we divide the individual’s value by the mean for their sample.16
Panel A of Table 10, Columns 1 and 3, interact the cyclical measure, unemployment rate,
with a worker’s …xed e¤ect in labor supplied. Results are shown separately for new hires and
other workers. Workers who typically work more show much more cyclical wages. This is true
both for new hires and other workers. The standard deviation in this measure of long-run labor
supplied is 0.22 for men (re‡ecting 0.12 in fraction of weeks worked and 0.17 from hours per
week) and 0.33 for women (re‡ecting 0.17 in fraction of weeks worked and 0.25 from hours
per week). Multiplying by the estimated coe¢ cients from Columns 2 and 4 shows that a onestandard deviation increase in hours worked implies that, among workers who are not new hires,
a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a wage decline that
is 0.36 percentage points larger for men and 0.28 percentage points larger for women. Among
new hires, Columns 1 and 3, wages are even more strikingly cyclical for those who work more,
especially among women.
Our model relates cyclicality of a worker’s reservation wage to that worker’s asset position.
Workers with lower assets, relative to their long-term earnings, are predicted to show more
cyclical wages and less cyclical separations. We examine these predictions in Panel B of Table
10. As discussed above, asset information is not collected for most interviews. In some SIPP
panels it was collected twice, or even more, in some only once, and for the 1988 panel not at
all. We stratify workers based on the amount of net worth and unsecured debt they report.
(We average the responses for panels with asset information from more than one interview.) We
de…ne a worker as a low-asset worker if either (a) they have non-positive net worth or (b) they
have unsecured debt greater than 1000 hours of earnings based on their average wage. About
one-sixth of the male sample and one-…fth of female sample fall under this category.
Wages are more cyclical for workers with lower assets. The table again reports results
separately for those hired within the last twelve months versus other workers. Wage are much
more cyclical for new hires with relatively low assets; this is true for men and women. Consider
two new hires with comparable long-term wage, but only one with low assets. The regression
implies that, among men, the man with low assets will show a decline in real wage that is 0.78
percentage points larger for a percentage point increase in the unemployment rate. Among
female new hires the di¤erential is similar, equaling 0.68 percentage points. These results are
16

Usual hours includes any on a second job. The average is taken over months with usual hours of at least
15. Workers’ relative hours and weeks worked are judged after removing the e¤ects of dummy variables for the
workers’panel of observation. We also adjust for the stage of business cycle of the observation.

27

robust to lower-wage workers having di¤erent wage cyclicality, as they control for the worker’s
wage level as well as age. This …nding is also robust to controlling for interactions of the business
cycle with the worker’s hours or schooling. For workers that are not new hires the e¤ects of
assets on wage cyclicality is qualitatively similar, but weaker. Among men greater cyclicality of
wages for workers with low assets is statistically clear; but the estimated interaction with wage
cyclicality is only seventy percent as large its estimate among new hires. For women, excluding
workers hired in the past year, the interaction of having low assets is smaller in magnitude and
not statistically signi…cant. We examined results separating workers employed in the private
sector from those in the government or non-pro…t sector. We base this split on the presumption
that the government sector may be less able to exhibit wages that respond in a rich manner
cyclically. The greater wage cyclical for low-asset workers, especially among men, is driven by
the behavior of wages in the private sector.
Our calibrated model predicts high-skilled workers display greater wage cyclicality–high
skilled workers have higher labor supply (lower reservation match quality), and so greater aversion to long unemployment spells in recessions. But, from Panel B of Table 10, for women we
see that wages are less cyclical for higher-wage workers. The standard deviation in long-term
wage is about 0.40 for both men and women. The estimates imply that increasing long-term
wage by this standard deviation reduces the absolute response of the wage to the unemployment
rate by 0.26 percentage points for women. (This estimated e¤ect of wage level on wage cyclicality is of the same magnitude for new hires and other female workers, but only statistically
signi…cant for the larger group that are not new hires.) Men with higher long-term wages also
show less wage cyclicality. But this di¤erential is considerably smaller across male workers and
not statistically signi…cant. The concluding section discusses how one might alter the calibrated
model to eliminate the prediction that higher-wage workers show more cyclical wages.17
5.2. Cyclicality in Separations
We last examine how cyclicality in separations di¤ers across workers by labor supplied and by
assets and long-term wage. We focus on separations out of employment, both those with and
without return to the employer. In each case the dependent variable take on value of zero (e.g.,
17

Castro and Coen-Pirani (2007) …nd, using CPS data, that for last twenty years wages and employment have
been comparably cyclical for workers of di¤ering years of schooling. This is in contrast to earlier years, where
the CPS shows less cyclicality in wages and employment for workers with more schooling. Their results are
not inconsistent with our results that higher wage workers show less cyclical wages and (below) less cyclical
separations. If we project wage and employment cyclicality just on years of schooling, ignoring other variations
in longer term wages, we see similar cyclical ‡uctuation in wages and separations across schooling groups.

28

no temporary separation) or one (yes, a temporary separation).
Panel A of Table 11 shows the e¤ect of interacting the unemployment rate with the worker’s
long-term labor supplied. From Columns 1 and 3 we see that, for both men and women,
workers who typically work more are much less likely to exhibit temporary separations when
unemployment is high. Increasing labor by one standard deviation (0.22 for men and 0.33 for
women) decreases the response of these separations to the unemployment rate by more than
0.5 percentage points for men and by 0.8 percentage points for women. These di¤erences are
large as well as statistically signi…cant.18 Workers who work longer hours, both for men and
for women, are also less likely to exhibit non-temporary separations out of employment during
recessions (Columns 2 and 4). We view these results as very supportive of the central tenet of
our model–that workers with higher desired labor supply will separate less during recessions.19
We see that in recessions separations shift toward workers who work less, especially for
men. We ask if this creates important cyclical compositional shifts in worker labor supply.
More exactly, does the average worker …xed e¤ect in labor supply conditional on being employed
respond to the unemployment rate? Does the average …xed e¤ect in labor supply conditional on
not being employed respond to the unemployment rate? For answers, we construct by month
the mean …xed e¤ect in labor for those employed and for those not employed.20

The top

panel of Figure 4 plots a three-month moving average for the compositional e¤ect in this labor
supply for employed men versus a three-month moving average for the unemployment rate.
(The composition e¤ect is …rst HP-…ltered and seasonally adjusted, paralleling treatment of the
unemployment rate.) Consistent with separations shifting toward lower labor supply workers,
the workforce shows a shift during recessions toward workers who typically work more. A
percentage point increase in unemployment is associated with a 0.22 percent increase in the
average labor …xed-e¤ect for the workforce (with Newey-West robust standard error of 0.02).21
18

Recall that, in determining separations in any month, the worker’s weeks worked and hours in that, the two
preceding, and three following months, do not enter into the measure of long-term labor supply. Since temporary
separations are those who return at least by the interview four months later, the period of temporary separation
is not re‡ected in the measure of long-term labor supplied.
19
We focus on separations out of employment, as job-to-job separations are not readily related to our model.
We can point out, however, that job-to-job separations display a shift toward workers with higher labor supply
and workers with higher wages with increases in the unemployment rate.
20
The compositional e¤ects in labor supply for the employed group and for the unemployed group is calculated
by subtracting the mean …xed e¤ect for all persons from the mean for that subgroup. So any shifts overtime in
the labor …xed e¤ect for the overall SIPP data are di¤erenced away.
21
Our …nding that the workforce shifts toward workers who typically work more hours in a recession parallels
the …nding from a number of papers that during recessions the workforce shifts toward workers who average higher
wages (e.g., Barsky, Parker, and Solon, 1994). For workers in the SIPP data, a one-percentage point increase
in the unemployment rate is associated with a 0.10 percent drop (standard error of 0.02 percent) in the wage

29

There is a much larger cyclical compositional e¤ect in labor supply among those not employed.
This is illustrated in the bottom panel of Figure 4. Among men not employed, a one-percentage
point increase in unemployment is associated with a large drop of 1.59 percent in the group’s
average labor …xed-e¤ect (standard error 0.32 percent). For women these cyclical composition
e¤ects are in the same direction, but considerably smaller and not statistically signi…cant.
For our model the sorting of workers with lower labor supply, re‡ecting higher reservation
match values, into unemployment discourages vacancy creation during recessions. The strong
compositional shift among unemployed men shown in Figure 4 supports this. A related question, more directly related to the value of vacancy creation, is what happens cyclically to the
…xed e¤ect in labor for the set of workers who transit from unemployed to employed. The
compositional e¤ect for these workers behaves very similarly to that for the unemployed pool–a
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is accompanied by a large drop of 1.61
percent in the group’s average labor …xed e¤ect (with standard error 0.35 percent).
Panel B of Table 11 examines how cyclicality in separations projects on a worker’s asset
position. As predicted by the model, for both men and women permanent separations are lower
in recessions for workers with low assets. The estimated magnitude of this e¤ect is economically
important; but it is not statistically quite signi…cant. By contrast, temporary separations, with
return to the employer, are more cyclical for those workers with greater assets. But this e¤ect
is also only marginally statistically signi…cant.
The regressions in Panel B also relate cyclicality in separations to the worker’s relative longterm wage. For men cyclicality of separations from employment are nearly unrelated to the
long-term wage; but behind this we see that during recessions lower-wage workers exhibit an
increase in temporary separations, whereas higher-wage worker exhibit an increase in permanent
separations. For women both types of separations shift toward higher-wage women during
recessions, but this is particular true for the permanent separations.

6. Conclusions
We introduced worker heterogeneity in worker skills and assets into a model of separations,
matching, and unemployment over the business cycle. We have focused on heterogeneity associated with a worker’s labor supply because it yields sharp, rich, testable predictions for a model
…xed-e¤ect of the employed workforce. Note that this compositional e¤ect is less than half the magnitude that
we see in the …xed e¤ect in labor supply. It is smaller than the cyclical compositional e¤ect in wages estimated
by Barsky, Parker and Solon; but this di¤erence is falls in line with Castro and Coen-Pirani (2007) evidence that
business cycle are much less focused on lower wage workers in the last twenty year.

30

with ‡exible wages. Most notably, it predicts that workers with high labor supply, those with low
assets to earnings and therefore low reservation wages, will avoid separating in recessions when
unemployment duration is long. In turn this predicts these workers will show greater cyclicality
of wages, but less (counter)cyclical separations. When separations shift toward workers with
high reservation wages in downturns, because these workers yield lower rents to employers, this
acts to discourage creating vacancies, compounding cyclicality of unemployment.
We examine employment separations and wage cyclicality over the past twenty years for
workers in the SIPP data. Workers who typically work longer hours do display much greater
cyclicality of wages and less cyclicality of separations. We also …nd that workers with low assets
or high debts show more cyclical wages and less cyclical separations into unemployment, though
the latter e¤ect is not so empirically signi…cant.
We conclude that heterogeneity, particularly sorting by unemployment tolerance, may help to
explain why unemployment durations are so cyclical. A related conclusion is that, in one way,
wage ‡exibility exacerbates cyclical volatility–it is through ‡exible wage setting that workers
with tolerance for unemployment sort into that pool during recessions.
One shortcoming of our calibrated business-cycle model is that it fails to predict the smaller
wage cyclicality we see for higher-wage workers. Related, it under predicts the cyclicality we
see in separations to unemployment for higher-wage workers, especially comparing across female
workers. One way to modify the model to capture these patterns would be to reduce the relative
labor supply of higher-wage workers (increase their reservation match qualities). In turn this
could be generated by increasing the relative unemployment income of higher-skilled workers (a
replacement rate more proportional to human capital) or by increasing the coe¢ cient of relative
risk aversion above one. Both of these modi…cations can be empirically justi…ed. But, for our
model to still generate the much higher unemployment rate observed for low-wage workers, this
would require that lower-wage workers face much higher job destruction rates and shocks to
match quality. We see it as more promising to pursue models where the comparative advantage
in the market for higher-wage workers is partly manifested through greater search intensity in
recessions. We believe this can potentially explain why higher wage workers show much higher
job-to-job separations, but fewer temporary separations, during recessions.

31

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, 1999, “E¢ cient Unemployment Insurance,” Journal
of Political Economy, 107, 893-928.
[2] Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer, 1997, “Unemployment Insurance Takeup Rates
and the After-Tax Value of Bene…ts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 913-937.
[3] Aiyagari, R. S., 1994, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-683.
[4] Baker, 1992, “Unemployment Duration: Compositional E¤ects and Cyclical Variability,”
American Economic Review, 82(1), 313-21.
[5] Barsky, Robert, Gary Solon and Jonathan A. Parker., 1994, “Measuring The Cyclicality
Of Real Wages: How Important Is Composition Bias?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
109(1), 1-25.
[6] Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo, 1991, “The E¤ect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99(4), 665-88.
[7] Bils, Mark J. 1985, “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data,”
Journal of Political Economy, 93(4), 666-89.
[8] Castro, Rui and Daniele Coen-Pirani, 2007, “Why Have Aggregate Skilled Hours Become
So Cyclical Since the Mid-1980’s?,” International Economic Review, Forthcoming.
[9] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim, 2006, “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply:
A Quantitative Analysis Based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy,” International
Economic Review, 47(1), 1-27.
[10] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim, 2007, “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implications
for Labor-Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[11] Coles, Melvyn, and Randall Wright, 1998, “A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of Search, Bargaining, and Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 78(1), 32-54.
[12] Costain, James S. and Michael Reiter, 2003, “Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance,
and the Calibration of Matching Models,” Economics Working Papers 872, Department of
Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
[13] Darby, Michael R., John C. Haltiwanger and Mark W. Plant, 1985, “Unemployment Rate
Dynamics and Persistent Unemployment under Rational Expectations,” American Economic Review, 75(4), 614-37.
[14] Den Haan,Wouter J., Garey Ramey and Joel Watson, 2000, “Job Destruction and the
32

Experiences of Displaced Workers,”Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
52(1), 129-136.
[15] Fisher, Jonas, 2006, “The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Technology
Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(3). 413-51.
[16] Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey, 2006, “The cyclicality of job loss and hiring,” Working
Papers 06-17, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
[17] Gertler, M., and Trigari, A., 2006, “Unemployment Fluctuations With Staggered Nash
Wage Bargaining,” NBER Working Papers 12498.
[18] Gomes, Joao, Jeremy Greenwood, and Sergio Rebelo, 2001, “Equilibrium Unemployment,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 48, 109-152.
[19] Gottschalck, Alfred O. and Robert B. Nielsen, 2006, “The presence of the seam in SIPP
panels: E¤ects on labor force estimates,”Eastern Economic Association. Philadelphia, PA.
[20] Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag, and Thijs van RensIourii Manovskii, 2007, “Wage
Rigidity and Job Creation,” manuscript, Universitat Pampeu Fabra.
[21] Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, 2005, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” manuscript.
[22] Hall, Robert E., 1980, “Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity,” Brookings Papers
on Economics Activity, (1), 93-123.
[23] Hall, Robert E., 2005a, “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”
American Economic Review, 95(1), 50-65.
[24] Hall, Robert E., 2005b , “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. over the
Past Fifty Years,” Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤ ed. NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
No. 20, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
[25] Hall, Robert E., 2006, “Work-Consumption Preferences, Cyclical Driving Forces, and Unemployment Volatility,” manuscript, Stanford University.
[26] Krusell, Per, and Anthony Smith, 1998, “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.
[27] Kudyak, Marianna, 2006, “Wage Smoothing and the Cyclical User Cost of Labor,” manuscript, University of Rochester.
[28] Kydland, Finn, 1984, “Labor-force heterogeneity and the business cycle,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, 173-208.
[29] Meyer, Bruce D., 1990, “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,” Econometrica, 58, 757-782.

33

[30] Mortensen, D., and Pissarides, C., 1994, “Job Creation and Destruction in the Theory of
Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397-415.
[31] Mortensen, D. and Eva Nagypal, 2005, “More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations,” IZA Discussion Paper 1765.
[32] Nagypal, E., 2005, “Worker Reallocation over the Business Cycles: The Importance of
Job-to-Job Transitions,” manuscript.
[33] Nakajima, Makoto, 2007, “Business Cycles in the Equilibrium Model of Labor Search and
Self-Insurance,” manuscript.
[34] Pissarides, C., 1987, “Search, Wage Bargains and Cycle” Review of Economic Studies, 54,
473-483.
[35] Pries, Michael J., 2006, “Worker Heterogeneity and Labor Market Volatility in Matching
Models” Review of Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.
[36] Ríos-Rull, J.-V., 1999, “Computation of Equilibria in Heterogeneous-Agents Models,” R.
Marimon and A. Scott, eds., Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economies,
New York: Oxford University Press.
[37] Rubinstein, Ariel, 1982, “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,”Econometrica, 50(1),
97-110.
[38] Shao, Enchuan and Pedro Silos, 2007, “Individual Risk and the Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and Vacancies,” Working Paper 2007-5, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
[39] Shimer, R., 2004, “The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models,” Journal of the
European Ecomic Association (Papers and Proceedings), 2, 469-479.
[40] Shimer, R., 2005a, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
American Economic Review, 95(1), 25-49.
[41] Shimer, R., 2005b, “Reassessing the Inns and Outs of Unemployment,” manuscript, University of Chicago.
[42] Sider, H., 1985, “Unemployment Duration and Incidence: 1968-1982,”American Economic
Review, 75, 461-72.
[43] Tauchen, G.,“Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and Vector Autoregressions,” Economics Letters, 20 (1986), 177-181.

34

A. Computational Algorithm
A.1. Steady-State Equilibrium
In steady state, the aggregate productivity z is constant at its mean and the measures of workers
and

are invariant over time. Computing the steady-state equilibrium amounts to …nding i )

the value functions W (a; x), U (a) and J(a; x), ii ) the decision rules a0e (a; x), a0u (a) and x (a),
iii ) the wage schedule w(a; x), iv ) the labor market tightness , v ) the time-invariant measures
(a; x) and

(a) that satisfy the equilibrium conditions given in subsection 2.4. The detailed

computational algorithm for steady state equilibrium is as follows.
1. Discretize the state space A

X over which the value functions and wages are computed.

The stochastic process for the idiosyncratic productivity is approximated by the …rst-order
Markov process of which transition probability matrix is computed using Tauchen’s (1986)
algorithm.
2. Assume an initial value of
3. Given

0

0

.

, we solve the Nash bargaining and individual optimization problems to approxi-

mate wages, value functions, and decision rules in the steady state, which will be used to
compute the time-invariant measures.
1. Assume an initial wage schedule w0 (a; x;
2. Given w0 (a; x;

0

0

) for each (a; x) node.

), solve for the worker’s value functions, W (a; x; w0 ) and U (a; w0 ),

using equations (2.1) and (2.2) in the text. The value functions are approximated
using the iterative method. The utility maximization problems in the worker’s value
functions are solved through the Brent method. The decision rules a0e (a; x; w0 ),
a0u (a; w0 ) and x (a; w0 ) are obtained at each iteration of the value functions.
3. Compute wages that satisfy the de…nition of J(a; x; w0 ) in (2.3) and the Nash bargaining solution in (2.5) in the text. Speci…cally, we solve for w1 (a; x;

0

) for each

(a; x) node that satis…es
w1 (a; x;

0

) = zxh

J(a; x; w0 ) + (1

)E maxfJ(a0e ; x0 ; w0 ); 0gjx ;

where J(a; x; w0 ) is computed using the …rst order condition for the Nash bargaining

35

problem in (2.5):
1

J(a; x; w0 ) =
4. If w1 (a; x;

0

) and w0 (a; x;

0

W (a; x; w0 )

U (a; w0 ) ce (a; x; w0 ):

) are close enough to each other, then move on to the

step 4 to compute invariant measures and the corresponding labor market thightness,
1

. Otherwise, go back to the step 3.1 with a new guess for the wage schedule:
w0 (a; x;

0

)=

ww

1

(a; x;

0

) + (1

w )w

0

0

(a; x;

):

4. Using the converged decision rules a0e (a; x; w0 ), a0u (a; w0 ) and x (a; w0 ) given the converged
wage schedule w0 (a; x;
(a; x;

0

) and

(a;

0

0

) from the step 3.2 and 3.1, compute the time-invariant measures

) by iterating the laws of motion for measures given in (2.6) and

(2.7). Then, compute the labor market tightness

1

that satis…es the free-entry condition

using equation (2.4) and the converged measures:
1

= q( )

5. If

1

and

0

Z

J(a0u ; x;

0

)d e (a0u ;

0

):

are close enough to each other, then we found the steady state. Otherwise,

go back to the step 3 with a new guess for the labor market tightness:
0

=

1

+ (1

) 0:

A.2. Equilibrium with Aggregate Fluctuations
Approximating the equilibrium in the presence of aggregate ‡uctuations requires us to include
the aggregate productivity, z, and the measures of workers,

and , as state variables for agents’

optimization problems. In order to make match separation decisions at the end of a period,
agents need to know their matching probabilities in the next period, p(
in turn depends on the next period’s measures of workers,

t+1 (a; x)

t+1 )

and

and q(

t+1 (a).

t+1 ),

which

The laws of

motion for the measures are given in equations (2.6) and (2.7). It is impossible to keep track
of the evolution of these measures. We employ Krusell-Smith’s (1998) “Bounded Rationality”
method which approximates the distribution of workers by a number of its moments. We assume
that agents in the economy make use of two …rst moments of the measures: the average asset
R
R
holdings of the economy, K = a d (a; x) + a d (a), and the number of employed workers,
36

E =

R

d (a; x). Let ^
s denote a vector of aggregate state variables in the approximation of

equilibrium with ‡uctuations. Then ^
s = (K; E; z). In addition we assume that the agents use
log-linear rules in predicting the current , the future K and the future E.
1. Guess a set of prediction rules for the equilibrium labor market tightness ( ) in the current
period, the average asset of the economy (K 0 ) and the number of employed workers (E 0 ) in
the next period. This step amounts to setting the coe¢ cients of the log-linear prediction
rules:
log = b0;0 + b0;1 log K + b0;2 log E + b0;3 log z
log K 0 = b0K;0 + b0K;1 log K + b0K;2 log E + b0K;3 log z
log E 0 = b0E;0 + b0E;1 log K + b0E;2 log E + b0E;3 log z:
As is the case in the steady state computation, we approximate the stochastic process for
the aggregate productivity by the …rst-order Markov process of which transition probability
matrix is computed using Tauchen’s (1986) algorithm.
2. Given these prediction rules, we solve the individual optimization and wage bargaining
problems. This step is analogous to step 3 in the steady state computation, so we omit the
detailed description of computational procedure. However, the dimension of state variables
is now much larger: (a; x; ^
s). Computation of the conditional expectations involves the
evaluation of the value functions not on the grid points along K and E dimensions since
K 0 and E 0 are predicted by the log-linear rule above. We polynomially interpolate the
value functions along the K dimension when necessary.
3. We generate a set of arti…cial time series data f t ; Kt ; Et g of the length of 9,000 periods.
Each period, these aggregate variables are calculated by summing up 50,000 workers’
decisions on asset accumulation and match separation, which are simulated using the
converged value functions, W (a; x; ^
s), U (a; ^
s), and J(a; x; ^
s), the decision rules, a0e (a; x; ^
s),
a0u (a; ^
s) and x (a; ^
s) from the step 2, and the assumed prediction rules for , K 0 and E 0
from the step 1.
4. We obtain the new values for the coe¢ cients (b1 ’s) in the prediction functions through the
OLS using the simulated data from the step 3. If b0 and b1 are close enough to each other,
then we …nd the (limited information) rational expectations equilibrium with aggregate

37

‡uctuations. Otherwise, go back to the step 1 with a new guesses for the coe¢ cients in
the prediction functions:
b0i;j =
where i = ; K; E and j = 0;

1
b bi;j

+ (1

0
b )bi;j ;

; 3.

The converged prediction rules and their accuracy, measured by R2 , for the benchmark
calibration with h = 1 are as follows.
Prediction for labor market thightness in the current period:
log = 1:9055

0:5176 log K + 6:8826 log E + 5:6884 log z;

R2 = 0:9678

Prediction for average aset holdings in the next period:
log K 0 = 0:0030 + 0:9999 log K + 0:0251 log E + 0:0438 log z;

R2 = 0:9999

Prediction for number of emloyed workers in the next period:
log E 0 = 0:0120

0:0071 log K + 0:8652 log E + 0:0768 log z;

R2 = 0:9517

Overall, the estimated prediction rules are fairly precise as R2 ’s are close to 1, while the
prediction rule for average asset holdings provides the highest accuracy.

38

h=1
α = 0.5
γ=1
θ=1
β = 0.99481
Β = 0.659
b = 0.25
κ = 0.073
λ = 1%
ρx = 0.97
σx = 0.58%
ρz = 0.95
σz = 0.37%
a = -6.0

Parameter
Level of Human Capital
Matching technology m(v, u) = .313 vαu1-α
Relative risk aversion
Steady state v/u ratio (normalized)
Discount factor
Utility from leisure
Unemployment benefit b = b h0.75
Vacancy posting cost κ = κ h0.5
Exogenous separation rate
Persistence of idiosyncratic productivity ln x
Standard deviation of innovation to ln x
Persistence of aggregate productivity shock ln z
Standard deviation of innovation to ln z
Borrowing constraint

Description

Table 1: Parameter Values for the Benchmark Economy

10.5%
3.9%
11.2%
5.6%

1.6%
-0.16
0.32
-0.99

0.77

3.7%
6.4%
0
4.3%

0.7%
-0.61
0
-0.85

-0.48

6.0%
2.0%
31.3%
1.002
17.3
5.92

λ = 1%
σx = 0.58%
κ = 0.0730
β = 0.99481

λ = 2%
σx = 0
κ = 0.0736
β = 0.99472

6.0%
2.0%
31.3%
0.994
17.4
4.99

Endog. Separations

Constant Separations

0.06

0.8%
0.28
0.30
-0.71

8.5%
7.3%
11.3%
4.4%

6.0%
2.0%
31.3%
0.994
17.4
4.99

λ = λt
σx = 0
κ = 0.0736
β = 0.99472

Exog. Separations

-0.89
0.71
-0.95

9.5%
10.1%
3.8%
5.9%

U.S. Data

A variable with circumflex denotes logged value: x̂ = ln x. Statistics for fluctuations, standard deviations (SD) and correlations (cor), reflect H-P
filtered series with smoothing parameter of 9 x 105. Standard deviation of H-P filtered simulated productivity is 1%. The discount factor (β) is
chosen to obtain assets near 18; and the vacancy cost (κ) is chosen to yield a v-u ratio of 1. U.S. statistics are based on Shimer (2006), with
standard deviations relative to productivity’s.

Fluctuations
SD(û)
SD( v̂ )
SD( ŝ )
SD( fˆ )
SD ( Ε[au ] Ε[ae ] )
cor (û, v̂ )
cor (û, ŝ)
cor (û, fˆ )
cor(û, Ε[au ] Ε[a e ] )

Steady State
u
s
f
w
a
SD(a)

Models

Table 2: Model Comparisons for One-Skill Economy

10.5%
3.9%
0.8%
11.2%
5.6%
-0.16
0.32
-0.99
0.77

-0.49
0.36
-0.97
0.72

6%
2%
31.3%
1.002
17.3
5.9

8.0%
4.2%
1.0%
7.7%
5.1%

10.2%
3.30%
28.7%
0.75
12.9
5.2

h = 1.0
λ = 1%
σx = 0.58%
β = 0.99481

h = 0.75
λ = 1.8%
σx = 0.98%
β = 0.99464

0.63

0.05
0.31
-0.99

9.3%
2.8%
0.5%
9.9%
4.7%

4.8%
1.85%
36.4%
1.34
23.1
7.2

h = 1.333
λ = 0.9%
σx = 0.58%
β = 0.99486

Highest Skill

0.78

-0.33
0.34
-0.99

8.6%
3.2%
0.7%
8.8%
4.9%

7.1%
2.37%
31.2%
1.04
17.8
7.5

Aggregate

-.0.89
0.71
-0.95

3.8%
5.9%

9.5%
10.1%

U.S. Data

A variable with circumflex denotes logged value: x̂ = ln x. Statistics for fluctuations, standard deviations (SD) and correlations (cor), reflect H-P
filtered series with smoothing parameter of 9 x 105. Standard deviation of H-P filtered simulated productivity is 1%. U.S. statistics are based on
Shimer (2006), with standard deviations relative to productivity’s.

Fluctuations
SD(û)
SD( v̂ )
SD( ê )
SD( ŝ )
SD( fˆ )
cor(û, v̂ )
cor(û, ŝ )
cor(û, fˆ )
cor(û, Ε[au ] Ε[ae ] )

Steady State
u
s
f
w
a
SD[a]

Middle Skill

Lowest Skill

Table 3: Model Comparisons with Multiple Skill Groups

0.22
(0.02)

(4)

7.17
(1.10)

0.22
(0.02)

(5)

Whether Separate

0.27
(0.04)

─0.95
(0.07)

0.21
(0.02)

(6)

The simulated panel consists of 2,160,000 observations (6,000 workers for 360 months each). Estimation of wage cyclicality in first three
columns allows for individual fixed effects. Estimation of cyclicality in separations controls for a worker’s human capital and assets as well as the
reported cyclical variables. Standard errors (in parentheses) correct for clustering by the 360 months.

0.14
(0.02)

─1.37
(0.03)

UR * Ln(Assets/Human Capital)

6.00
(0.07)

─1.38
(0.03)

(3)

─0.53
(0.05)

─1.37
(0.03)

(2)

UR * Ln(Human Capital)

UR * Ln(Reservation Match Quality)

Unemployment Rate

(1)

Ln(Real Wage)

Dependent Variable

Table 4: Model Predictions for Cyclicality of Wages and Separations

4.7%
2.4%
1.7%
23.4%

Not working and say
searching

Not working and say not
searching

Monthly rate from working
to not working

Monthly rate from not
working to working
2,053,116

─2.37
(.34)

0.05
(.03)

0.05
(.03)

0.93
(.04)

Response to
Unemployment
Rate

17.1%

2.3%

8.4%

3.8%

Mean

2,315,159

─0.86
(.24)

0.01
(.03)

─0.05
(.05)

0.59
(.04)

Response to
Unemployment
Rate

Women

Regressions (columns 2 and 4) control for years of schooling, marital status, age, age2, individual fixed effect in wage, monthly seasonals, linear
and quadratic time trends, and dummies variables for early, mid, and late segments of SIPP panels. Estimates employ sampling weights. Standard
errors (in parentheses) correct for clustering by the 240 monthly periods

No. of observations

Mean

Dependent variable →

Men

Table 5: Cyclicality in Monthly Employment and Transition Rates

2.25
12.2
2.94
22.7
15.7

Ln Wage

Non-employment rate (%)

Monthly rate from working to
not working (%)

Monthly rate from not working
to working (%)

Mean net wealth/family income

17.7

25.1

1.35

5.2

2.74

Middle

22.9

23.6

1.03

4.1

3.17

High

18.5

15.2

3.96

21.7

2.10

Low

19.6

19.2

1.97

9.5

2.54
1

Middle

Women

22.1

21.8

1.23

5.3

2.99

High

Overall sample is 2,053,116 for men and 2,315,159 for women. Sample sizes are smaller for separation rates and, particularly, for searching and
finding rates (e.g., for finding rates samples sizes are 131,050 for men and 271,048 for women.) Estimates employ sampling weights. Low-wage
for men means hourly wage (Dec 2004 dollars) below $12.74. High-wage means greater than $18.80. The respective cutoffs for women are
$10.42 and $15.28.

Low

Wage group →

Men

Table 6: Wages, employment, and transition rates by Long-term Wage

12.6

Percent response, relative to group’s mean, in
non-employment rate

17.7

─0.97

0.92
(.05)

Middle

14.0

─0.59

0.56
(.06)

High

4.3

─1.19

0.93
(.11)

Low

3.9

─0.41

0.37
(.09)

Middle

Women

4.1

─0.23

0.22
(0.07)

High

Regressions include variables for marital status, age and age2, linear and quadratic time trends, dummy variables for early, mid, and late segments
of SIPP panels, and seasonal dummies. Estimates employ sampling weights. Standard errors reflect clustering by monthly period. Low-wage for
men is hourly wage (Dec 2004 dollars) below $12.74. High-wage is greater than $18.80. The respective cutoffs for women are $10.42 and
$15.28.

─1.74

1.53
(.10)

Low

Percent response, relative to group’s mean, in
employment rate

↓ Dependent variable
Non-employment rate

Wage group →

Men

(Response of Dependent Variable to Aggregate Unemployment rate)

Table 7: Cyclicality of Employment and Unemployment by Long-term Wage

12.8%
6.2%
3.5%
3.1%

Separations of all kinds

Job to job transition

Return to employer

Out of employment,
not temporary
382,056 / 216

0.07
(.05)

0.09
(.07)

─0.51
(.14)

─0.35
(.16)

Response to
Unemployment Rate

3.9%

5.3%

5.9%

15.0%

Mean

416,369 / 216

0.002
(.07)

0.06
(.08)

─0.25
(.12)

─0.19
(.17)

Response to
Unemployment Rate

Women

Regressions in columns 2 and 4 control for years of schooling, marital status, age, age2, individual fixed effect in wage, monthly seasonals, linear
and quadratic time trends, and dummies variables for early, mid, and late segments of SIPP panels. Estimates employ sampling weights. Standard
errors (in parentheses) correct for clustering by the 240 monthly periods.

No. of observations

Mean

↓ Dependent variable

Men

Table 8: Cyclicality in Trimester Separation Rates

470,252

No. of observations

72,488

─1.78
(0.21)

New hires

397,764

─0.29
(0.15)

Other workers

504,771

─0.27
(0.14)

All workers

91,438

─1.23
(0.19)

New hires

Women

413,333

─0.10
(0.14)

Other workers

Estimation allows individual fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) correct for clustering by the 224 to 232 monthly periods. Regressions
control for age, age2, and monthly seasonals. Estimates employ sampling weights.

─0.49
(0.15)

Unemployment Rate

All workers

Men

Dependent variable is natural log of real wage

Table 9: Wage Cyclicality

72,485

0.44
(0.38)
─0.78
(0.33)
68,174

No. of observations

UR * Relative Wage

UR *Low Assets

No. of observations

372,293

─0.53
(0.17)

0.29
(0.24)

397,763

─1.65
(0.51)

Panel B

Panel A

Other workers

86,836

─0.68
(0.28)

0.67
(0.38)

91,431

─1.47
(0.32)

New hires

390,237

─0.13
(0.14)

0.66
(0.24)

413,332

─0.86
(0.29)

Other workers

Women

Estimation allows individual fixed effects. Standard errors correct for clustering by 224 to 232 monthly periods. Regressions control for age,
age2, and seasonals. In addition to reported variables, regressions include the unemployment rate and interactions of age and age2 with the
unemployment rate. Estimates employ sampling weights. The relative labor supplied reflects the worker’s measured fixed effect in labor, which
excludes the prior two months, current, and subsequent three months to the month determining the dependent variable. The relative wage reflects
the workers fixed effect in ln(wage). Low assets equals one if net wealth is not positive or unsecured debt is greater than 1000 hours of wages,
zero otherwise. 16.7% of the sample for men and 21.1% of the sample for women has low assets by this measure.

─1.93
(0.69)

UR * Relative Labor Supplied

New hires

Men

Dependent variable is natural log of real wage

Table 10: Wage Cyclicality across Workers

0.26
(0.13)

UR * Low Assets
358,524

381,052

─0.17
(0.13)

0.51
(0.16)

─0.53
(0.08)

No return to
employer

Panel B

Panel A

0.18
(0.13)

0.24
(0.17)

─2.42
(0.10)

394,246

413,197

Return to employer

Women

─0.20
(0.11)

0.78
(0.11)

─0.35
(0.05)

Not return to
employer

Standard errors correct for clustering by 208 to 216 monthly periods. Regressions additionally include the unemployment rate and controls for
years of schooling, marital status, age, age2, individual fixed effect in wage, dummy for low assets, monthly seasonals, linear and quadratic time
trends, and dummies variables for early, mid, and late segments of SIPP panels. Also included are interactions of each reported variable with
linear and quadratic trends and interactions of age and age2 with time trends and the unemployment rate. Estimates employ sampling weights.
The relative labor supplied reflects the worker’s measured fixed effect in labor, which excludes the prior two months, current, and subsequent
three months to the month determining the dependent variable. The relative wage reflects the workers fixed effect in ln(wage). Low assets equals
one if net wealth is not positive or if unsecured debt is greater than 1000 hours of wages, zero otherwise. 16.7% of the sample for men and 21.1%
of the sample for women has low wealth by this measure.

No. of observations

─0.40
(0.15)

─2.43
(0.10)

Return to employer

UR * Relative Wage

No. of observations

UR * Relative Labor Supplied

Dependent variable →

Men

Table 11: Cyclicality in Separations from Employment across Workers

wage

1.1

−1
−50

0

1

2

3

4

0.85
−50

0.9

0.95

1

1.05

W−U

0

0

50
asset

50
asset

100

100

150

150

−0.5
−50

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

0

50
asset

Figure 1: Steady State Value Functions and Wages (Benchmark)

J

100

150

0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

density
density

−3

0

20

0.95

x 10

40

1
x

60
a

80

1.05

µ(:,x)

100

120

µ(a,x=0.9695)
µ(a,x=1.0)
µ(a,x=1.0415)

0

1

2

3

4

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

density

0

−3

x 10

20

20

40

40

60
asset

60
a

80

80

120

100

120

x*(a)

100

µ(a,:)
ψ(a)

Figure 2: Steady State Distributions and Separation Decision Rules (Benchmark)

x*

separation rate
finding rate

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

20

20

40

40

60

60

80

80

100

100

120

120

140

140

160

160

180

180

Figure 3: Separation and Findings Rates (Benchmark)

200

200

220

log f
log u

220

log s
log u

240

240

−0.02
1980

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

−0.02
1980

1985

1985

1990

1995

2000

1990

2000

Labor fixed effect (right scale)

1995

Not Employed

−6

−0.01

−0.1
2005

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

−10
2005

−8

−4

−0.005

−0.015

−2

0

0

4

0.005

Unemp. Rate (left scale)

−3

x 10
6

2

Labor fixed effect (right scale)

Employed

0.01

0.015

0.02

Figure 4: Unemployment rate and fixed-effect in labor for employed and not employed

