NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYMENT LAW AND THE LABOR MARKET
Christine Jolls
Working Paper 13230
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13230

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

This paper is forthcoming as a chapter in the Handbook of Law and Economics. Thanks to Louis Kaplow,
Daniel Klaff, Cass Sunstein, and participants at the March 13, 2004, conference for contributors to
the Handbook for helpful comments and discussions, and to Kenneth Moon for outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Christine Jolls. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Employment Law and the Labor Market
Christine Jolls
NBER Working Paper No. 13230
July 2007
JEL No. J08,J18,J38,K00,K31,K32
ABSTRACT
Legal rules governing the employer-employee relationship are many and varied. Economic analysis
has illuminated both the efficiency and the effects on employee welfare of such rules, as described
in this paper. Topics addressed include workplace safety mandates, compensation systems for workplace
injuries, privacy protection in the workplace, employee fringe benefits mandates, targeted mandates
such as medical and family leave, wrongful discharge laws, unemployment insurance systems, minimum
wage rules, and rules requiring that employees receive overtime pay. Both economic theory and empirical
evidence are considered.
Christine Jolls
Yale Law School
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
christine.jolls@yale.edu

In a modern economy, individuals usually rely on paid work to meet their basic material
needs. The present paper is concerned with the economic analysis of laws governing this
ubiquitous employer-employee relationship. Such laws have proliferated in both number and
scope across nations, and economic analysis of these laws’ desirability and effects has
accordingly attracted significant attention.
Within a pervasively unionized economy, the body of what is referred to in the United
States as “labor law” plays an important role in regulating the employer-employee relationship.
This body of law governs the practices and treatment of labor unions. In countries with only
moderate levels of unionization, however, the central responsibility for legal regulation of the
employer-employee relationship falls to what is referred to in the United States as “employment
law.” Employment law governs the treatment of individual employees regardless of their union
status. Areas of regulation include workplace safety and privacy, employee fringe benefits,
workplace leave, job security, and the payment of wages. The present paper is concerned with
the economic analysis of these employment law rules.
An obvious but critical starting point in the economic analysis of employment law is that
legal regulation of the treatment of employees typically takes place against the backdrop of a
market relationship. This market relationship often imposes significant limits on the prospects
for using employment law purely for the purpose of transferring power, wealth, or other
entitlements to employees – although employment law is often enacted with such motives as the
law’s declared purpose. In the area of mandated leave from employment, for instance, if
employment law seeks to better employees’ situation by specifying minimum entitlements to
leave from work, it is possible that the end result will be to worsen employees’ situation as
wages or employment levels adjust in response to the new legal requirements. Because of the

1

way in which the market constrains the prospects for using employment law purely to effect
transfers of resources, the economic analysis of employment law in this paper gives primary
emphasis to market failures in the employer-employee relationship. In the presence of a market
failure, legal intervention through employment law may both enhance efficiency and make
employees better off.
This paper situates the major areas of employment law within this market-failure analytic
framework; importantly, it also identifies certain areas in which legal intervention may help
targeted employees even in the absence of market failure (sections VI and IX below). At the
broadest level, the paper seeks to describe both theoretically and empirically the degree to which
major forms of legal regulation of the employer-employee relationship may enhance efficiency
and make employees better off. Section I of the paper briefly presents the basic framework used
throughout much of the paper. Sections II-X consider specific areas of employment law,
including workplace safety regulation, privacy protection in the workplace, fringe benefits
mandates, targeted mandates such as medical and family leave, wrongful-discharge laws,
minimum wage requirements, and rules requiring overtime pay. A separate chapter of the
Handbook of Law and Economics (chapter 18, by John Donohue) considers antidiscrimination
requirements in employment law and other domains such as housing and education.

I.

Framework

As suggested above, the analysis in this paper rests on the assumption that employment
law operates to regulate market relationships between employers and employees. Obviously, it
is possible to organize an economy in which wages and conditions of employment are set not by

2

private actors in employment markets but instead by a central planner; such non-market settings
would naturally require a different analysis.
Within a market setting, when wages and conditions of employment are determined by
the interaction of labor supply and labor demand, legal intervention not tied to an identified
market failure will often, although not always, reduce both efficiency and employee welfare
(section I.A). However, a number of important market failures may characterize the employeremployee relationship (section I.B).

A.

Employment law in the absence of market failure
Most of the rules of employment law considered in this paper reflect the imposition of a

legally prescribed term governing the conditions of work into the parties’ employment contract.
This subsection describes the typical effects of such rules in the absence of market failure.
Section VI below shows how the analysis differs for rules that target the work conditions of
discrete, identifiable subgroups of employees. Note that the framework described here does not
apply to the rules establishing minimum wage and overtime pay requirements or to the rules
governing discharge of employees because these forms of legal regulation directly operate on the
wage or employment level in the regulated employment markets rather than on the conditions of
work; these forms of legal regulation are covered separately in sections VII - X below.
In speaking of legally prescribed terms within a contract, it is important to distinguish
between mandatory and default terms. Mandatory terms are ones that cannot be changed by the
parties even if they express a desire to do so. For instance, if the Occupational Safety and Health
Act (OSHA), which regulates workplace safety in the United States, requires that a particular
safety measure be adopted, employers and employees may not avoid the requirement simply by

3

agreeing through contract that it does not apply. Default terms, by contrast, are terms that apply
unless the parties reach a contrary agreement. Most employment law rules are mandatory rules,
and the analysis to follow assumes that the rule in question is a mandatory one. The specific
employment law rules discussed in the reminder of this paper are all mandatory ones.
The legally prescribed terms that employment law specifies for the employer-employee
relationship typically require employers to provide something of value – a safer workplace;
privacy; certain fringe benefits; leaves from work in specified circumstances – to employees.
Accordingly, within a simple labor supply and demand framework with no market failure of any
sort, these rules will produce a downward shift in the labor supply curve by the amount of the
value of the mandated benefit and a downward shift in the labor demand curve by the amount of
the cost of the mandated benefit (Summers 1989). These effects are depicted graphically in
Figure 1.
Within this simple framework, it is obvious that the effects of a particular employment
law rule on efficiency and employee welfare turn on the relative magnitude of the labor supply
and labor demand shifts. If the downward shift in the labor supply curve (S° to S' in Figure 1) is
less than the downward shift in the labor demand curve, then the wage will fall by more than the
value of the legally mandated benefit to employees in the employment market in question, and
employment (and, with it, efficiency and employee welfare) will fall (Figure 1, top panel). If, by
contrast, the downward shift in the labor supply curve is larger than the downward shift in the
labor demand curve, then the wage will fall by less than the value of the legally mandated benefit
to employees, and employment (and with it, efficiency and employee welfare) will rise (Figure 1,

4

bottom panel). But if that were the case, then, given the assumed lack of any form of market
failure, employers would have offered the benefit without any need for a legal mandate. 1
Thus, in the absence of market failure, employment law rules will generally reduce both
efficiency and employee welfare. However, employment markets may fail for a variety of
reasons. Section I.B below describes the most commonly discussed market failures in the
employer-employee relationship.

B.

Market failures in the employer-employee relationship
As described above, market failures provide an organizing paradigm for the analysis of

many major areas of employment law. A number of market failures may occur in the employeremployee relationship, as described below.

1.

Information failures

Of central importance in the employment setting are possible information failures.
Information failures occur when some market participants lack information that bears upon their
decisions in that market. In employer-employee relationships, both parties may suffer from
information failures.

1

This analysis assumes that there is no binding legally specified minimum wage in the employment
market in question. At least in the United States, the minimum wage is sufficiently low in most
jurisdictions that it is not binding in most employment markets. With a binding minimum wage (meaning
the market wage is near or below the legally prescribed minimum wage) the effects of legally mandated
terms would be felt in employment levels rather than wages.

5

a.

Employee-side information failures

Some aspects of the employment relationship are likely to be relatively transparent to
employees. Wages, for instance, are an aspect of the relationship about which employees will
usually have good information. By contrast, the magnitude of the risk of long-term occupational
disease is something about which employees will often not be well informed.
Employee-side information failures may be modeled in two distinct ways. One
possibility is that employees with limited information are aware of their informational limits and
take rational steps in response to those limits. As described below, this type of modeling
assumption is often adopted in analyzing employer-side information failures. A second
possibility is that employees with limited information either are not aware of their informational
limits or do not change their behavior in response to such awareness. This is the usual modeling
assumption adopted in analyzing employee-side information failures and is the assumption used
in this paper for analyzing such information failures.
If employees are unaware of some aspect of the employment relationship that would
affect their willingness to supply labor, then observed labor supply will differ from employees’
“true” willingness to supply labor. In the case of workplace safety, for instance, employees may
lack adequate information about risks and harms and, as a result, may oversupply labor at a given
wage rate. In terms of Figure 1 above, the labor supply curve is shifted toward S', and
employees behave as if their workplace were covered by an employment term fostering safety
even though it is not. In such cases, the information failure means that some transactions that
take place are inefficient – because the cost of supplying labor (measured by S° in Figure 1) in
these transactions exceeds the marginal revenue product of labor (measured by D°); it also means
that employees are worse off than they would be in a well-functioning market – because they are

6

engaging in some transactions in which the cost of supplying labor exceeds the wage they earn.
Employee-side information failures are discussed further in sections II (workplace safety) and IV
(workplace privacy) below.

b.

Employer-side information failures

Employers will frequently have only imperfect information about the attributes of their
employees. This is particularly likely to be true at the point of hiring but may be true later on as
well. A large literature in labor economics examines the consequences of such employer-side
imperfect information for labor markets (e.g. Greenwald 1986; Gibbons and Katz 1991).
As noted above, the usual modeling assumption in the case of an employer-side
information failure is that employers are aware of the limits on their information and respond
rationally to these limits. Thus, the employers’ information problem is typically modeled as a
situation of adverse selection. Employer-side information failures and the resulting adverse
selection problems are discussed further in sections V (fringe benefits mandates) and VII
(wrongful discharge law) below.

2.

Monopsony

A second failure in employment markets is monopsony power. (Because this paper is
focused on employment law rules that protect employees and does not examine labor law, the
paper does not discuss the alternative scenario of market power or monopoly on the employee
side.) If an employer is a monopsonist in the market for a particular type of employee, then
instead of taking the wage as given as in a competitive labor market, the individual employer
will face an upward-slowing labor supply curve. This employer will choose its employment

7

level E to maximize R(E) – w(E)E, where R(E) is the employer’s revenue and w(E) is the labor
supply curve. Under the associated first-order condition for the employer, it is clear that the
wage under monopsony falls short of the marginal revenue product of labor R′(E). This outcome
is inefficient, as well as detrimental to employee welfare, because some employees who would
produce more value than the cost of their labor are not hired. Section IX below notes the
familiar argument that minimum wage laws may respond to such monopsony-based market
failure – a point that, while of theoretical interest, is generally believed to have limited practical
importance.

3.

Externalities

A third potential failure in employment markets arises from the external effects of some
decisions by market participants. If, for instance, an employee is killed or injured on the job, it is
not only the employee (and possibly employer) who may suffer harm. Family members will
typically suffer, though employees may usually take such effects into account. Systems of social
support will often be affected as well. Although externalities are obviously a classic form of
market failure, they have received less attention than information failures and monopsony in the
existing literature on the economics of employment law and, thus, receive relatively limited
attention below.

4.

Employee-side cognitive bias

Information failures, market power, and externalities are the traditional forms of market
failure within conventional economic analysis. A separate set of potential market failures,

8

however, arises from the possibility that employees will exhibit distorted labor supply decisions
as a result of various forms of cognitive bias.
Of natural relevance to employment law is a substantial literature showing that many
individuals exhibit optimism bias, adjudging their personal probability of facing bad outcomes to
be lower than the average probability of facing such outcomes (Weinstein 1980). Many people,
for instance, believe that their chances of having an auto accident are significantly lower than the
average person’s chances of experiencing this event (DeJoy 1989), although of course these
beliefs cannot all be correct, for if everyone were below “average,” then the average would be
lower. There is also evidence that people underestimate their absolute as well as relative (to
other individuals) probability of experiencing negative events such as auto accidents (Arnould
and Grabowski 1981:34-35; Camerer and Kunreuther 1989:566).
From a modeling standpoint, optimism bias among employees is similar to the employeeside information failures discussed in section I.B.1 above. Parallel to the case of such
information failures, the most natural assumption, and the one that will be utilized in this paper,
is that employees with optimism bias either are not aware of the bias or do not change their
behavior in response to the bias. 2 Thus, as with information failures, if employees exhibit
optimism bias in relation to some aspect of the employment relationship that affects their
willingness to supply labor, then observed labor supply will differ from employees’ true
willingness to supply labor. In the case of workplace safety, for instance, optimism bias may
lead even employees who have full information about the general risks and harms in their
workplace to underestimate the probability that they personally will experience negative
2

Akerlof and Dickens (1982), by contrast, analyze workplace safety under the assumption that employees
are aware of their tendency to believe (in Akerlof and Dickens’s model, because of cognitive dissonance)
that the workplace is safer than it is. Because of such awareness, employees in their model take action in
response to their biased tendencies.

9

outcomes, and, as a result, they may oversupply labor. The effects of this were discussed in
section I.B.1 above. Optimism bias is discussed further in sections II (workplace safety) and IV
(workplace privacy) below.

II.

Workplace Safety Mandates

This section and the sections that follow analyze the major forms of legal regulation of
the employer-employee relationship, beginning with the legal regulation of workplace safety. A
few of the topics included in the sections to follow are already treated in some depth in the
Handbook of Labor Economics or the Handbook of Public Economics and, thus, are mentioned
only briefly here, with cross-references to the longer treatments in the existing Handbook
volumes. 3 Throughout, work published in law review, as opposed to economics journal, format
is described at greater length, on the theory that the typical degree of background and detailed
exposition provided in a law review article creates a form of barrier to entry that is not present
when reference is made to work published in economics journal format.
Because many individuals spend a substantial fraction of their waking hours at work and
often encounter risks in the course of work, workplace safety is a central issue of public policy.
Many features of employment law are concerned with enhancing workplace safety. Legal
regulation in this area includes both direct mandates of safe work conditions, as under the
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) in the United States, and indirect channels for

3

In areas not already covered in other Handbook chapters, the treatment offered below seeks to describe
and synthesize the most influential economic analyses in each major area of employment law, rather than
to catalogue in a comprehensive manner all existing economic analyses in each area.

10

improving workplace safety through the employer incentives created by mandated compensation
for workplace injuries. This section and section III consider these two basic approaches in turn. 4
The general starting point for economic analysis of workplace safety regulation is the
observation that in the absence of market failure, less safe working conditions should be fully
compensated by higher wages – an application of the theory of equalizing wage differentials. 5
Viscusi (1978) and Viscusi and O’Connor (1984), among others, present evidence of adjustments
in wages in response to workplace risks. The evidence on risk-based adjustments in wages,
however, is limited in two important ways. First, without some independent way of monetizing
the cost of a higher-risk job, at most the empirical evidence can tell us that wages move in a
particular direction in relation to risk; it cannot tell us whether wages adjust by the right amount
(given the employee’s underlying preferences) in light of workplace risks. Movement in one
direction or the other is ultimately a fairly weak test of the theory of equalizing wage
differentials. The second limitation is that sources of credible identification of empirical effects
are extremely difficult to find in this area because employees who select into different types of
jobs with different levels of associated risk may differ along important dimensions that are not
observed by the analyst; and moreover, the jobs into which employees select may also differ
along dimensions that are not observed by the analyst. If either individual or job characteristics
that are unobservable by the analyst are correlated with job risks, then correlations between risks
and wages may be entirely spurious. Employment law, not satisfied that equalizing wage

4

In addition to workplace safety mandates and mandated compensation for workplace injuries, general
tort law may have some effect on workplace safety incentives; however, such effects are limited by the
fact that, at least in the United States, workers’ compensation (discussed in section III) preempts most tort
liability for workplace injuries. See chapter 2, by Steven Shavell, in this Handbook for further discussion
of the economic analysis of tort law.
5
Brown (1980) offers a general treatment of the topic of equalizing wage differentials.

11

differentials fully address the issue of workplace safety, has chosen to regulate workplace safety
in both the direct and indirect ways noted above.

A.

Theoretical analysis of workplace safety mandates
The most direct form of workplace safety regulation is workplace safety mandates.

These mandates require particular workplace practices intended to enhance workplace safety. In
the United States, as previously noted, OSHA imposes a range of such mandates, which are
described in detail in Smith (1976) and Mendeloff (1979).
Within economic analysis, workplace safety mandates are typically justified on the
ground that either information failures or optimism bias on the part of employees leads them to
oversupply labor at a given wage rate. Frequently employees will not be aware of the risks of a
particular workplace, and even employees who have good information about the general risks of
their workplace may overoptimistically assume that those risks do not apply to them personally.
As noted in section I.B above, an oversupply of labor because of information failures,
optimism bias, or both means that some inefficient transactions are taking place and that
employees are worse off than they would be in a well-functioning market. Workplace injuries
may also have important externality effects, but the informational and cognitive problems have
been central in the existing literature. In the presence of such problems, workplace safety
mandates can in theory improve both efficiency and employee welfare by eliminating the
inefficient and detrimental (to employees) transactions described in section I.B. If observed
labor supply under a mandate matches the “true” willingness to supply labor (because the
workplace is safe, consistent with employees’ belief), then only efficient transactions will occur,
and employees will accept employment only to the extent that the wage equals or exceeds their

12

“true” cost of supplying labor. Of course, in the real world the mandated levels of workplace
safety may not match employees’ beliefs or may be exorbitantly expensive; responding to even a
genuine employee-side informational or cognitive problem does not guarantee that efficiency
and employee welfare will rise under a workplace safety mandate. Ultimately, the effects of a
workplace safety mandate are an empirical question. 6

B.

Empirical analysis of workplace safety mandates
As just noted, the central question about workplace safety mandates concerns their

empirical effects on wages, employment levels, and, of course, workplace safety. A large
empirical literature has attempted to identify such effects. 7 This literature has focused on
workplace injuries (in the sense of immediate negative health effects), as distinguished from
longer-term health risks from work; this focus is reflected in the discussion below. As the
discussion below will make clear, the overall body of empirical evidence suggests modest (at
best) effects of workplace safety mandates on observed levels of workplace safety, and,
presumably because of the limited evidence of effects on the basic level of workplace safety,
wage and employment effects of workplace safety mandates have generally not been studied.
Most of the empirical evidence on the effects of workplace safety mandates comes from the
United States, and that focus is reflected in the discussion below.
In sharp contrast to the workplace injury compensation systems noted in section III
below, workplace safety mandates in the United States operate at the federal level, and, as a

6

Not addressed in this discussion is the possibility that workplace safety mandates may affect the degree
of precautionary behavior by employees. Rea (1981) offers related discussion, although his analysis is
primarily focused on compensation systems for workplace injuries (the topic of the next section) rather
than on workplace safety mandates.
7
For a comprehensive survey of this literature through the early 1990s, see Smith (1992).

13

result of OSHA’s status as a federal law, state law variation generally cannot be used to identify
OSHA’s effects. 8 Limited exceptions to this statement about OSHA are Ruser and Smith (1988)
and Morantz (2005). Ruser and Smith examine the effects of the initiation of a records-check
procedure in some but not all states on the level of reported workplace injuries; they find a lower
level of reported injuries with the records-check procedure in place, but they are unable to
determine from their data whether this results from a true reduction in injury rates or (the
interpretation they emphasize) an increase in the frequency of underreporting because under the
records-check procedure underreporting would reduce the likelihood of costly safety inspections.
Ruser and Smith’s study is largely concerned with effects on reporting levels rather than the
more basic issue of effects on workplace safety. Meanwhile, Morantz’s (2005) work examines
how injury rates among construction workers vary with federal versus state enforcement of
OSHA’s substantive provisions and finds significantly lower injury rates in states with federal
enforcement. Although the injury rate data do not go back far enough to allow Morantz to
examine changes over time with the move from federal to state enforcement (so that, in contrast
to Ruser and Smith, identification is based on cross-state variation only, rather than variation
across both states and time), Morantz’s empirical approach does attempt to control
comprehensively for other cross-state differences, apart from federal versus state enforcement,
that could be influencing injury rates.

8

Much empirical work in employment law, including the work described in several of the sections below
as well as much work in the employment discrimination area (e.g., Neumark and Stock 1999; Jolls 2004a;
Jolls and Prescott 2006), exploits variation in legal innovation across states to identify the effects of legal
rules. With change over time but no cross-state variation – as with a federal law such as OSHA – it is
often difficult to disentangle the effects of the law’s enactment from other unobserved changes occurring
at the same time. Indeed, as Smith (1992) notes, even a simple national-level before-after comparison of
injury rates in relation to OSHA’s enactment is not possible because OSHA significantly changed the
manner of collecting data on workplace safety.

14

Other empirical work on OSHA has examined variation in its enforcement over time or
across industries (rather than across states) as a source of identification of the law’s effects on
workplace safety. In light of the low financial penalties for the typical OSHA violation and the
low likelihood of OSHA inspections (Viscusi 1979; Weil 1996), many have questioned whether
OSHA is likely to have any effect on workplace safety at all, regardless of variation in
enforcement within the low observed ranges of penalties and inspection frequencies. Viscusi
(1979) and Bartel and Thomas (1985), for instance, find limited or no relationship between
measures of OSHA enforcement and injury rates, while Viscusi (1986) finds at best a modest
relationship. 9
Scholz and Gray (1990) have suggested, however, that the limited effects of OSHA on
injury rates in many empirical studies reflect the overly generalized approach of these studies.
Scholz and Gray focus on the firms most likely to be affected by OSHA – large, frequently
inspected firms – and find significant effects of OSHA enforcement on injury rates in their
sample. Unlike earlier studies, Scholz and Gray’s study uses plant-level rather than industrylevel data on OSHA enforcement levels and injury rates. However, a recent study by Gray and
Mendeloff (2005) using a methodology similar to that in Scholz and Gray (1990) found that the
significant effects of OSHA on injury rates lasted only through the early 1990s and were not
apparent in data for most of the 1990s.
While the central variable of policy interest in studying OSHA’s effects is the workplace
injury rate, several studies have examined the relationship between the level of OSHA
enforcement and the degree of firms’ observed compliance with OSHA’s requirements. Bartel
and Thomas (1985) and Weil (1996), for instance, find evidence of significant effects of
9

See Viscusi (1983) for discussion of additional studies of OSHA’s effects on injury rates from the
period just after OSHA’s enactment.

15

enforcement on compliance with OSHA’s requirements, notwithstanding the general evidence,
noted above, of very limited levels of OSHA enforcement. By contrast, Weil (2001) finds only
limited effects of enforcement activity on compliance in the construction industry.
Ultimately, the existing empirical work provides relatively little evidence of effects of
OSHA on injury rates, with slightly more evidence of compliance effects. The lack of variation
across states has, not surprisingly, impeded efforts to pin down the effects of OSHA’s workplace
safety mandates more definitively. Although the theory suggesting the likelihood of market
failure in the workplace safety context seems strong, direct empirical evidence on the effects of
OSHA has, at least thus far, not provided a clear basis for concluding that this law has enhanced
efficiency and employee welfare or, even more basically, that the law has decreased workplace
injuries. As described below, the empirical picture on compensation systems for workplace
injuries – the other major employment law mechanism for improving workplace safety – is at
least somewhat more positive.

III.

Compensation Systems for Workplace Injuries

Employment law seeks to enhance workplace safety not only through direct safety
mandates, as under OSHA, but also through the deterrent effects afforded by legally mandated
systems of compensation for those injured on the job. In the United States, state workers’
compensation programs are a major source of such legally-mandated compensation. Injured
workers in the United States may also be eligible for compensation through the federal disability
insurance program, but the absence of any experience-rating component in this program means
that it does not create any particular deterrent effects for employers. The disability insurance
program, which is funded through compulsory payroll deductions by employers, is nonetheless a

16

significant additional source of compensation for employees injured at work and, thus, is usually
included in analyses of compensation systems for workplace injuries.
Both the theory and the empirical evidence relating to workers’ compensation systems
are developed in chapter 33 (by Krueger and Meyer) of the Handbook of Public Economics, and
the federal disability insurance program is also extensively discussed in that chapter; thus the
reader is referred to Krueger and Meyer’s treatment for further discussion of the economic
analysis of these programs. In brief, Krueger and Meyer conclude that the empirical evidence
suggests longer periods out of work with more generous workers’ compensation benefits (a
finding with ambiguous welfare consequences, as noted by Krueger and Meyer); they also note
the work by Gruber and Krueger (1991) suggesting no statistically significant reduction in
aggregate employment levels from increases in the generosity of workers’ compensation
programs (a finding suggestive of the absence of significant welfare costs from these programs,
although not of affirmative efficiency gains from the programs). Meanwhile, with respect to the
federal disability insurance program, Krueger and Meyer emphasize the unresolved question of
what causes the observed major changes in the size of the population receiving federal disability
insurance payments, a topic of ongoing research (e.g., Autor and Duggan 2003).

IV.

Workplace Privacy Mandates

A very rapidly growing area of employment law – particularly with the increasing
presence of computers and the associated monitoring possibilities in the workplace – is
workplace privacy. Issues of workplace privacy span a broad array of domains. Questions
include the degree to which employers may videotape or audiotape their employees’ activities in
the workplace, the restrictions (if any) on drug and alcohol testing of employees, the degree to

17

which employers may engage in various forms of monitoring of employees’ activities on
computers, and the limits on employers’ disclosure of medical and other personal information
about employees. Workplace privacy mandates require employers to conduct activities of this
sort in specified ways, if at all. This section briefly highlights the central issues in the economic
analysis of such workplace privacy mandates.

A.

Theoretical analysis of workplace privacy mandates
From an economic standpoint, the possible market failures in the workplace privacy

setting parallel the main potential market failures in the workplace safety context. One potential
market failure is an employee-side information failure; for some forms of privacy-related
employer behavior, the employee may simply have no idea that the behavior is occurring.
Employees may assume that their privacy is protected at work, just as they may assume that their
workplace is safe. Examples in the privacy context include video or audio monitoring and the
monitoring of employees’ computers – practices of which employees may be entirely unaware.
In other settings, by contrast, an employee may know when a particular invasion of privacy
occurs; an example is urine testing for drug use – an employer practice that obviously cannot be
done without the employee’s knowledge.
Even employees who have accurate information about an employer’s general practices in
relation to workplace privacy may be led by optimism bias to underestimate the likelihood that
the at-issue employer behavior will be undertaken in relation to, or have a negative effect upon,
them as opposed to other employees. The analysis is again parallel to the workplace safety
context, in which employees may underestimate their personal likelihood of workplace risks.
Note that in the workplace privacy context, the risks of market failure related to optimism bias

18

will tend to be greater when there is more uncertainty in the employer’s policy. For instance,
employees may underestimate the likelihood that they will be subjected to a drug test under an
employer policy permitting drug testing of employees involved in a workplace accident, simply
because employees may tend to underestimate the likelihood that they will be involved in such
an accident. By contrast, if an employer policy provides that employees will be subjected to
ongoing video or audio monitoring as a matter of course, then optimism bias is likely to be less
important – though optimistically biased employees could still underestimate the likelihood that
the monitoring will detect a prohibited behavior on their part.
Parallel to the discussion of workplace safety in section II.A above, a workplace privacy
mandate may address an employee-side information failure or cognitive bias by eliminating the
gap between observed labor supply and the “true” willingness to supply labor (because privacy is
now protected at the workplace, consistent with employees’ expectation). Of course, as above,
whether any given workplace privacy mandate actually has positive effects on efficiency and
employee welfare is ultimately an empirical question.

B.

Empirical analysis of workplace privacy mandates
Very little empirical evidence currently exists on the effects of workplace privacy

mandates. However, in the case of the United States, the existence of variation in these
mandates across states and time suggests the potential value of empirical inquiry in this area.
Whether wages and employment levels would ever move to a discernible degree in response to
workplace privacy mandates is unclear, but effects on observable outcomes other than wages and
employment levels may be easier to detect. Jacobson (2003), for instance, presents evidence of
better safety outcomes in safety-sensitive occupations in states that enacted legislation clarifying

19

the permissibility of drug testing for safety-sensitive positions than in states that did not enact
such legislation. There is some suggestion of preexisting trends in the enacting states, so the
results should be viewed with some caution, but Jacobson also finds improved safety outcomes
after the imposition of federally mandated drug testing for certain safety-sensitive positions.
Jacobson’s findings suggest that some forms of workplace privacy mandates (especially in the
drug testing context) may have the unfortunate effect of worsening safety outcomes. Additional
empirical work on the effects of workplace privacy mandates is likely to appear as these
mandates become increasingly common.

V.

Fringe Benefits Mandates

Employers may be responsible not only for improved workplace conditions – including
safety and privacy – but also for the provision of important fringe benefits. Fringe benefits are
usually understood to include such benefits as health insurance and pensions. The present
section focuses on the legal regulation of health insurance, the great majority of which is
provided through the employment relationship (although this is less true outside the United
States). Pension-related mandates are not considered in this paper because there is very little
existing literature on the effects of such mandates on wages, employment levels, or other labor
market outcomes. 10
With respect to health insurance mandates, the Medicare program in the United States
requires compulsory payroll deductions by employers and offers government-provided health

10

The central law governing pensions in the United States is the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act, a federal law that broadly displaces potential state-level regulation of pensions and, thus, leaves little
opportunity for credible identification (through state-level variation in legal innovation) of the effects of
legal regulation of pensions. See Ippolito (1988) for further discussion of the effects of the pensionrelated mandates imposed at the federal level.

20

insurance to (primarily) retirement-aged individuals. Under this program, individuals see a
deduction from their paychecks during their working years and then are entitled to health
insurance financed by the federal government during their retirement. 11 The Medicare system is
discussed in chapter 50 (by Currie and Madrian) of the Handbook of Labor Economics and
chapter 31 (by Cutler) of the Handbook of Public Economics, and the reader is referred to those
volumes for further discussion of this system. Because the Medicare system is covered in those
volumes, the focus of the present section is other types of health insurance mandates.
Both federal and state law in the United States play a role in structuring the system of
health insurance mandates considered in this section. The federal role here is two-fold. First, the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) broadly “preempts,” or renders
inapplicable, all state-level health insurance mandates insofar as employer-provided health
insurance is concerned, unless the employer-provided insurance is procured from an insurance
company. Thus, any employer that self-insures – as many now do – is not subject to any health
insurance mandates imposed at the state level. Second, federal law imposes a few limited
mandates on health insurance plans. One such mandate is contained in the Consolidated
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA), which requires that, above a certain employersize threshold, employees be allowed to continue purchasing health insurance through their
former employer for up to 18 months after leaving that employer. A second source of federal
health insurance mandates is the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA),

11

By contrast, the Medicaid program in the United States is targeted to the needy and is not linked to the
employment relationship in any way.

21

which imposes a variety of requirements on employers and other health insurance providers,
including mandated coverage for preexisting conditions.12
State-level health insurance mandates, to the extent that their application is not preempted
by ERISA, also impose a variety of requirements on health insurance plans; for instance, some
state laws impose continuation coverage mandates similar to the mandate in COBRA (see
Gruber and Madrian 1994). State-level regulation is discussed briefly below where its mandates
overlap with federal requirements, but, because of the preemption issue noted above, the focus of
this section is on federal health insurance mandates. 13

A.

Theoretical analysis of fringe benefits mandates
Several potential market failures, including employee-side information failures and

cognitive biases, may be relevant to analysis of the health insurance mandates noted just above,
but perhaps the most obvious labor market failure in this context involves employer-side
imperfect information. (For discussion of the broader issue of provision of health insurance
through, rather than independently of, the employment relationship, see chapter 50 (by Currie
and Madrian) of the Handbook of Labor Economics.) For instance, an individual employer
opting unilaterally to offer continuation coverage of the sort required by COBRA might
disproportionately attract employees who are less likely to remain employed (especially those
who simultaneously have concerns about their future health) and, thus, who are particularly

12

Moreover, recently enacted HIPAA regulations impose a series of privacy-related requirements on
employers concerning the disclosure of medical information; those requirements may be analyzed under
the framework set forth in section IV (workplace privacy) above. An additional federal law regulating
health insurance is the Mental Health Parity Act. For the reasons given in section VI below, this law is
best viewed as a targeted mandate and, thus, is discussed in section VI rather than here.
13
Economic analyses of the effects of various state-level health insurance mandates include Gruber
(1994b), Kaestner and Simon (2002), and Simon (2005). Chapter 31 (by Cutler) in the Handbook of
Public Economics also contains discussion of these mandates.

22

focused on the issue of continuation coverage. In broad terms, the problem of adverse selection
here is similar to the problem – described in detail in section VII.A below – faced by an
individual employer opting to offer protection against discharge from employment without just
cause. In both cases, offering the benefit may make the employer disproportionately attractive to
less desirable employees. 14
In the health insurance context, if the value to employees of a particular form of health
insurance coverage (such as continuation coverage) exceeds the cost of providing such coverage,
then mandating such coverage may efficiently respond to the adverse selection problem just
described. Of course, in the case of continuation coverage, employers in an ideal world might
offer not this type of coverage but, instead, employee-specific packages of wages and health
insurance tailored to each employee’s individual costs and needs (Gruber and Madrian 1994).
However, as Gruber and Madrian note, the barriers to such an approach – whether achieved
voluntarily or through legal regulation – in the real world are clear, and thus mandated
continuation coverage, as under COBRA, may be a good second-best solution. Empirical
evidence on the effects of both mandated continuation coverage and mandated coverage for
preexisting conditions is noted in the next section.

B.

Empirical analysis of fringe benefits mandates
Empirical evidence on the effects of continuation coverage mandates on a variety of

employment-related outcomes is discussed in chapter 50 (by Currie and Madrian) of the
Handbook of Labor Economics; the discussion there of the studies by Gruber and Madrian
(1994, 1995, 1996, 1997) of both COBRA and state-level continuation coverage mandates is
14

Aghion and Hermalin (1990) offer general discussion of the problem of adverse selection in employeremployee and other contracting releationships.

23

especially relevant. On balance, continuation coverage mandates appear to increase both
separation and retirement from work by employees; effects on overall wage and employment
levels (which would permit conclusions about the welfare effects of continuation coverage
mandates) presumably were not large enough to be studied empirically.
With respect to preexisting conditions coverage mandates, chapter 31 (by Cutler) of the
Handbook of Public Economics discusses the effects of various state-level health insurance
mandates, including preexisting condition coverage mandates, on health insurance coverage
rates. In addition, in the time since this volume of the Handbook of Public Economics was
published, studies by Kaestner and Simon (2002) and Simon (2005) have also examined the
effects of state-level health insurance mandates, including preexisting condition coverage
mandates, while recent work by Sanz-de-Galdeano (2006) studies the effects of HIPAA, which
(as noted above) includes a preexisting conditions coverage mandate. The body of existing
empirical work suggests that these mandates have limited or no effects on insurance coverage
rates, wage and employment levels, or other outcomes. 15

VI.

Targeted Mandates

While the employment law mandates discussed in sections II through V above are
mandates predominantly directed to employees as a whole rather than to any discrete subgroup
of employees, other employment law mandates are targeted to particular demographic
subgroups. Indeed, many employment law mandates – including certain aspects of employment
15

Note that although the primary focus of the empirical literature on health insurance mandates is on
outcomes other than overall wage and employment levels, insofar as overall wage and employment levels
are concerned, the framework described in section I.A above may require some adjustment when
analyzing the effects of health insurance mandates. This is so because the cost of health insurance is
likely to vary with the number of employees rather than, as depicted in Figure 1 above, with the number
of total worker-hours; in other words, the distribution of worker-hours over employees may matter greatly
in the health insurance context. Cutler and Madrian (1998) offer further discussion of this point.

24

discrimination law as well as employment law rules such as mandated workplace leave
(emphasized below) – are targeted in this way. The direct effects of these targeted mandates will
be felt primarily or exclusively by demographic subgroups of employees, such as individuals
with disabilities, women, or members of particular racial groups, rather than by employees as a
whole (Gruber 1994a).
Of course, no benefits mandate may be entirely untargeted; many mandates, including at
least some of those discussed above, may tend to benefit some demographic groups within a
given employment market more than others within this market. Thus, the difference between
general and targeted mandates is probably best viewed as a difference in degree rather than a
difference in kind.
The importance of distinguishing between general and targeted mandates arises from the
fact that the subgroups to which targeted mandates are directed are generally groups whose
wages and employment opportunities are legally required to match those of the nontargeted
employees. In the absence of such requirements (or if such requirements were not binding), 16 the
targeted subgroup could simply be treated as a separate labor market, and the same basic sort of
analysis as was discussed in sections II through V above would continue to apply. However, in
the presence of binding restrictions on differential treatment across groups, the analysis of
targeted mandates proves to be quite different from the analysis employed until this point in the
paper. As described more fully below, employment law mandates targeted to demographic
subgroups of employees constitute an important exception to the general focus in this paper on
market failures as a necessary condition for employment law regulation to enhance employee
welfare. If the goal of a targeted mandate is to enhance the welfare of targeted employees – as it
16

More precisely, if restrictions on wage differentials between the two groups were not binding. See Jolls
(2000) for further discussion.

25

often is – then the desired result may obtain wholly apart from any sort of market failure – a
point obscured by the common focus in the literature on the standard mandated benefits
framework even when analyzing targeted mandates. 17 In light of this observation, and for the
sake of analytic clarity, the present section will analyze targeted mandates on the assumption of
no market failure of any sort. The analysis below could readily be adjusted to incorporate
market failure in combination with a targeted rather than general mandate. As above, empirical
analysis follows the theoretical analysis.

A.

Theoretical analysis of targeted mandates
With a targeted mandate and no market failure of any sort, labor supply with the mandate

in place will shift exclusively or disproportionately for the targeted employees, rather than (as in
section I.A above) for employees as a whole. Meanwhile, on the employer side, the total
marginal revenue product of labor (reflecting, among other things, the cost of the mandated
benefit) will shift exclusively or disproportionately for the targeted group. If, for instance,
employers are legally required to provide leave from work following the birth of a child, as they
are in many countries, then both the willingness to supply labor and the total marginal revenue
product of labor are likely to shift disproportionately for female employees. 18
Because of the differential effects of a targeted mandate across groups of employees, it is
important for purposes of the analysis of such mandates to separate out two distinct labor
markets: the market for employees targeted by the mandate and the market for the remaining
17

See Jolls (2000) for further discussion of this point.
For expositional ease, the analysis below will assume that the mandated benefit has value only to the
targeted group and imposes costs only in connection with that group. However, the conclusions offered
below would remain qualitatively uncharged if the mandate had some value beyond the targeted group
(although less than the value to the targeted group); the same is true if the mandate imposed some cost
beyond the targeted group (although less than the cost for the targeted group).

18

26

employees. Each market will have its own labor supply and demand functions (although, as
described below, the demand functions will end up being the same if restrictions on wage and
employment differentials are binding). And, because the demand for employees of one type
will depend, among other things, on the demand for employees of the other type, it will no
longer be possible to represent everything of interest on a single, two-dimensional labor supply
and demand diagram, as in Figure 1.
The following notation will be used below:
Et = employment level of targeted employees;
Wt = wage level of targeted employees;
En = employment level of nontargeted employees;
Wn = wage level of nontargeted employees;
C (> 0) = per-worker-hour cost of providing mandated benefit to targeted employees;
V = per-worker-hour value of mandated benefit to targeted employees;
MRPL = per-worker-hour marginal revenue product of labor from production.
Prior to the imposition of a targeted mandate, the wages earned by targeted and
nontargeted employees will be given by Wt = Wn = MRPL(Et + En). Meanwhile, labor supply
for the two groups of employees prior to the imposition of a targeted mandate may be written as
follows:
Et = St(Wt)
En = Sn(Wn)
Let (Wt°, Wn°, Et°, En°) with Et° > 0 and En° > 0 denote an interior solution to this system.
After the imposition of a targeted mandate, labor supply for the two groups of employees
will be given by the following equations:
Et = St(Wt + V);
En = Sn(Wn).

(1)
(2)

However, labor demand after the imposition of the mandate will depend on the degree to which
restrictions on wage and employment differentials are binding. One possibility is that

27

restrictions on wage differentials are not binding (and restrictions on employment differentials
are or are not binding); in this case, as noted above, a targeted mandate may be analyzed within
the basic type of framework used in sections II through V above. 19 A second possibility is that
restrictions on wage differentials are binding while restrictions on employment differentials are
not; in this case targeted employees will effectively be more expensive to employ (as they must
earn the same wage but cost the employer more), and employers will thus tend to reduce their
hiring of targeted employees. The most interesting possibility, and the one that will be
examined in the remainder of this section, occurs when restrictions on both wage and
employment differentials are binding. In this case there must not be any difference between the
wages or employment opportunities of targeted and nontargeted employees within a given
employment market; employers must pay each type of employee the same wage and must
demand each type in proportion to its willingness to supply labor at that wage.
With binding restrictions on wage and employment differentials, the common wage W
for the two groups of employees after the imposition of the mandate will be given by:
W = [Et/(Et + En)][MRPL(Et + En) – C] + [En/(Et + En)]MRPL(Et + En).
Rewriting:
W = MRPL(Et + En) – [Et/(Et + En)]C.

(3)

The equation in (3), together with the labor supply equations in (1) and (2), yields a system of
three equations in three unknowns; let (W*, Et*, En*) denote a solution to this system.
As (3) shows, a targeted mandate will affect labor demand both as a result of the
mandate’s effect on MRPL through changes in Et + En and as a result of the direct cost C of the
mandated benefit. With respect to the former effect, it is straightforward to show that because

19

See Jolls (2000) for further discussion.

28

of the downward pressure on labor demand as a result of the cost of the mandated benefit, the
employment level of nontargeted employees will fall with the mandate: En* < En°. 20
Intuitively, the mandate, by requiring employers to incur costs for targeted employees that
nontargeted employees will have to share as a consequence of the binding restrictions on wage
and employment differentials, induces marginal nontargeted employees to exit the market. This
relationship between En* and En° in turn allows one to depict the effects of a targeted mandate
on the wages and employment of targeted employees in simple graphical form in a figure
(Figure 2) similar to Figure 1 from above.
In Figure 2, the curve Dt° is the pre-mandate labor demand curve for targeted employees
at the pre-mandate equilibrium level of nontargeted employment (En°). Thus, the curve Dt° is
given by W = MRPL(Et + En°). Meanwhile, the curve Dt' is given by the following equation:
W = MRPL(Et + En°) – [Et/(Et + En*)]C.
The curve Dt' thus depicts the effect of the shift due to the cost of the mandated benefit after the
mandate is imposed; the MRPL term is ignored by assuming that the marginal revenue product
of labor from production as a function of targeted employment (Et) is the same pre-and postmandate (MRPL(Et + En°) in both cases). Because, as noted above, En* < En°, it is
straightforward to see that the ultimate post-mandate labor demand curve for targeted
employees, with En = En*, must lie above the curve Dt' in Figure 2.
We are now in a position to assess the effects of a targeted mandate on the wages and
employment levels of targeted employees. As the discussion in section I.A above suggests, it is
useful to separate the analysis into distinct cases based on the relationship between the value
and the cost of the mandated benefit. The straightforward case is the one in which the value of

20

See Jolls (2000) for details.

29

the mandated benefit equals or exceeds its cost. 21 In this case, not surprisingly, the targeted
employees’ wage will fall by less than the value of the mandated benefit, while their
employment level will rise, as depicted in Figure 2.
The more interesting case is the one in which the value of the mandated benefit is less
than its cost. In this case it is no longer certain that targeted employees will be better off after
the mandate is imposed, but it remains likely; as long as the fraction of nontargeted individuals
in the qualified population is not too small, and the gap between the value and the cost of the
mandated benefit is not too large, a targeted mandate will always make targeted employees
better off. If, for example, nontargeted employees constitute the vast majority of the
employment market in question, then the fall in the total marginal revenue product of labor for
all employees in that market with the imposition of a targeted mandate will be small, as the
average cost of the mandated benefit across the employment market will be small. And the
smaller the downward shift in the total marginal revenue product of labor as a result of the
mandated benefit cost, the smaller the gap between the curves Dt° and Dt' in Figure 2, and hence
the lower the likelihood that this gap will exceed the downward shift in the labor supply curve
(St° to St'). As long as the downward shift in the labor supply curve equals or exceeds the gap
between Dt° and Dt' over the relevant range of employment levels, the wage of targeted
employees will fall by less than the value of the mandated benefit, while their employment level
will rise.

21

In the absence of any market failure – the assumption maintained throughout this section – a benefit
whose value equals or exceeds its cost might, but conceivably would not, be provided in the absence of a
mandate. Because the benefit accrues exclusively or disproportionately to targeted employees, it seems
possible that the benefit would not be provided (with binding restrictions on wage and employment
differentials) even if the value of the benefit exceeded its cost. This issue is not analyzed rigorously here,
however.

30

Thus, targeted mandates may be justifiable on distributive grounds even when the cost of
the mandated benefit exceeds its value. 22 In the case of general mandates, by contrast,
distributive considerations cannot justify legal intervention when the cost of the mandated
benefit exceeds its value because, as noted in section I.A above, the employees’ wage will fall
by more than the value of the benefit to them. This effect occurs because there is no other group
to whom to shift costs. But with targeted mandates, even if the value of the mandated benefit is
less than its cost, the mandate may make targeted employees better off because nontargeted
employees will bear some of the associated cost.
The point about potential distributive gains wholly apart from market failure is especially
important because the fact that the value of a mandated benefit is less than its cost may reflect
precisely the undesirable distributive situation that employment law seeks to remedy. The
reason is that “value” in this framework is measured by employees’ willingness to pay for the
benefit by accepting lower wages, and the distributive situation of targeted employees might
preclude them from accepting lower wages (see generally Dworkin 1980). If, for instance, a
mandate requires employers to provide medical leave to employees with serious medical
problems, the value (measured by willingness to pay) of this benefit to the targeted employees
may be limited not by the utility of the leave to these employees but by their financial position.
Mandated medical leave is discussed further in the next section.

22

Of course, distributive goals might alternatively be achieved through a tax-and-transfer regime (Kaplow
and Shavell 1994).

31

B.

Empirical analysis of targeted mandates
As suggested above, some targeted mandates arise under employment discrimination law

and, for that reason, are not analyzed further in this paper. 23 The primary employment law
application of the analysis of targeted mandates is workplace leave mandates, which at least in
the United States arise under employment law outside of what is generally considered
employment discrimination law. 24 Workplace leave mandates in the United States
disproportionately target both disabled employees (through mandated entitlement to medical
leave) and female employees (through mandated entitlement to leave following the birth of a
child). 25 These two aspects of mandated workplace leave are considered in turn below. 26

1.

Mandated medical leave

As noted above, the wage and employment effects of a targeted mandate depend
significantly on the degree to which restrictions on wage and employment differentials between
targeted and nontargeted employees are binding. Starting with restrictions on wage differentials,
such restrictions are likely to be binding in the absence of significant occupational segregation
23

Disability discrimination law, for instance, requires employers to make “reasonable accommodations”
for disabling conditions – a mandate targeted to employees with disabilities (Acemoglu and Angrist
2001). Similarly, to the extent that sex discrimination law requires health insurance coverage of
maternity-related medical costs, it imposes a mandate targeted to female employees (Gruber 1994a)
24
The Family and Medical Leave Act, which requires employers to provide employees with leave from
work under specified conditions, is not part of any of the employment discrimination statutes in the
United States and is administered by the Department of Labor rather than the agency (the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission) that administers employment discrimination statutes.
25
Mandated leave following the birth of a child is targeted to female employees even though leave is
typically available to male employees because female employees who have biological children will
require at least a brief period of time off from work after a birth to recover from the temporary disability
associated with giving birth and, thus, will almost certainly (for purely biological reasons) be more likely
than male employees to take leave.
26
Another targeted mandate in the United States is the Mental Health Parity Act, which requires that
coverage of mental and physical conditions under health insurance plans be comparable in certain
respects. Because this law is generally believed to be of modest practical impact, it seems unlikely to be
the source of observable empirical effects.

32

between targeted and nontargeted groups. Legal restrictions on wage differentials are generally
fairly easy to enforce (e.g., Posner 1987), and, moreover, employers may have incentives to
adhere to norms of pay equity wholly apart from legal restrictions because of the potential
morale problems that can result from inequity in wages between different groups performing the
same work.
In the case of mandated entitlement to medical leave, the group of employees
disproportionately (though of course not exclusively) targeted by such a mandate is employees
with disabilities, some of whom will be significantly more likely to require leave than
nondisabled employees. With respect to occupational segregation, at least in the United States
employees with disabilities are not significantly segregated, so restrictions on wage differentials
between employees with and without disabilities are likely to bind.
Likewise, with respect to restrictions on employment differentials, while these
restrictions are unlikely to bind directly for employees with and without disabilities because of
the difficulty of enforcing such restrictions (e.g., Posner 1987), the ultimate effect may be the
same in analyzing mandated entitlement to medical leave because many of the conditions for
which such leave will be required are unobservable to employers at the time of hiring and, thus,
cannot be the basis of differential employment decisions (Jolls 2006). In this case, the analysis
in section VI.A above predicts that mandated entitlement to medical leave will increase both
wages and employment levels of employees with disabilities, unless either the fraction of
targeted individuals in the qualified population is too large or the cost of the leave significantly
exceeds its value. In the United States, because medical leave under the Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) is unpaid, it seems unlikely that the cost of this benefit significantly exceeds
its value.

33

A straightforward empirical measure of the wage and employment effects of mandated
entitlement to medical leave under the FMLA on employees with disabilities is a comparison of
wages and employment levels of such individuals before and after the FMLA went into effect –
ideally with an additional comparison between states in which mandated entitlement to medical
leave under the FMLA was an innovation and those in which it was not. Both approaches
suggest neutral to positive effects of mandated entitlement to medical leave on disabled
employment levels (relative to nondisabled employment levels), with the most credible evidence
suggesting positive effects (Jolls 2006). This evidence underlines the prospects for positive
effects of targeted mandates on the employment opportunities of targeted employees, consistent
with the theoretical analysis offered in section VI.A above.

2.

Mandated leave following the birth of a child

As noted above, relatively limited degrees of occupational segregation (as in the case of
employees with and without disabilities in the United States) suggest that restrictions on wage
differentials will be binding. But in the case of male and female employees – the groups likely
to be disparately affected by mandated entitlement to leave following the birth of a child –
employment markets remain quite segregated. 27 With substantial occupational segregation,
restrictions on wage differentials will tend to be of little force because the only comparisons that
are drawn in the law are those between employees within the same employment market (or, more
technically, those performing the same or similar work). As noted above, in the absence of

27

See chapter 25 (by Blau and Kahn) in the Handbook of Labor Economics for further discussion of
occupational segregation by sex.

34

binding restrictions on wage differentials, an analysis similar to that used in sections II through V
above remains applicable to the case of a targeted mandate. 28
Mandated entitlement to leave from work following the birth of a child exists in a wide
array of countries and has been extensively studied. Waldfogel (1999), for instance, examines
female employees’ wages and employment levels in the aftermath of the FMLA’s enactment in
the United States and finds no consistent pattern of statistically significant results. The lack of
clear results may stem in part from the fact that, as Waldfogel notes, many female employees
were entitled (by state legislation or firm policy) to FMLA-type benefits following the birth of a
child even prior to the FMLA’s enactment.
Another test of the effects of mandated entitlement to leave following the birth of a child
comes from looking at the effects of European leave laws. Ruhm (1998), for instance, finds that
the length of the leave period under these laws generally is negatively related to the wages of
female employees and positively related to their employment levels. Note that because
employees’ leave is paid, in contrast to the situation under the FMLA, positive employment
effects are more likely under the European laws, which are presumably valued more by
employees than the FMLA because of the paid nature of the leave. (Negative labor demand
effects of paid leave are blunted by government rather than employer financing of the leave.)
An exception to the general pattern of Ruhm’s findings is that the effect of having some
mandated leave versus none – as distinguished from the effect of having a short mandated leave
versus a long mandated leave – has no statistically significant effect (rather than a statistically
significant negative effect) on wages of female employees. This may result from the fact that a
28

Of course, very few employment markets are actually perfectly segregated, so that there is absolutely
no opportunity to compare targeted and nontargeted employees’ wage levels. Jolls (2000) provides
further discussion of the reasons that markets with significant segregation are nonetheless most naturally
modeled as markets in which restrictions on wage differentials are not binding.

35

short leave, as opposed to a long leave, imposes relatively few costs on employers, and thus
provides little occasion for a wage adjustment. 29
Overall, the empirical evidence on mandated entitlement to leave following the birth of a
child suggests neutral to positive employment effects – the same broad pattern as with mandated
entitlements to medical leave. Wage effects, by contrast, appear more negative with mandated
leave after the birth of a child – a likely consequence of the degree of occupational segregation
by sex. Note, however, that because sex (in contrast to many medical conditions) is easily
observable to employers, decreasing occupational segregation by sex over time is more likely to
generate job losses from mandated entitlement to leave following the birth of a child (as wage
adjustments are precluded by decreased segregation) than to produce the benefits for targeted
employees that may come from mandated entitlement to medical leave.

VII.

Wrongful Discharge Laws

One of the most fundamental issues in employment law involves the general conditions
under which employers may engage in “the industrial equivalent of capital punishment” by
discharging an employee. 30 In many countries, a pervasive set of laws limits the conditions
under which employees may be discharged without attendant legal obligations (e.g., Blau and
Kahn 1999). In the United States, by contrast, a sharply different approach prevails; an
employee may generally be fired at any time, without identification of any reason whatsoever for
the discharge and without any attendant employer obligations, unless either the employee’s
29

An important subtlety in discerning the effects of mandated entitlement to leave following the birth of
a child is that, as Waldfogel (1998, 1999) emphasizes, such mandates may have a sort of composition
effect, moving female employees into, or keeping them in, better, higher-level jobs. If this is so, then the
aggregate effects of the mandates may be more mixed and more complex than the effects suggested by
the theoretical framework described above.
30
The quoted phrase comes from Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Reis, 451 U.S. 401 (1981).

36

contract specifically provides otherwise or the discharge reflects unlawful discrimination or
some other unusually arbitrary or abusive basis for decision (Kim 1997). Only one of the fifty
United States (Montana) departs from this regime of “at will” employment. The United States
does have an unemployment insurance system, which is a limited form of employment protection
and is discussed in the next section, but (outside of Montana) there is no general requirement that
employers offer any sort of justification when discharging an employee and no general set of
employer financial obligations attending such discharges. 31
The issue of the scope of wrongful discharge laws – defined for purposes of this paper as
laws requiring a threshold level of justification before employers may discharge employees –
does not fit well within the framework described in section I.A above because, in contrast with
the legal rules discussed in the preceding sections, the legal regulation here is directly linked to
the employment level. (In the case of the legal rules governing workplace safety, workplace
privacy, and various types of employee benefits such as health insurance and workplace leave,
the rules affect the wage and employment levels only indirectly through the shifts in labor supply
and marginal revenue product of labor they will produce.) The analysis below first provides
theoretical discussion of the labor market effects and the efficiency of wrongful discharge laws;
it then notes evidence from empirical studies of these laws.

A.

Theoretical analysis of wrongful discharge laws
1.

Labor market effects of wrongful discharge laws

In general, wrongful discharge laws have competing potential effects on the employment
level. On the one hand, they potentially increase employment because they impose barriers to
31

For further discussion of current law governing discharge from employment in the United States, see
Kim (1997).

37

firing. On the other hand, these very barriers may discourage the hiring of employees in the first
place. Models of these types of competing effects are discussed in chapter 25 (by Blau and
Kahn) in the Handbook of Labor Economics, and the reader is referred to that volume for further
discussion of the theoretical analysis of the labor market effects of various forms of employment
protection law.

2.

Efficiency analysis of wrongful discharge laws

At least in theory, several market failures may justify legal rules requiring a threshold
level of justification before employees are discharged. Two leading arguments are noted
below. 32

a.

Employee-side information failures

The most straightforward justification for wrongful discharge laws is that in the absence
of such laws, inadequate employee-side information about the ability of an employer to
discharge employees without offering an adequate justification for the discharge leads employees
to oversupply labor at a given wage rate. Empirical evidence on this form of market failure is
discussed in section VII.B below.
If, in the absence of wrongful discharge laws, many employees incorrectly believe that
they can only be discharged after a threshold level of justification has been met, then wrongful
discharge laws can improve both employee welfare and efficiency by eliminating the gap
between employees’ observed and “true” willingness to supply labor. With a wrongful discharge
law in place, the governing regime is consistent with employees’ belief – although of course in
32

Levine (1991) notes additional potential market failures in this context, including cognitive bias and
externalities.

38

the real world the mandated level of justification for discharge may not match employees’
beliefs, or its imposition may impose very large costs. As described below, the available
empirical evidence on employee-side information failure in the wrongful discharge context –
while strongly supportive of the existence of such information failure – does not allow any
inference about whether existing wrongful discharge laws are ultimately a welfare-enhancing
response to employee-side information failure in this context.

b.

Employer-side information failures

Alongside employee-side information failure, Levine (1991) develops the argument that
employer-side information failures may also justify wrongful discharge laws. Intuitively, an
individual employer may not offer wrongful discharge protection on its own, even if such
protection, adopted universally, would increase both efficiency and employee welfare, because
the individual employer who offers the protection may become a magnet for less desirable
employees.
In Levine’s model, employees are of two different types, and discharge occurs either on
an at will basis – where employers need not provide any reason for discharge – or on a “just
cause” basis – where employers must prove employee malfeasance in order to justify a
discharge. Note that, by contrast to the focus in sections II through VI above on models in which
employees are paid in accordance with the marginal revenue product of labor, Levine’s model is
a species of efficiency-wage model, in which employees may earn rents in order to discourage
shirking. Levine shows that a single firm may not profit from adopting just cause when its
competitors do not adopt it, even if such an approach, adopted universally, would be efficiency-

39

increasing. Because of the phenomenon of adverse selection, a mandated just cause requirement
may enhance both efficiency and employee welfare.

B.

Empirical analysis of wrongful discharge laws
1.

Labor market effects of wrongful discharge laws

The evidence on the labor market effects of various forms of employment protection law
is discussed in chapter 25 (by Blau and Kahn) in the Handbook of Labor Economics. In
addition, in the time since this volume of the Handbook of Labor Economics was published,
studies by Miles (2000), Autor (2003), and Autor, Donohue and Schwab (2006) have further
examined the wage and employment effects of wrongful discharge laws in the United States.
Both Miles (2000) and Autor (2003) find a significant positive relationship between more
restrictive wrongful discharge laws and the substitution of temporary for regular employees.
Meanwhile, Autor, Donohue and Schwab (2006) find negative employment effects of some,
though not all, types of wrongful discharge laws.

2.

Efficiency analysis of wrongful discharge laws

The available empirical evidence on the efficiency of wrongful discharge laws bears most
strongly on the first potential market failure discussed above – employee-side information
failure. Kim (1997, 1999) presents evidence that most individuals in the United States are not
aware of the fact that employers need not meet some threshold level of justification in order to
discharge their employees. Kim surveyed a total of 921 recently discharged employees at
unemployment benefits offices in California, Missouri, and New York in the late 1990s. To file
a claim for unemployment benefits, claimants in these states must appear in person at a benefits

40

office. In Kim’s study, claimants were approached while waiting for assistance at benefits
offices and asked if they would complete a written survey. Presumably because the claimants
were already waiting and did not have the option to be elsewhere, response rates were high –
85% in California and Missouri and 69% in New York.
The surveys in Kim’s study asked respondents to consider specific scenarios in which
individuals were discharged without a good reason and then to indicate whether they believed
such discharges would be found to be lawful by a court of law. For instance, one question asked
about the lawfulness of a termination based upon personal dislike of the employee; another asked
whether it was lawful to terminate an employee based on a mistaken belief that the employee had
stolen money (a belief that the employee could prove was incorrect). While such discharges are
unquestionably permitted under the law in the United States (outside of Montana), the vast
majority of respondents believed that the discharges were unlawful. Table 1 below summarizes
Kim’s main findings.
One issue with Kim’s findings is whether unemployment insurance claimants are
representative of the overall employee population in the United States. On the one hand, as Kim
notes, individuals who recently lost their jobs may be more likely than the average employee to
have some familiarity with the legal regime governing discharge, precisely because of their
recent experience with being discharged. In addition, because eligibility for unemployment
benefits requires both that the claimant have some prior attachment to the labor market (in the
form of a minimum number of weeks employed) and that the claimant undertake an active search
for new employment, claimants’ beliefs should provide a good measure of what a job seeker with
labor market experience knows at the moment at which a decision is made about accepting a job
offer from a particular employer. On the other hand, unemployment benefits claimants may be

41

less informed than the average employee about the legal rules governing termination because
those who are better informed – and thus realize that they have no legal protection against
discharge without an adequate justification – may better protect themselves from involuntary
termination. Balancing these various factors, there does not appear to be a strong a priori reason
to believe that unemployment benefits claimants will be systematically less aware than other
employees of the United States rule of at will employment, thought only additional empirical
study can definitively resolve the question.
Note that because unemployment benefits claimants are disproportionately individuals
who earned low to moderate, rather than high, wages prior to their discharge from employment,
Kim’s evidence bears most directly on the existence of employee-side information failure in
employment markets other than those involving highly compensated employees. However, Kim
finds that erroneous beliefs about the legal rules governing discharge are common regardless of
education level. In Missouri, for instance, respondents with college degrees still exhibited
strongly mistaken beliefs about the legal rules governing discharge (Kim 1997).
Kim’s findings suggest that employees often do not have good information about the
United States rule of at-will employment. While in some search models a limited proportion of
informed actors may eliminate the effects of information failure in markets (e.g., Wilde and
Schwartz 1979), Kim’s evidence suggests that the proportion of United States employees
suffering from information failure is extremely large. While the empirical support for employeeside information failure is thus large, it is, as noted above, not clear exactly what legal reform
would bring the treatment of discharge in the United States in line with employees’ expectations
or what the costs of such reform would be.

42

VIII. Unemployment Insurance Systems
Unemployment insurance, briefly noted in the preceding section, is an extremely
common, although limited, form of employment protection. Unemployment insurance requires
the payment of benefits in lieu of wages upon discharge from employment, typically (at least in
the United States) without regard for the reason for the discharge except in extreme
circumstances. Under the United States system, benefits are financed by a payroll tax that
employers must pay on a per-employee basis.
Both theory and evidence relating to unemployment insurance are developed at length in
chapters 13 (by Atkinson) and 33 (by Krueger and Meyer) of the Handbook of Public
Economics, and, thus, the reader is referred to that volume for further discussion of the
economics of unemployment insurance. In brief, Krueger and Meyer, in the more recent of the
two chapters, conclude that the empirical evidence suggests longer periods out of work with
more generous unemployment insurance benefits – a finding, like its counterpart in the workers’
compensation context from section III above, with ambiguous welfare consequences.

IX.

Minimum Wage Rules

Among the most extensively discussed rules within the economic analysis of employment
law are minimum wage rules. Under these rules, employers must pay a legally-specified
minimum wage to employees. An important opening observation about these rules is that, akin
to the analysis in section VI above, the usual role of market failure in justifying employment law
rules is altered. Even in the absence of market failure, a minimum wage rule may increase total
employee income and, thus, at least by this measure, may enhance employee welfare.

43

For minimum wage rules to increase not only total employee income but also efficiency
and the income of each individual worker, market failure is necessary. It is often observed in
discussions of minimum wage rules that market failure in the form of monopsony may justify
such rules. This is so because, as discussed in section I.B above, under monopsony the wage is
set below the marginal revenue product of labor. Anything that moves the wage closer to the
marginal revenue product of labor will both enhance efficiency and make all employees better
off.
Both theory and evidence relating to minimum wage rules are developed in chapter 32
(by Charles Brown) in the Handbook of Labor Economics, and the reader is referred to that
volume for further discussion of these rules and their effects on efficiency and employee welfare.

X.

Overtime Pay Requirements

The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) in the United States imposes both minimum wage
rules – discussed in the preceding section – and overtime pay requirements, which are the focus
of the present section. Under overtime pay requirements, employers are legally required to pay a
wage premium for hours above a specified weekly or other threshold. In the United States,
employers generally must pay one and a half times the normal wage for hours worked above 40
hours per week. This section describes both theoretical and empirical analysis of overtime pay
requirements

A.

Theoretical analysis of overtime pay requirements
Overtime pay requirements, like the employment law rules discussed in the preceding

sections, represent a legally prescribed term in the employment relationship. However, there is

44

an important analytic difference between overtime pay requirements and the rules considered in
all of the preceding sections. In the case of overtime pay requirements, the legally prescribed
term simply concerns the form within which dollars are paid to an employee, rather than some
other aspect (such as the safety, privacy, or wage level) of the job. In principle, then, it may be
possible for employers to undo completely the effects of overtime pay requirements (Ehrenberg
and Schumann 1982, pp. 36-37). To borrow Trejo’s (1991) example, suppose that in the absence
of overtime pay regulation, an employee works 50 hours per week and earns $11 per hour. The
employer in this circumstance could satisfy the FLSA by reducing the employee’s straight-time
wage to $10 per hour and then paying time and a half for the 10 hours in excess of the 40-hourper-week cutoff. The employee would be in an identical situation, working 50 hours per week
for $550 in pay. By contrast, when, for instance, a particular workplace safety mandate is put
into effect, employers in the new equilibrium must provide the new safety feature (possibly
compensated by lower wages) and cannot directly replicate the prior equilibrium.
Of course, there are limits on the foregoing account of the undoing of overtime pay
requirements. To the extent that straight-time wages are at least somewhat sticky, employers
may not be able to adjust such wages continuously over time in response to the number of
desired overtime hours. In addition, adjustment will be either impossible or limited for
employees whose straight-time wages are at or near the legal minimum wage level prior to any
requirement of overtime pay. Both of these points are emphasized by Trejo (1991). Ultimately,
then, empirical evidence is necessary to determine whether the theoretical account of the
irrelevance of overtime pay requirements is true in practice.
To the extent that overtime pay requirements are not completely undone – as a result of
various forms of wage stickiness or other factors – is there a market failure to which overtime

45

pay requirements might be thought to be responsive? The conventional view is that intensive use
of a smaller set of employees, instead of reliance on a broader group of employees, has a
negative externality effect on those individuals who are unable to obtain employment when a
smaller group of employees is used intensively. To the extent that overtime pay requirements
increase employment levels to some degree, it is possible that these requirements represent an
effective response to the negative externality just noted.

B.

Empirical analysis of overtime pay requirements
In an effort to determine whether overtime pay requirements are effectively undone by

changes in base wages, Trejo (1991) studies differences in base wages across employees covered
and not covered by the overtime pay requirements of the FLSA. The noncovered employees
used in Trejo’s analyses – who are comparable to covered employees in being paid on an hourly
basis – include nonsupervisory agricultural workers, many transportation employees, and certain
retail and services employees. (The largest group of employees not covered by the overtime pay
requirements are employees who are paid on a salary rather than an hourly basis, but these
individuals would, for obvious reasons, provide a weak control group for examining the effects
of overtime pay requirements on covered, hourly wage employees.) Using a sample of repeated
cross sections, Trejo finds that the hourly wages of covered employees are significantly lower
than the hourly wages of noncovered employees. According to Trejo, this evidence provides
some suggestion that overtime pay requirements are partially, although not completely, undone
by adjustments in straight-time wages. Potential limits on Trejo’s empirical analysis include the
fact that the results are somewhat sensitive to the measure of wages used (with weekly earnings
yielding results different from those just described) and the limited degree of identification

46

resulting from possible unobservable differences across individuals in hourly wage jobs within
covered versus noncovered sectors. In contrast to Trejo, Hunt (1999), examining evidence from
Germany, finds increases rather than decreases in wages in response to strengthened overtime
pay requirements negotiated between unions (which are industry-wide in Germany) and
employers; wages may well be less flexible in Europe than in the United States. Hunt’s
identification strategy has the virtue of employing both cross sectional and time series variation.
In addition to examination of whether base wages adjust to offset overtime pay
requirements, empirical work has directly studied the linked question of whether workweeks
longer than 40 hours in the United States are less frequent with overtime pay requirements in
place. (Only with imperfect wage adjustments should such workweeks be less frequent with
overtime pay requirements in place.) Costa (2000) examines changes in the frequency of
overtime hours with the passage of the FLSA and finds a significant reduction in the proportion
of employees working such hours. Costa also finds much greater reduction in the South – in
which more employees were at the minimum wage level and, thus, could not be subjected to
wage adjustments in response to overtime pay requirements – than in the North. By contrast,
Trejo (2003), using as a source of identification variation over the 1970s and 1980s in the
proportion of employees within an industry who are subject to the overtime pay requirements of
the FLSA, finds no effect of overtime pay requirements on the frequency of workweeks longer
than 40 hours in specifications that include industry time trends. However, as Trejo notes, the
coefficients on coverage changes are imprecisely estimated, making it difficult to discern
whether the absence of a statistically significant effect suggests no underlying effect or simply
the limited power of the empirical approach. Hamermesh and Trejo (2000) study not the FLSA
but a California state law expanding the set of employees covered by a strict form of overtime

47

pay and find significant negative effects on the level of overtime employees work. None of these
studies, however, offers any evidence that, in response to a decline in long work hours, aggregate
employment rises in the employment market in question – although it is obvious that a decline in
workweeks longer than 40 hours is a logical predicate for such an increase. Using German data
and examining the effects of industry-specific changes in overtime pay requirements, Hunt
(1999) finds that, if anything, aggregate employment levels fall rather than rise in response to
strengthened overtime pay requirements.

XI.

Conclusion

This paper has offered economic analysis (or, at times, referred to economic analysis in
the Handbook of Labor Economics or the Handbook of Public Economics) of the major topics in
employment law. Topics addressed above include workplace safety mandates (section II),
compensation for workplace injuries (section III), workplace privacy mandates (section IV),
fringe benefits mandates (section V), targeted benefits such as mandated medical and family
leave (section VI), wrongful discharge laws (section VII), unemployment insurance (section
VIII), minimum wage rules (section IX), and overtime pay requirements (section X). 33 There
remains much interesting work to be done on many of these topics, including the effects of some
of the relatively new laws mentioned above. Moreover, while the focus of most existing
employment law is on mandating particular features within the employer-employee relationship,
recent legal scholarship in employment law has given increased emphasis to prospects for using
“default” rather than mandatory rules. Relatively unexplored in existing work is theoretical and
empirical analysis of the effects of default versus mandatory rules in the regulation of the
33

A separate area of inquiry concerns the causes (rather than the desirability and the effects) of
employment law rules. This question is analyzed by Botero et al. (2004).

48

employment relationships. In this and other areas, there are important potential future synergies
between legal scholarship on employment law and economic analysis of this body of law.
As noted above, this paper has focused on employment law rather than labor law.
However, it bears emphasis that the two fields of law do not operate in any way independently of
one another. The contours of labor law, in affecting the prevalence and power of unions, may
greatly affect what sorts of employment law rules are enacted and, perhaps most importantly, the
degree to which employment law rules are effectively enforced against employers. 34 With
respect to the importance of enforcement, it is difficult to disagree with Pound (1910, pp. 16, 3435), who noted long ago that employment law “in action” may look quite different from
employment law “on the books.”

34

For discussion of the difficulties of enforcing employment rules in a non-union context, see Jolls
(2004b).

49

References
Acemoglu D, Angrist JD. 2001. Consequences of employment protection? The case of the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Journal of Political Economy 109(5):915-957
Aghion P, Hermalin B. 1990. Legal restrictions on private contracts can enhance efficiency.
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 6(2):381-409
Akerlof GA, Dickens WT. 1982. The economic consequences of cognitive dissonance. American
Economic Review 72(3):307-319
Arnould RJ, Grabowski H. 1981. Auto safety regulation: an analysis of market failure. Bell
Journal of Economics 12(1):27-48
Atkinson AB. 1987. Income maintenance and social insurance. In Handbook of Public
Economics Vol. II, ed. AJ Auerbach, M Feldstein, pp.779-908. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Autor, DH. 2003. Outsourcing at will: the contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to the growth
of employment outsourcing. Journal of Labor Economics 21(1):1-42
Autor DH, Donohue JJ, Schwab SJ. 2006. The costs of wrongful-discharge laws. Review of
Economics and Statistics 88(2):211-231
Autor DH, Duggan MG. 2003. The rise in the disability rolls and the decline in unemployment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):157-205
Bartel AP, Thomas LG. 1985. Direct and indirect effects of regulation: a new look at OSHA’s
impact. Journal of Law and Economics 28(1):1-25
Blau FD, Kahn LM. 1999. Institutions and laws in the labor market. In Handbook of Labor
Economics Vol. 3A, ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card, pp.1399-1461. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Botero JC, Djankov S, La Porta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 2004. The regulation of
labor. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4):1339-1382
Brown C. 1980. Equalizing differences in the labor market. Quarterly Journal of Economics
94(1):113-134
Brown C. 1999. Minimum wages, employment, and the distribution of income. In Handbook of
Labor Economics Vol. 3B, ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card, pp.2101-2163. Amsterdam:
Elsevier
Camerer CF, Kunreuther H. 1989. Decision processes for low probability events: policy
implications. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 8(4):565-592

50

Costa DL. 2000. Hours of work and the Fair Labor Standards Act: a study of retail and wholesale
trade, 1938-1950. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53(4):648-664
Currie J, Madrian BC. 1999. Health, health insurance and the labor market. In Handbook of
Labor Economics Vol. 3C, ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card, pp.3309-3416. Amsterdam:
Elsevier
Cutler DM. 2002. Health care and the public sector. In Handbook of Public Economics Vol. 4,
ed. AJ Auerbach, M Feldstein, pp.2143-2243. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Cutler DM, Madrian BC. 1998. Labor market responses to rising health insurance costs:
evidence on hours worked. RAND Journal of Economics 29(3):509-530
DeJoy DM. 1989. The optimism bias and traffic accident risk perception. Accident Analysis and
Prevention 21(4):333-340
Dworkin RM. 1980. Is wealth a value? Journal of Legal Studies 9(2):191-226
Ehrenberg RG, Schumann PL. 1982. Longer Hours or More Jobs? An Investigation of Amending
Hours Legislation To Create Employment. Ithaca: Cornell University
Gibbons R, Katz LF. 1991. Layoffs and lemons. Journal of Labor Economics 9(4):351-380
Gray WB, Mendeloff JM. 2005. The declining effects of OSHA inspections on manufacturing
injuries, 1979-1998. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58(4):571-587
Greenwald BC. 1986. Adverse selection in the labour market. Review of Economic Studies
53(3):325-347
Gruber J. 1994a. The incidence of mandated maternity benefits. American Economic Review
84(3):622-641
Gruber J. 1994b. State-mandated benefits and employer-provided health insurance. Journal of
Public Economics 55(3):433-464
Gruber J, Krueger AB. 1991. The incidence of mandated employer-provided insurance: lessons
from workers’ compensation insurance. In Tax Policy and the Economy Vol. 5, ed. D
Bradford, pp.111-143. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Gruber J, Madrian BC. 1994. Health insurance and job mobility: the effects of public policy on
job-lock. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(1):86-102
Gruber J, Madrian BC. 1995. Health-insurance availability and the retirement decision.
American Economic Review 85(4):938-948

51

Gruber J, Madrian BC. 1996. Health insurance and early retirement: evidence from the
availability of continuation coverage. In Advances in the Economics of Aging, ed. DA
Wise, pp.115-143. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Gruber J, Madrian BC. 1997. Employment separation and health insurance coverage. Journal of
Public Economics 66(3):349-382
Hamermesh DS, Trejo SJ. 2000. The demand for hours of labor: direct evidence from California.
Review of Economics and Statistics 82(1):38-47
Hunt J. 1999. Has work-sharing worked in Germany? Quarterly Journal of Economics
114(1):117-148
Ippolito, RA. 1988. A study of the regulatory effect of the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act. Journal of Law and Economics 31(1):85-125
Jacobson M. 2003. Drug testing in the trucking industry: the effect on highway safety. Journal of
Law and Economics 46(1):131-156
Jolls C. 2000. Accommodation mandates. Stanford Law Review 53(2):223-306
Jolls C. 2004a. Identifying the effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act using state-law
variation: preliminary evidence on educational participation effects. American Economic
Review 94(2):447-453
Jolls C. 2004b. The role and functioning of public-interest legal organizations in the enforcement
of the employment laws. In Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the 21st Century,
ed. RA Freeman, J Hersch, L Mishel, pp.141-176. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Jolls C. 2007. Workplace leave mandates and the employment of individuals with disabilities.
Manuscript
Jolls C, Prescott JJ. 2007. Disaggregating employment protection: the case of disability
discrimination. Manuscript
Kaestner R, Simon KI. 2002. Labor market consequences of state health insurance regulation.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(1):136-159
Kaplow L, Shavell S. 1994. Why the legal system is less efficient than the income tax in
redistributing income. Journal of Legal Studies 23(2):667-681
Kim PT. 1997. Bargaining with imperfect information: a study of worker perceptions of legal
protection in an at-will world. Cornell Law Review 83(1):105-160
Kim PT. 1999. Norms, learning, and law: exploring the influences on workers’ legal knowledge.
University of Illinois Law Review 1999(2):447-515

52

Krueger AB, Meyer BD. 2002. Labor supply effects of social insurance. In Handbook of Public
Economics Vol. 4, ed. AJ Auerbach, M Feldstein, pp.2327-2392. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Levine DI. 1991. Just-cause employment policies in the presence of worker adverse selection.
Journal of Labor Economics 9(3):294-305
Mendeloff J. 1979. Regulating Safety: An Economic and Political Analysis of Occupational
Safety and Health Policy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press
Miles TJ. 2000. Common law exceptions to employment at will and U.S. labor markets. Journal
of Law, Economics, and Organization 16(1):74-101
Morantz AD. 2005. Has regulatory devolution injured American workers? A comparison of state
and federal enforcement of construction safety regulations. Manuscript
Neumark D, Stock WA. 1999. Age discrimination laws and labor market efficiency. Journal of
Political Economy 107(5):1081-1125
Posner RA. 1987. The efficiency and the efficacy of Title VII. University of Pennsylvania Law
Review 136(2):513-521
Pound R. 1910. Law in books and law in action. American Law Review 44(1):12-36
Rea SA. 1981. Workmen’s compensation and occupational safety under imperfect information.
American Economic Review 71(1):80-93
Ruhm CJ. 1998. The economic consequences of parental leave mandates: lessons from Europe.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1):285-317
Ruser JW, Smith RS. 1988. The effect of OSHA records-check inspections on reported
occupational injuries in manufacturing establishments. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
1(4):415-435
Sanz-de-Galdeano A. 2006. Job-lock and public policy: Clinton’s second mandate. Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 59(3):430-437
Scholz JT, Gray WB. 1990. OSHA enforcement and workplace injuries: a behavioral approach
to risk assessment. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 3(3):283-305
Simon KI. 2005. Adverse selection in health insurance markets? Evidence from state smallgroup health insurance reforms. Journal of Public Economics 89(9-10):1865-1877
Smith RS. 1976. The Occupational Safety and Health Act: Its Goals and Its Achievements.
Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research

53

Smith RS. 1992. Have OSHA and workers’ compensation made the workplace safer? In
Research Frontiers in Industrial Relations and Human Resources, ed. D Lewin, OS
Mitchell, PD Sherer, pp.557-586. Madison: Industrial Relations Research Association
Summers LH. 1989. Some simple economics of mandated benefits. American Economic Review
79(2):177-183
Trejo SJ. 1991. The effects of overtime pay regulation on worker compensation. American
Economic Review 81(4):719-740
Trejo SJ. 2003. Does the statutory overtime premium discourage long workweeks? Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 56(3):530-551
Viscusi WK. 1978. Wealth effects and earnings premiums for job hazards. Review of
Economics and Statistics 60(3):408-416
Viscusi WK. 1979. The impact of occupational safety and health regulation. Bell Journal of
Economics 10(1):117-140
Viscusi WK. 1983. Risk by Choice: Regulating Health and Safety in the Workplace. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press
Viscusi WK. 1986. The impact of occupational safety and health regulation, 1973-1983. RAND
Journal of Economics 17(4):567-580
Viscusi WK, O’Connor CJ. 1984. Adaptive responses to chemical labeling: Are workers
Bayesian decision makers? American Economic Review 74(5):942-956
Waldfogel J. 1998. Understanding the ‘family gap’ in pay for women with children. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12(1):137-156
Waldfogel J. 1999. The impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act. Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 18(2):281-302
Weil D. 1996. If OSHA is so bad, why is compliance so good? RAND Journal of Economics
27(3):618-640
Weil D. 2001. Assessing OSHA performance: new evidence from the construction
industry. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 20(4):651-674
Weinstein ND. 1980. Unrealistic optimism about future life events. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 39(5):806-820
Wilde LL, Schwartz A. 1979. Equilibrium comparison shopping. Review of Economic Studies
46(3):543-553

54

Table 1: Employees’ Knowledge of Legal Rules Governing Discharge
% of Total
Reason for Discharge
State
Legal Rule:
Responses
Discharge is
Asserting
Discharge is
Unlawful
Employer plans to hire
another person to do the same
job at a lower wage

California
Missouri
New York

Legal
Legal
Legal

81.3%
82.2%
86.1%

Retaliation for reporting theft
by another employee to
supervisor

California
Missouri
New York

Legal
Legal
Legal

80.9%
79.2%
81.8%

Mistaken belief that employee
stole money (employee can
prove mistake)

California
Missouri
New York

Legal
Legal
Legal

82.7%
89.4%
91.6%

Personal dislike of employee

California
Missouri
New York

Legal
Legal
Legal

88.1%
91.7%
90.6%

Source: Kim (1997, 1999)

55

Figure 1: Labor Market Effects of Legally Mandated Benefits in the Absence of Market
Failure

Notes: Employees are assumed to be demanded and paid
in accordance with their marginal revenue product of labor
(rather than, for example, earning efficiency wages), and
the mandated benefit is assumed to be a variable-cost
rather than a fixed-cost one.

Notes: Employees are assumed to be demanded and paid
in accordance with their marginal revenue product of labor
(rather than, for example, earning efficiency wages), and
the mandated benefit is assumed to be a variable-cost
rather than a fixed-cost one.

56

Figure 2: Effects of a Targeted Mandate on Wages and Employment Levels of Targeted
Employees

Notes: Employees are assumed to be demanded and paid in
accordance with their marginal revenue product of labor
(rather than, for example, earning efficiency wages), and the
mandated benefit is assumed to be a variable-cost rather than a
fixed-cost one.

57

