NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPLEMENTARITY AMONG VERTICAL INTEGRATION DECISIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM AUTOMOBILE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
Sharon Novak
Scott Stern
Working Paper 13232
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13232

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

Eugene Orlov and Mercedes Delgado provided outstanding research assistance. We thank George
Baker, Tom Hubbard, Mike Mazzeo, Todd Zenger, three anonymous referees, and seminar participants
at various universities and conferences for helpful comments and suggestions. This research was partially
funded by MIT Center for Innovation and Product Development and the International Motor Vehicle
Program at MIT. All errors or omissions remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Sharon Novak and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Complementarity Among Vertical Integration Decisions: Evidence from Automobile Product
Development
Sharon Novak and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 13232
July 2007
JEL No. L24,L62,O32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines complementarity among vertical integration decisions in automobile product
development. Though most research assumes that contracting choices are independent of each other,
contracting complementarity arises when the returns to a single vertical integration decision are increasing
in the level of vertical integration associated with other contracting choices. First, effective coordination
may depend on the level of (non-contractible) effort on the part of each agent; contracting complementarity
results if coordination efforts are interdependent and vertical integration facilitates a higher level of
non-contractible effort. Second, effective coordination may require the disclosure of proprietary trade
secrets, and the potential for expropriation by external suppliers may induce complementarity among
vertical integration choices. We provide evidence for complementarity in product development contracting
by taking advantage of a detailed dataset that includes the level of vertical integration and the contracting
environment for individual automobile systems in the luxury automobile segment. Using an instrumental
variables framework that distinguishes complementarity from unobserved firm-level factors, the evidence
is consistent with the hypothesis that contracting complementarity is an important driver of vertical
integration choices. The findings suggest that contracting complementarity may be particularly important
when coordination is important to achieve but difficult to monitor.
Sharon Novak
Policy Department
D505
UCLA Anderson School of Management
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095
snovak@anderson.ucla.edu
Scott Stern
Management and Strategy Department
Kellogg School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
s-stern2@northwestern.edu

I.

Introduction
The modern theory of the firm has made considerable progress in explaining the determinants of

vertical integration and firm boundaries, assuming that the level of vertical integration results from
independent transactional choices (Masten and Saussier, 2002; Richman and Macher, 2006). For most
organizations, however, firm boundaries are not determined by independent vertical integration decisions
but depend on interrelated choices spanning functional activities (Holmstrom, 1999; Nickerson 1997).
For example, in automobile product development, the degree of vertical integration for a single
manufacturer is the consequence of hundreds of individual procurement choices, ranging from simple
supply contracts for commodity components to complex arrangements for cutting-edge technology
development. If these individual contracting choices are interdependent with each other, the decision to
outsource a single function (e.g., the supply for an individual component) impacts the vertical integration
calculation for related procurement decisions. This will be particularly true if overall performance
depends on coordination among agents responsible for these functional areas and the degree of
coordination is sensitive to governance structure.
Interdependence among governance choices has important testable implications for patterns of
vertical integration. When the marginal returns to vertical integration for a given vertical integration
choice are increasing in the level of vertical integration on related choices, there will be complementarity
among governance choices, which we refer to as contracting complementarity. The goals of this paper
are to identify conditions under which contracting complementarity may be an important driver of vertical
integration decisions, and to evaluate the empirical evidence for contracting complementarity in the
context of automobile product development governance choices.
Our analysis suggests that contracting complementarity arises when coordination is important to
achieve but difficult to monitor. Consider the coordination required between two automobile product
development teams, each of which is responsible for one of two distinct “systems” (e.g., the engine
system or the brake system). While some incentives for coordination between the teams can be written
into formal contracts, effective coordination requires non-contractible coordination effort by each team.
The benefits from coordination are likely to depend on the level of interaction between the teams: a high
level of coordination effort by one team will be of little benefit unless reciprocated with effort by the
other team. In other words, coordination efforts are complements. Moreover, while external teams may
be more responsive than in-house teams to explicit incentives for system-specific performance, external
teams may be less effective than in-house teams in terms of devoting effort towards cross-system
coordination (precisely because such effort is non-contractible). If vertical integration in any one system
induces a higher level of coordination effort by team members for that system, and the marginal returns to
coordination effort is increasing in the level of coordination effort by other teams, the vertical integration

1

choices for each system will themselves be complements. Trade secrecy concerns may also result in
contracting complementarity. While effective coordination requires disclosing strategic technical choices,
such information may also result in expropriation if that knowledge leaks to competitors. If the risk of
expropriation is particularly salient with the first potential leakage of information (i.e., the first external
contract), trade secrecy concerns may limit disclosure unless all development is maintained internally.
More generally, contracting complementarity arises when the returns to vertical integration for any one
system are increasing in the level of vertical integration on other systems.
Our focus on interdependence among vertical integration choices differs from most theoretical
and empirical research in economics, which often focuses on the drivers of vertical integration at the level
of transactions (Williamson, 1979; Hart and Moore, 1990; Whinston, 2003).1 In contrast, product
development researchers have increasingly identified the interactions among components and systems as
perhaps the most important “problem” in managing new product development (Eppinger, et al, 1994;
Ulrich, 1995; Suh, 1999; Baldwin and Clark, 2000). This literature emphasizes the role of interfaces and
vertical integration for achieving effective coordination (Alexander, 1964; Suh, 1990; Ulrich and
Eppinger, 1995).2

Motivated by these insights from the product development literature, and our

qualitative research on contracting practices in the automobile industry, this paper explores whether
coordination requirements and the need to share knowledge across components and systems may result in
complementarity across vertical integration choices.
Our analysis of contracting complementarity exploits an original and detailed dataset covering
luxury automobile models over a fifteen year period. For each model, we observe both the degree of
vertical integration and the contracting environment for seven distinct automobile systems (e.g., the brake
system, the seat system, etc.). Across different systems, we observe a similar set of system-specific
vertical integration drivers. For example, for each system, we observe whether the firm has existing inhouse sunk investments in plant and equipment. Observing multiple system-specific measures allow us to
develop and implement an instrumental variables strategy that overcomes several related problems in

1

See Masten and Saussier (2002) and Macher and Richman (2006) for recent surveys of the transaction cost
economics literature, and Tirole (1999) for a survey of the incomplete contracting literature. Empirical research has
primarily focused on individual contracting opportunities in which individual decisions are assumed independent
(e.g., Joskow, 1988; Baker and Hubbard, 2004). In the context of product development, this approach has placed
emphasis on individual components, examining how factors such as asset specificity or relative bargaining power
shape contracting at the most “micro” level of decision-making (Monteverde and Teece, 1982; Masten, 1984;
Masten, Meehan and Snyder, 1991). While we are not aware of prior studies of contracting complementarity,
several recent papers highlight interrelationships in governance choice. For example, building on Nickerson (1997),
Nickerson and Silverman (2003) highlight the potential for spillovers across truckers taking orders from a single
carrier, while Azoulay (2004) examines the potential for substitutability in drug development contracting choices
and argues for a “portfolio” approach to empirical contract analysis.
2
Though more abstract than this applied paper, Segal (1999) provides theoretical foundations for multi-lateral
contracting choice, emphasizing the potential for signaling across contracting decisions.
2

testing for complementarity among organizational design choices.3 An instrumental variables approach is
required to disentangle contracting complementarity from unobservable firm-level fixed effects in
contracting mode (e.g., if a firm adopts “outsourcing” across all systems in response to a fad). We adapt
the methodology proposed in Arora (1996) and Athey and Stern (2004) to exploit system-specific
variation in the contracting environment within each automobile model. In particular, we estimate the
sensitivity of vertical integration on a system i to the level of vertical integration on other systems within
that model by (a) including the system-specific measures for system i directly as control variables and (b)
using the system-specific drivers for the other systems as instruments for the level of vertical integration
on those other systems.

Of course, this approach requires that the system-specific measures are

themselves exogenous. While we do not observe a single unambiguous natural experiment, the richness
of the dataset allows us to explore several alternative identification strategies. In particular, we observe
multiple observations for individual model-systems over time (i.e., we observe 2-4 system-specific
observations per automobile model), and so we are able to focus exclusively on within-variation (i.e.,
changes in the contracting environment over time within a model-system), exclusively on betweenvariation (e.g., variation in contracting choices across model-systems linked to variation in the initial
contracting environment for each model-system), or allow for both sources of variation. Observing
multiple system-specific drivers of vertical integration, and exploring whether the results depend on
cross-sectional or time-series identification strategies, the core of the empirical strategy is based on
assuming that we observe exogenous system-specific differences in the contracting environment which
also result in differences in contracting choices.
Our findings highlight the potential empirical importance of contracting complementarity. First,
using the instrumental variables strategy described above, the probability of vertical integration for each
automobile system increases in share of other systems that are vertically integrated. This finding is
statistically and quantitatively significant, remains similar in magnitude whether we rely exclusively on
time-series or cross-sectional variation (or both), and is robust to focusing exclusively on system-specific
measures relating to pre-existing in-house capabilities/resources or exclusively focusing on measures
related to the intensity of design and manufacturing challenges. Additionally, the findings are most
salient in environments where we expect contracting complementarity to be most important (e.g., among
tightly coupled systems within the automobile). Taken together, the evidence is suggestive of contracting
complementarity rather than spurious correlation induced by company-level fixed effects in outsourcing.

3

A growing literature examines complementarity in organizational design more generally from both theoretical and
empirical perspectives, with several specific applications to the automobile industry (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990;
Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1994; Helper, 1995, 1997; Ichniowski, Shaw and Prenusshi, 1997; Cockburn, Henderson
and Stern, 2003; Ichniowski and Shaw, 2003; Van Biesebroeck, 2006; MacDuffie, 1995; Pil and MacDuffie, 1996).
3

While we interpret this evidence cautiously in light of the size of the dataset and the inherent
challenges in assessing the drivers of organizational design, our results do suggest that assuming away
contracting complementarity may be problematic in contexts where coordination activities are important
yet difficult to monitor. Contracting complementarity may have implications for aggregate patterns of
vertical integration. Consider how one might interpret the increased (and clustered) use of outsourcing.
While most researchers interpret the increased use of outsourcing of non-core activities as a firm-level
“strategy,” contracting complementarity suggests that a coordinated shift towards outsourcing might be
the result of an unraveling process; under contracting complementarity, the benefits to vertical integration
for individual functions depend on maintaining a vertically integrated structure across functions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces a qualitative
assessment of product development contracting choices in the automobile industry, and the potential for
contracting complementarity in this environment. Section III derives a formal empirical framework for
testing for contracting complementarity. After a review of the data in Section IV, Section V presents our
empirical findings. A final section concludes.
II.

Interactions among Vertical Integration Choices in Automobile Product Development
The Setting.4 Automobile product development is among the most well-known settings to study

the drivers of vertical integration and contracting, beginning with the classical GM-Fisher Body
integration choice (Coase, 1937; Klein, et al, 1978; Monteverde and Teece, 1982; Hart, 1995; CasadesusMasanell and Spulber, 2000; Bigelow, 2003).

This is not surprising, as product development and

governance choices reflect features of the contracting literature, including the importance of noncontractible investment and the potential for renegotiation.
While most empirical research in economics and strategy assesses the determinants of vertical
integration at the level of individual transactions, coordinating activities across transactions is at the heart
of automobile product development (Ulrich and Eppinger, 1995).

The organization of product

development activities reflects the technical choices and interfaces of the vehicle itself. After overall
vehicle requirements and goals are chosen (e.g., building “the ultimate driving machine” or “the safest car
on the road”), work is decomposed into requirements for each automobile system (e.g., engine
horsepower, steering column adjustability). These system requirements are then translated into needs for
sub-systems or individual components (e.g., engine block characteristics, steering column characteristics).
Though procurement takes place at the level of individual components (e.g., an engine block with
a given specification can be made or bought), vehicle performance depends on effective coordination

4

This section is based on a detailed qualitative understanding of the drivers and impact of contracting and
vertical integration in this setting, drawing on a multi-year study by one of the authors (Novak and Eppinger, 2001).
4

among components and between systems, and performance is only observed after a long lag. For
example, in the event of a crash, safety performance depends on seamless integration between the engine,
braking and steering systems; as a result, design decisions for the engine block must be coordinated with
design decisions in the braking and steering systems. Realized performance of each system will only be
observed after the vehicle goes into production, on average five years after the initiation of product
development (Novak and Klibanoff, 2004).
Automobile manufacturers achieve this coordination in several ways. First, product development
is typically governed by a “vehicle integrity” team, which has responsibility for monitoring and ensuring
cross-system coordination throughout the automobile. Second, and perhaps more importantly, direct
coordination among individuals responsible for different components or systems is achieved through
repeated and ongoing exchanges of information, such as technical requirements for interacting parts or
software specifications impacting multiple vehicle systems. In some cases, effective integration requires
updating information on even a daily basis. While coordination activities have always been crucial, their
importance across vehicle systems has increased dramatically over the past twenty years, with the
introduction of advanced electronics that impact multiple systems, such as electronic engine controllers,
antilock brake systems (ABS), or electronic features such as anti-whiplash protection.
Our goal is to examine how the inability to contract on the level of effort devoted to coordination
across systems limits the effectiveness of coordination efforts, particularly when contracting with external
parties. We begin by describing the challenges of contracting for cross-system coordination effort, and
how secrecy concerns in product development can similarly reduce such effort. We then outline how
these forces can result in complementarity across vertical integration choices.
Cross-System Coordination Effort.

Effective vehicle performance requires substantial

investments in coordination across individual components and systems. However, contracting on the
level of effort devoted towards coordination is costly and difficult to enforce. For example, while
contracting in terms of specification ranges is feasible (e.g., the gear box for the transmission system must
be 12cm wide plus or minus 2 cm), it is difficult to write and enforce contracts which assign
responsibility for resolving system-to-system mismatches (e.g., ensuring that the allowable range of
gearbox parameters is adjusted when the body dimensions are also at the high end of a given range). This
is because the benefits to coordination depend on effort by all parties involved, but a higher probability of
failure results from shirking by even one agent. Moreover, the performance consequences of insufficient
coordination can rarely be assigned to any one individual or unit (any one party can blame “failure to
coordinate” on every other party involved), a problem that is compounded by the fact that failure is often
observed only with a long lag (often after the product is commercially introduced). Consequently, while
procurement contracts with external suppliers specify that coordination activities must be undertaken, the

5

inability to assign responsibility for coordination failure makes such provisions essentially unenforceable.
In most cases, the inability to enforce formal contract terms relating to coordination limits the
effectiveness of formal contracts in inducing effort towards coordination, and suggests that the
coordination effort by external suppliers will likely be lower than that achieved by an internal team.
First, since the vehicle integrity team is internal to the firm, members of these teams are at a higher level
in the organizational hierarchy and so have (formal) authority over internal system engineers (Clark and
Fujimoto, 1991); in contrast, external suppliers are less constrained by the authority relationships within
the manufacturer’s organization. While internal teams can be focused exclusively on a single project
(allowing time for investments in coordination activities), suppliers often work on multiple projects, and
it is difficult for the manufacturer to observe the precise allocation of time to individual projects. Second,
while supplier incentives are closely linked to the verifiable terms of formal contracts, internal teams may
be able to be monitored and provided effective subjective performance incentives (Baker, Gibbons and
Murphy, 1994; 2002). For example, while the observed seat defect rate is a measure that a seat supplier
may agree to incorporate into a contract, a seat supplier likely will not contract on qualitative customer
satisfaction ratings (in part, because the manufacturer may distort such data to lower payments). The use
of subjective performance signals can be achieved through direct compensation, subjective bonuses, and
promotion incentives. While reputational mechanisms can also be used to encourage external suppliers,
relational contracting incentives will be more salient for internal employees who have a long-lived
relationship with a single firm. Finally, ensuring a given level of coordination is often easier in the
context of internal development, where product development teams are more likely to be co-located and
share a common language and background (Ulrich, 1995). Together, these factors suggest that the
coordination effort by external suppliers will likely be lower than that achieved by an internal team.
Consider the case of rollovers and tire blowout incidents on the Ford Explorer that was traced to
the interaction between Ford and its tire supplier, Firestone (Kumar, 2001; Kalogeridis, 2005). While
both Ford and Firestone successfully completed the design and production responsibilities laid out in their
contract, the parties were not able to effectively manage the interface between their responsibilities. That
is, while the tires were within contractually specified maximum and minimum tire inflation specifications
and the vehicle body was within maximum and minimum weight specifications, the accidents resulted
from a complex interaction between vehicle and tire that neither Ford nor Firestone had considered.
When asked about the vehicle failures, Firestone spokeswoman Jill Bratina said. "The vehicle is beyond
our area of expertise,” and a Ford spokesman stated, “This is a tire issue, not a vehicle issue." (Kumar,
2001). At least in part, this coordination problem was exacerbated by the fact that Ford was unable to
manage system-to-system coordination activities with Firestone as effectively as they might had tire
design and supply been maintained in-house. Had tire development and body development been in-house

6

at Ford, effective coordination would have unambiguously been a “Ford” issue. Simply put, the ability to
coordinate between systems was reduced by outsourcing. While the resultant safety hazard was likely an
extreme case, Ford/Firestone highlights the role of coordination among systems in product development.
Trade Secrecy. Trade secrecy concerns also limit the effectiveness of coordination efforts across
components and systems within an automobile. Automobile manufacturers expend substantial resources
on maintaining design and technology choices as secrets during the product development stage. For
example, for most companies, product development for each system occurs within a secure facility, and
system-specific or even component-specific access codes are required to access specific areas or
computer databases.

When a system is outsourced, it is more likely that trade secrets will leak. Not

necessarily as a direct consequence of explicit industrial espionage, knowledge about new innovations or
design initiatives can inadvertently be revealed to competitors when external suppliers exploit knowledge
gained in one partnership in bidding on future projects. For example, in the 2001 lawsuit between
Daimler-Chrysler and General Motors, Daimler charged that the GM Hummer H2 grille was “borrowed”
from the Jeep design (Kiley, 2001; respondent interviews). The Hummer grille was designed by AM
General. AM General received a trademark for the grille in 1996, when it was exclusively designing for
Jeep. General Motors signed an agreement with AM General in 1999 to develop and build vehicles based
on the Hummer design. The lawsuit was based on the argument that Chrysler’s outsourcing of Jeep grilles
to AM General resulted in the design being passed on to General Motors, in violation of Jeep intellectual
property. While it is possible to “copy” designs by reverse-engineering or benchmarking, a supplier can
pass on detailed information such as effective design of distinctive characteristics (such as the sharp edges
of the Jeep grille) through related experience on other projects. In the case of the Jeep lawsuit, a study
alleged "Nearly two-thirds of all Jeep Grand Cherokee and Jeep Cherokee owners ... incorrectly
associated the new H2 grille with a DaimlerChrysler.” (Kiley, 2001).
Trade secrecy concerns place restrictions on effective design integration when product
development is outsourced through a substantial reduction in the amount and frequency of information
that can be exchanged among developers. Whereas internal product development groups can (mostly)
exchange information about design details freely, external suppliers may expose highly confidential trade
secrets, and so manufacturers place additional limits on their access to pieces of information.5

Cross-

system coordination requires disclosure of design details for each system; limiting the release of technical
details because of trade secrecy concerns reduces the ability to coordinate systems during product
development.6
5

For example, “early” spy photos of vehicles in development are highly sought after by trade publications, and
suppliers have been sued for using their access to cause competitive harm through trade secrecy violations.
6
Though long-term exclusive contracts might mitigate such concerns, such arrangements are rare in the automobile
industry, as a principal benefit of organizing as an independent supplier is the ability to leverage investments across
7

Since effective integration requires the disclosure of design choices, manufacturers working with
external suppliers face the risk of innovations being revealed to competitors before vehicles are
introduced to the market.7

Consider the case of cellular telephones (respondent interviews). In the

luxury car market, a design challenge has been the integration of the cellular telephone sub-system into
the audio system. In an integrated design, the cellular telephone would share a circuit board and control
panel with the audio system, and these would interface with the antennas, speakers, and microphone. In
contrast, a modular design would maintain the cell phone’s circuitry as separate from the audio system.
This facilitates outsourcing production of the cellular telephone components, with little overlap between
manufacturer and supplier during product development.

While the integrated design has several

performance and cost advantages, such as better sound quality and less bulk, the integrated design would
also require extensive disclosure by the auto manufacturer to the cellular telephone supplier during
product development. For example, an integrated design would reveal to the supplier whether a Global
Positioning System (“GPS”) was also included, while a modular design need not result in this disclosure.
When considering whether to choose the integrated or modular design, the manufacturer must trade off
the benefits to coordination with the potential costs of disclosure of proprietary design decisions.
Complementarity among Vertical Integration Decisions. While our discussion so far has focused
on how trade secrecy concerns and cross-system coordination impact the returns to outsourcing on a
single system, we now examine how these issues result in interdependence among outsourcing choices
(i.e., complementarity among vertical integration choices among systems in product development).8 Let
us first consider the role of cross-system coordination effort. Consistent with our qualitative discussion,
suppose that (a) cross-system coordination effort is non-contractible and (b) the returns to coordination
effort by workers associated with one system is higher if the level of coordination effort by workers on
other systems is higher. Moreover, suppose that the level of coordination effort elicited under in-house
governance is higher than under outsourcing, perhaps because of the ability to provide subjective
incentives for coordination to in-house workers. Finally, while the level of cross-system coordination
effort is important, each governance choice is additionally impacted by factors shifting the returns to
vertical integration independent of other systems. Then, vertical integration on any one system will be a
complement to the level of vertical integration on any other system. An increase in the idiosyncratic

projects for multiple firms. Indeed, while some expropriation may be intentional and violate confidentiality
agreements, most information leaks occur because suppliers advertise the innovations developed in an ongoing
project in their bids for new projects with other manufacturers.
7
Secrecy is particularly important since competitive advantage in the automobile industry depends, in large part, on
earning “transitory” advantage on innovations during the period in which other firms “catch up” as they imitate
value-enhancing new features and performance improvements.
8
In Appendix A, we develop a simple formal model in which coordination effort and/or trade secrecy concerns
results in complementarity among vertical integration choices, which we summarize in this sub-section.
8

returns to vertical integration for one system (e.g., an increase in system-specific capabilities) will not
only raise the marginal returns for in-house contracting for that system, but will have a spillover effect on
other systems for the same automobile.

For example, the vertical integration of engine system

components is highly dependent on the internal capabilities of a given manufacturer (some such as Honda
are highly skilled in this area, others less so); when these capabilities allow for vertical integration in that
system, this also greatly facilitates coordination of engine development with those of other systems such
as the body and transmission.

For example, Honda has been able to support a wider range of

engine/transmission combinations in the Acura Legend than competitors, through intense coordination
between its internal engine, transmission, and body teams (respondent interviews).
A related argument suggests that trade secrecy concerns can also result in complementarity
among governance choices. Suppose that outsourcing any single system enhances the risk of loss from
disclosure of trade secrecy, and the marginal (expected) losses from disclosure of additional systems are
declining. In other words, while outsourcing a single system entails a significant disclosure cost (perhaps
because of the need to develop systems or infrastructure to protect information), the incremental
disclosure costs arising from outsourcing are lower. When the marginal costs of disclosure are declining
in the level of outsourcing, the marginal returns to vertical integration on any one system are higher when
a related system is already vertically integrated. For example, as in the cellular phone case discussed
above, if an integrated solution has already been shared with an external supplier, thereby revealing the
inclusion of GPS technology, further outsourcing of related systems will not further compromise
information already revealed about this proprietary feature.
Both the ability to induce coordination effort and the economics of disclosure costs imply
complementarity among vertical integration choices, motivating the central hypothesis of the paper: the
level of vertical integration on any one automobile system will be sensitive to the level of vertical
integration on other automobile systems, and a shift in the system-specific returns to vertical integration
for one system will have a spillover effect onto other systems within the same automobile model. The
remainder of the paper develops and implements an approach for evaluating the contracting
complementarity hypothesis in the context of automobile product development.
III.

The Empirical Framework
To test for the presence of contracting complementarity, we build on a recent applied

econometrics literature that offers an approach for distinguishing complementarity from extraneous “firmlevel” factors driving correlated adoption across distinct choices (Arora, 1996; Athey and Stern, 2004).
We begin by developing this empirical framework, adapt that framework to the specifics of the empirical
setting, and then discuss checks for the assumptions underlying the identification strategy.

9

Suppose there are two observable vertical integration choices, YA and YB, and the separable
benefits (and costs) to vertical integration observable to the firm can be decomposed into two distinct
parts. Both the firm and the econometrician observe a set of system-specific vertical integration drivers
(ZA, ZB), and η = (ηA, ηB) is a vector of the choice-specific mean-zero shocks observed by the firm but
unobservable to the econometrician. The elements of η may be correlated; for simplicity, we assume a
firm-level mean-zero “fixed effect” (ξ) which impacts the overall propensity of the firm to vertically
integrate (i.e., for a given system i and firm j, ηi , j = ξ j + ε i , j ). Finally, suppose that the returns to each
choice are interdependent: the marginal returns to vertical integration for YA depend on whether the firm
vertically integrates into YB. We assume this interdependence term,λ, is constant across firms all firms.9
The firm optimizes across its choices of YA and YB, yielding the following maximization problem:

Max f j = λ (YA, j * YB , j ) + ( β Y j + β YA Z A Z A , j + η A, j )YA, j + ( β YB + β YB Z B Z B , j + η B , j )YB , j

YA , j ,YB , j

(1)

To understand the relationship between performance, optimal choice behavior, and estimation,
consider the adoption condition for each practice:
Yi , j = 1 if λ Y− i , j + ξ j + ( β i + β i , Z j Z i , j + ε i , j ) > 0

(2)

A firm’s choice of integration on Yi depends on the firm’s vertical integration decision on Y-i, the
observable choice-specific drivers, Zi,j, and the stochastic components, ξj and εij. λ can be interpreted as
the degree of complementarity (or substitutability if λ < 0) between YA and YB, and ξj is an unobserved
firm-level effect which (spuriously) induces correlation among the firm’s decision regarding YA and YB.10
The empirical objective is to estimate the parameters of the “organizational design production function,”
focusing on λ, the contracting complementarity parameter. Consider the linear probability model:

Yi , j = αi + γ j + λY−i , j + β Zi Zi , j +ηi , j

(3)

The probability that Y-i = 1 is increasing in ξ, so E (Y−i *ηi ) = E (Y−i *ξ ) > 0 , and so an OLS
estimate of (3) will be biased upward due to an omitted variables problem. At the same time, Y-i may
suffer from measurement error, particularly if Y-i is constructed as an imperfect index of more finegrained vertical integration decisions (as it does in our context). The presence of measurement error can
lead to attenuation bias, resulting in a downward OLS bias. Whether from an omitted variables problem
or from measurement error, λˆOLS will be a biased estimate of the sensitivity of the vertical integration
choice Y-i on Yi. However, an instrumental variables estimator can provide a consistent estimate of λ, if

9

In line with the model, λ is a function of the benefits from coordination effort and the reduced probability of
disclosure. This parameter combines the impact of these distinct mechanisms.
10
ξ need not be related to performance, and could reflect fads or managerial preferences for outsourcing.
10

the econometrician observes measures correlated with the vertical integration decision on Y-i but
independent of η.

Our framework yields a natural set of instruments: for each choice i, Z-i – factors

driving the adoption of Y-i but uncorrelated with ηi – are potential instruments to examine the relationship
between Y-i on Yi.

For Z-i to be valid instrumental variables, we assume that, conditional on all

observables, E ( Z − iηi ) = E ( Z − iξ ) = 0 . As emphasized by Arora (1996) and Athey and Stern (2004),
disentangling complementarity from common shocks that raise the propensity to adopt multiple practices
requires a choice-specific instrumental variables framework that addresses omitted variables and
measurement error in a single framework.11
Our dataset includes choice-specific measures.

We observe data for 19 distinct automobile

model-generations, where each model-generation corresponds to a major revision for an overall
automobile model (we observe each model between two and four times over our sample). For each
model-generation, we observe the level of vertical integration and drivers of vertical integration at the
level of individual automobile systems (e.g., engines, brakes, etc.). These measures are thus specific to
each system and independently observed across multiple systems. For example, on a system-specific
basis, we observe whether the firm has existing in-house sunk investments in plant and equipment and
adequate manufacturing capacity.

Suppose that these system-specific measures of sunk assets and

available capacity are exogenous determinants of system-level vertical integration (an assumption we
discuss below). In our equation for vertical integration for system i, we can then simultaneously control
for the level of sunk assets and capacity constraints on system i, and use the level of sunk assets and
capacity constraints on system -i as instrumental variables for vertical integration level for system -i.
This instrumental variables approach is premised on two conditions. First, it requires variation
across systems and within model-generations in the system-specific drivers of vertical integration. For
example, if the only system-specific driver was a single measure of capacity constraints, and there was no
variation across systems (within a model-generation), the measure of vertical integration for system –i
(instrumented with the measure of capacity constraints for system –i) would not be separately identified
from the measure of capacity constraints for system i. Since the identification strategy depends on
system-specific differences in the contracting environment which also result in differences in contracting
choices, Section IV presents evidence of variation across systems but within model-generation. The
second requirement of the empirical framework is that the system-specific drivers are exogenous. Two
distinct issues arise. First, the framework assumes that Zi is uncorrelated with ηi – the observed system-

11

In the large literature evaluating the potential for complementarity among organizational design choices (see
Ichniowski and Shaw (2003)), only a small number of recent papers have addressed the omitted variables problem
directly by adopting a choice-specific instrumental variables framework (Miravete and Pernias, 2006; van
Biesebroeck, 2006). See also Cassiman and Veugelers (2007) for an alternative approach.
11

specific drivers of vertical integration are independent of the idiosyncratic returns to vertical integration.
Of course, similar to many papers exploiting real data from organizations, the potential for endogeneity is
real. It is possible that firms with a high realization of ηi will choose activities that raise the measured
level of Zi. For example, if a firm expects that a particular system is likely to be outsourced in the future,
they might limit physical investment and internal capacity.12 Second, even if the system-specific drivers
were exogenous to each vertical integration equation, our instrumental variables approach requires that,
conditional on the system-specific drivers for system i, the system-specific drivers for system –i are
uncorrelated with the unobserved returns to vertical integration for system i (i.e., E (ηi Z − i | Z i ) = 0 ).
For example, if the level of sunk assets on any one system is informative about the total extent of sunk
assets available across all systems (as might occur if the level of sunk assets are correlated across systems
and there is measurement error at the system-specific level), the proposed instrumental variables estimator
could be biased.
We address the potential for bias in several ways. First, in Section IV, we build on our qualitative
knowledge to evaluate the potential for endogeneity for each system-specific measure. Though no single
measure offers an unambiguous natural experiment, different measures likely mitigate different sources of
potential bias, and we examine the robustness of our findings to alternative specifications for Zi. Second,
we exploit the sensitivity of our results to exploiting two distinct sources of variation in our data: across
automobile models, and across generations of a given automobile model. While some system-specific
measures exhibit significant variation across manufacturers but are fixed over time (e.g., the presence of
sunk investments), other system-specific measures exhibit significant variation across time within modelsystems (e.g., the degree of technological complexity for a given model-generation).
These separate sources of variation facilitate more focused identification approaches. If timeseries variation in the system-specific contracting environment is uncorrelated with changes in the
unobserved returns to vertical integration, λ can be identified by relying exclusively on variation within
automobile models over time. Adapting (3) to allow for multiple generations (t) of a given automobile
model j, we can specify an instrumental variables estimator with fixed effect for each model-system:

Yi , j ,t = αi, j + δt + λY−i , j ,t + βZi Zi, j ,t +ηi , j ,t

(4)

Z-i,j,t are the (excluded) instruments for Y-i,j,t:: conditional on a complete set of model-system and
generation fixed effects, (4) relies on variation in the contracting environment (over time but within

12

Indeed, it is possible that the current values of Zi will directly reflect prior vertical integration choices (e.g., the
decision to outsource in one period leads to constrained capacity in a subsequent period). In this case, Zi will be a
function of the lagged endogenous variable, Yi(-1). As discussed below, we account for this possibility directly, by
comparing our results using a fixed effects IV approach, a first-differencing IV approach, and an initial conditions
IV approach (see Table 3 and Appendix C).
12

model-systems) resulting in variation in vertical integration choices (over time but within modelsystems).13
Alternatively, if the system-specific differences across automobile models are determined by
circumstances independent of current vertical integration decisions, a consistent estimate of λ can be
identified by relying exclusively on differences across automobile models. In particular, we can identify
the interdependence among systems by relying exclusively on differences across different model-systems:

Yi , j = γ j + λY−i , j + β Zi Zi , j +ηi , j

(5)

where Z −i , j are the (excluded) instruments for Y−i , j .14 By assuming that the variation across firms in
their contracting environment are independent of the idiosyncratic returns to vertical contracting over
time, this estimator is identified by the presence of variation across different automobile models and
across systems within automobile models.
Finally, we can also implement a reduced-form strategy in the spirit of Arora (1996), where we
include both the system-specific drivers (Zi,j,t) of vertical integration as well as the system-specific drivers
of other systems within the same automobile model (Z-i,j,t):

Yi , j ,t = αi + γ j + δt + θZi Zi , j ,t + θ− Zi Z−i , j ,t + ε i, j ,t

(6)

Because our dataset includes (a) similar measures of the contracting environment for each system, and (b)
we control for the system-specific drivers in our analysis, the identification in this paper results from
measured differences in the contracting environment across systems within a given automobile model.
The reduced-form approach highlights this feature; if the correlation was driven by similarities in the
environment across systems, then the instrumental variables would be collinear with the system-specific
direct effects included in each model (i.e., H 0 : θ − Zi = 0 ).
Our empirical work explores each of these approaches, evaluating how our results differ when
employing estimators that rely on both cross-sectional and time-series variations or focus exclusively on
one dimension or the other.
13

By comparing results across alternative strategies, we obtain a more

Alternatively, we can implement (4) in first-differences: Δ Y

i , j ,t

= Δ δ t + λ Δ Y − i , j ,t + β Z i Δ Z i , j ,t + Δ η i , j ,t

This specification relies exclusively on variation in the contracting environment and vertical integration levels
across adjacent product generations, and, by clustering the standard errors at the model-system level, treats serial
correlation within model-systems. Unfortunately, due to our small sample size (and the fact that we observe exactly
two model-generations for several models), implementing a more efficient Arellano-Bond dynamic GMM panel
data estimator results in dropping more than 50% of our sample. Consequently, we limit our analysis to the
traditional first-differences IV estimator rather than the Arellano-Bond estimator (Arellano and Bond, 1991).
14
Alternatively, we can implement an initial conditions model, relying exclusively on variation in the initial
contracting environment across different automobile models. Assuming that variation in the initial contracting
environment is independent of the idiosyncratic returns to vertical integration over time, we can estimate
Yi , j ,t = γ j + δ t + λY− i , j ,t + β Z Z i , j ,0 + η i , j ,t , where Z-i,j,0 are the (excluded) instruments for Y-i,j,t.
i

13

complete assessment of the robustness of our results to alternative potential sources of endogeneity.
Moreover, since we observe multiple system-specific measures, we are able to perform a number of
specification tests, including a Hausman test of the exclusion restrictions imposed by our IV estimator.
Implementing these approaches requires adapting the framework to our application. First, while
several of the examples in Section II focused on interactions within automobile systems, our empirical
focus is on system-to-system interactions; though more aggregated than the case studies, this is the best
feasible alternative, since we only observe variation in the contracting environment at the system level.
Second, for each automobile model-generation, we observe seven different automobile systems; rather
than estimate the potential for complementarity between system pairs, we adapt the framework to
evaluate sensitivity of vertical integration on any one system to the “average” level of vertical integration
on all other systems within that automobile-generation.15 Third, while we observe instrumental variables
at the level of automobile systems (e.g., the brake system, the engine system, etc.), our measure of vertical
integration (in-house or external supplier) is at a more fine-grained component level (e.g., the gearbox,
the cylinder head, etc.). To accommodate this imbalance, we average the component decisions on each
system for each model to calculate the degree of vertical integration for each model-system (the resulting
integration measure thus varies between 0 and 1).
Finally, this framework allows us to evaluate whether the degree of complementarity varies with
observable factors, focusing on two types of interaction effects. First, we consider whether the degree of
complementarity is higher in environments where the returns to coordination and/or secrecy may be
particularly high. For example, we observe whether the firm designates a system for “high” performance,
in which the returns to coordination with other systems may be reduced.

To test this hypothesis, we

interact this “high performance” measure with Y-i, and construct additional instruments by interacting this
measure with Z-i.

Second, we consider whether complementarity among systems is particularly high

among systems that are tightly coupled in terms of design and coordination requirements.

Using our

qualitative knowledge, we group each system-to-system pair as a “high” or “low” interaction, and
evaluate a separate parameter for the sensitivity of vertical integration decisions among systems within
these two groups (i.e., are vertical integration choices that are rated to be highly interdependent more
sensitive to each other?). By extending our framework to evaluate whether the salience of contracting
complementarity varies with the product development environment, we are able to provide a more careful
assessment of the sources and nature of contracting complementarity in our empirical environment.

15

To do so, we first calculate, for each system, the sum of vertical integration for other systems on that automobile
model. We then adapt our instrumental variables strategy by calculating the sum of Z-i for each observation,
yielding instruments for Y-i in the empirical analysis.
14

IV.

The Data
Sample and Methods. This paper uses a proprietary and original dataset based on a multi-year

study of contracting and product architecture in the global auto industry. We study luxury performance
cars (defined by Consumer Reports as vehicles priced above $30,000 in 1995) and the companies in the
sample are drawn from Europe, the U.S. and Japan, accounting for roughly 90% of revenues in the global
luxury performance market. As these are flagship vehicles developed in different environments over
time, wide variation in contracting practices (and the contracting environment) was expected.

By

focusing on a single vehicle segment, we limit the measurement problems arising from combining
information from different vehicle types.
The unit of analysis is an automotive system for a model-generation, where a model-generation is
linked to the major model change for a given automobile model. For each model-generation, we observe
information for seven systems: engine, transmission, body, electrical, suspension, steering, and brakes.
For each of these systems, we observe information for nineteen model-generations, covering a fifteen year
window for seven models.16 The data were collected through on-site interviews with over 1000 people,
including CEOs, chief engineers, project managers and the system engineers involved in the development
of each model-generation.17
Data was collected through interviews conducted on-site at each company. To ensure accuracy,
interviewees were given an overview of the research project, definitions for terms and a list of questions
pertaining to the design and sourcing of components within their respective systems. The questions
focused on objective information (e.g. number of parts in the body side) so as to minimize the likelihood
of response bias. The overall sample is composed of 133 model-generation-system observations. Table 1
provides variable names, definitions, and summary statistics (Appendix B provides pairwise correlations).
Contracting Variables. The dependent variable is VERTICAL INTEGRATION, the percentage
of the system produced in-house, with 1 indicating in-house production of all components within that
system. For each component, system, vehicle model, and generation, we collected data on the make / buy
outcome. VERTICAL INTEGRATION at the system level is calculated as the average across the
individual components for that system, with each component weighted equally.18
16

VERTICAL

The coverage is between 1980 and 1995, and each of the model-generations are observed at (roughly) five-year
intervals, depending on the rhythm of product development for each manufacturer. Relative to the initial data
collection (Novak and Eppinger, 2001), we drop one automobile model due to lack of comprehensive data.
17
All participants were assured that only aggregate data would be presented, and confidentiality agreements were
signed with each company.All interviewees were given the option of being interviewed in their native languages.
Professor Kentaro Nobeoka graciously provided Japanese interview interpretation.
18
Parts supplied by wholly-owned subsidiaries, such as the Delphi division of General Motors, are treated as inhouse. Parts produced by partially owned suppliers, such as Nippondenso (Toyota group), were treated as outside
suppliers. Our core findings are robust whether we define partially owned suppliers as in-house or external.
15

INTEGRATION exhibits substantial variation across the sample, ranging from 0 (fully outsourced) to 1
(in-house production), with a mean of .48 and a standard deviation of .32. Moreover, much of this
variation is “model-specific.” Figure A plots 90% confidence intervals for VERTICAL INTEGRATION
for each of the 19 model-years in the sample.19 Relative to the variation in means across models, there is
significantly less variation within most models. In an OLS regression of VERTICAL INTEGRATION on
individual model-year dummies, R2 = 0.58, most model-year effects are individually significant, and the
overall F-test statistic is highly significant at 8.74. VERTICAL INTEGRATION is “clustered” according
to model-year; our empirical approach disentangles whether this clustering is due to complementarity or
results from unobservable “fixed effects” in governance.
We also calculate VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i, which is the sum of VERTICAL
INTEGRATION across all other systems within that model. Consistent with the empirical framework,
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i will be treated through the bulk of the analysis as endogenous; we
calculate the instruments for VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i from within-model-generation variation in
the system-specific contracting environment.
System-Specific Contracting Environment Measures. The identification strategy utilizes four
system-specific measures of the contracting environment. Each of these variables is measured at the
model-system level, can vary across systems within a given model-generation, and shifts the relative
returns to vertical integration at the system level. These measures allow us, in principle, to control for the
system-specific contracting environment (Zi,j,t) and calculate instruments, within each model- generation,
for VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i,j,t (Z-i,j,t).

Our empirical approach depends on combining our

qualitative knowledge of these system-specific contracting measures with the empirical approaches
outlined in Section III.
The dataset includes two different types of system-specific measures: factors relating to preexisting in-house capabilities/resources (SUNK COSTS and LOW CAPACITY), and factors relating to
the intensity of design and manufacturing challenges (COMPLEXITY and PLATFORM). We begin with
the measures related to the level of pre-existing capabilities. LOW CAPACITY is a dummy variable
indicating that, prior to contracting, the level of in-house capacity is insufficient to manufacture the
system in-house (mean = 0.17). If a certain system, like a one-piece body side, exceeds the capacity of
current plant equipment, the relative returns to outsourcing are increased. For this reason, we predict a
negative relationship between VERTICAL INTEGRATION and LOW CAPACITY.
SUNK COST is a dummy variable indicating whether there is pre-existing in-house sunk
investments for each system (mean = 0.13). Specifically, managers were asked whether or not existing
19

Confidentiality issues prohibit us from reporting exact levels and dispersion of vertical integration for individual
manufacturers.
16

plant equipment directly affected their design choices for the system, as systems are often designed
around plant-specific process equipment investments. Overall, the existence of pre-existing in-house
capital investment will tend to favor a positive relationship between VERTICAL INTEGRATION and
SUNK COST at the system level.
Turning to factors related to system-specific design and technology choice, PLATFORM is a
dummy variable equal to one for models with platform requirements where the component was designed
to be used by more than one vehicle. Platform requirements could support in-house production through
economies of scale achieved through parts sharing. For this reason, we expect a positive relationship
between PLATFORM and VERTICAL INTEGRATION.
As well, the degree of system-specific complexity should be positively related to VERTICAL
INTEGRATION. As developed in Novak and Eppinger (2001), the degree of system-level complexity
will impact the need for coordination across component elements of the system, encouraging in-house
contracting. Our measure of system complexity draws on several measures, based on detailed system
design and manufacturing data. For each system, we estimate product complexity on a scale from 0 to 1
(no complex system interactions to high product complexity) based on an unweighted average of
characteristics of design complexity.20

For some systems, measures include characteristics such as

“newness” - the degree to which a design configuration has been used in the company and in the vehicle.
For example, product complexity in the suspension system is calculated as an unweighted average of
three (0-1) measures: newness of the design, number of moving parts in the suspension and whether the
suspension is active or passive (Novak and Eppinger, 2001). The measure COMPLEXITY (mean = .41)
is the result of applying this procedure for each component within each system.
Exogeneity of the System-Specific Contracting Environment Measures. Ideally, variation in the
contracting environment (i.e., variation in each of these four measures) would result from strictly
exogenous shocks (e.g., unanticipated demand shocks for vehicle models in unrelated segments that share
facilities with the luxury models). While we do not observe an unambiguous natural experiment, our
assumption that these system-specific measures are exogenous reflects several related aspects of the
contracting environment, our dataset, and our econometric approach.
First, our qualitative knowledge of the contracting environment suggests that we can (at least in
part) exploit the path-dependent nature of vertical integration choices and the relative independence
managers had during the time of our sample period over individual contracting choices. From an
historical perspective, investments in sunk assets and production capacity are made many years (perhaps
decades) in advance of individual model-generation contracting choices (e.g., Ford has maintained
multiple engine plants continuously since the 1940s) and design and technology choices are made well in
20

Each system-specific complexity measure is based on system engineering principles (Novak and Eppinger, 2001).
17

advance of the vertical integration choices for individual components within individual systems, primarily
based on factors unrelated to vertical integration. For example, while GM’s commitment to develop antilock braking systems in 1980 greatly increased the complexity associated with their braking systems
throughout the 1990s, this technology commitment was made well in advance of information about
opportunities for contracting with specific external suppliers for this system.21

Historical factors are

particularly significant when relying on variation across automobile manufacturers, rather than within
model-systems over time. Additionally, during our sample period, individual managers maintained a high
level of discretion over the outsourcing choice at the component (or, at most, system) level, and managers
were able to vertically integrate or not in response to idiosyncratic circumstances.22

For example, a

component-level manager had the latitude to choose a specific supplier (over an in-house option) based
on that supplier’s component-specific reputation or skills (respondent interview). Of course, the fact that
the system-specific contracting measures are determined in advance of the contracting choice and
managers maintain discretion over this choice does not ensure exogeneity. Instead, our argument is that
the specific system-specific measures we observe shape the contracting environment but are largely
independent of an important idiosyncratic component (i.e., the econometric error) that also contributes to
contracting choices.
Second, our instrumental variables strategy relies exclusively on variation in the contracting
environment across model-systems within the same model-generation. Our approach is to use measures
(such as LOW CAPACITY-i) as instrumental variables for VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i, while at the
same time controlling directly for LOW CAPACITYi.

As a practical matter, this approach only has

empirical bite if there is variation between our instrumental variables (e.g., LOW CAPACITY-i) and our
control variables (e.g., LOW CAPACITYi). If a firm makes a fixed investment in contracting (e.g.,
lawyers, accountants, etc.), and under-invests in capacity in response to this investment, this would lead to
a LOW CAPACITY = 0 for all systems within that manufacturer. In contrast, we observe a high level of
variation across systems within individual models, as documented in the final column of Table 1. Of the
19 model-years in our sample, 13 exhibit variation across systems in SUNK COST, 17 exhibit variation
in LOW CAPACITY, and all models display variation in the PLATFORM and COMPLEXITY measures.
21

As the specification and integration challenges vary significantly from one model generation to another, and from
one component to the next, the legal and transactional costs of contracting are largely independent of integration
choices on prior product generations or other components. For example, even when a manufacturer seeks to
contract for a single component for two separate automobile models (e.g., an Autoliv airbag for a mid-size model
and for a luxury model), the contracting process (and associated costs) are mostly independent: the effort associated
with specifying the mid-market airbag neither raises nor lowers the costs associated with the detailed contracting
process for the feature-rich and specifications-oriented luxury version (respondent interview).
22
While outsourcing multiple systems to a particular supplier might be expected to result in economies of scope and
scale, this practice was only observed in practice after our sample period. Over the past ten years, at least in part to
take advantage of outsourcing opportunities while maintaining some level of coordination, manufacturers have
outsourced multiple systems to Tier 1 suppliers such as Lear and Johnson Controls.
18

This means that within a specific model, some systems were low capacity and others were not.

For

example, for one of the models, SUNK COST = 0 on suspensions and SUNK COST = 1 for engines.
While the historic presence of an engine plant continues to lower the in-house cost for engine component
production, pre-existing assets did not lower the costs of in-house production for suspensions relative to
outsourcing. We exploit this variation across systems to identify the interdependence among governance
choices for those systems.
Finally, as discussed in Section III, the instrumental variables framework can be adapted to (a)
rely exclusively on variation over time within model-systems (i.e., a fixed effects or first-differences IV
estimator), (b) exclusively on variation across model-systems (the initial conditions IV estimator or the
between effects IV estimator), or (c) incorporate both sources of variation. These alternative control
structures allow us to control for distinct sources of potential correlation between the system-specific
contracting measures and the unobserved returns to vertical integration, and to rely on different sources of
variation within our data.

For example, while the fixed effects estimator assumes that changes in the

contracting environment within model systems over time are uncorrelated with changes in the systemspecific returns to vertical integration, the initial conditions estimator assumes that the initial level of the
contracting environment is exogenously given, and controls for any changes arising during our sample
period.23 These alternative control structures exploit distinct types of variation in the system-specific
measures. While SUNK COST and LOW CAPACITY primarily vary across model-systems (indeed,
SUNK COST has no variation within a model-system over time), COMPLEXITY and PLATFORM
exhibit variation both within model-systems over time and across model-systems. Moreover, since we
observe multiple system-specific contracting measures, we can evaluate how the estimates change with
the inclusion or exclusion of individual variables, and test the exclusion restrictions implied by the model
(i.e. a Hausman test for the exogeneity of VERTICAL INTEGRATION and an overidentification test for
the exogeneity of the instruments). Our empirical approach is thus justified by the use of a range of
alternative specifications, our qualitative understanding of the origins of variation in the contracting
environment, and our ability to exploit variation across systems within individual automobile models.
Technology and Location Controls. Our dataset also includes technology and location measures
which are not predicted to have a direct impact on VERTICAL INTEGRATION but may impact the
degree of contracting complementarity.24

First, DESIGN GOAL is a dummy variable equal to 1 if an

individual system is associated with “high” system-specific performance and design goals.
23

The

Moreover, the estimates of λ turn out to be quite stable across alternative identification approaches, suggesting
that no single source of spurious correlation contaminates our main findings.
24
While each of these measures was originally collected as instrumental variables for COMPLEXITY (discussed in
Novak and Eppinger (2001)), they may also serve to mediate the relative importance of coordinating contracting
choices across systems.
19

importance of these goals were provided by vehicle product managers, on a 0-10 scale, with 0 indicating
no importance for product performance goals and 10 indicating that the vehicle competes based on high
system performance. Certain performance goals necessitate more complex product designs, such as more
integral architectures (Ulrich, 1995).

For example, a high top-speed capability requires a body system

consisting of tightly interconnected parts. Since systems for which performance goals are very high are
likely to be associated with high system-specific complexity, integration with other systems may be less
important, and so DESIGN GOAL may reduce the importance of contracting complementarity in
contracting choice. Similarly, SKILL SHORTAGE (mean = .15) is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
system-specific worker skills are absent within current plant locations. For example, it is much more
costly to produce a body design featuring many complex manual welds in an area where workers are not
trained in advanced welding. Vehicle product managers were asked whether the absence of worker skills
played a role in design considerations for each system. Because SKILL SHORTAGE may constrain the
system-specific contracting choices for individual components and systems, SKILL SHORTAGE may
reduce the degree to which an auto manufacturer can coordinate contracting choices over systems.
While small sample size prevents us from directly identifying complementarities between specific
systems (e.g., engine and transmission), we can still divide the system pairs into those with a tight
coupling during product development, and thus with significant expected complementarities, and those
with loose coupling during product development, where we would not expect to see resulting
complementarities.25 We define tight coupling as a frequent (hourly or daily vs. monthly or longer) need
for coordination of systems i and j during product development.26 For example, in order to make any
major changes to suspension specifications, it is essential to check the possible effects of such changes to
the steering system specifications to ensure their joint performance. Given this need for coordination, we
define this pair as highly coupled and would expect to see strong complementarity between such coupled
pairs. Of our 21 possible system pairs, we identify 14 as tightly coupled and 7 as loosely coupled.
System, Year, and Company Fixed Effects. We also observe a potential driver of contracting at
the model-year level, UNION. UNION is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if any component is
produced in house and covered under a union agreement. If a system is produced in a plant with a union
agreement, the union may exert pressure to produce as much of the system in-house as possible (in order
to ensure in-house employment).

To the extent that this pressure is successful, we expect a positive

relationship between UNION and VERTICAL INTEGRATION (of course, we exclude this measure in
specifications with model-year fixed effects). Finally, we calculate fixed effects for seven automobile

25

We thank one of the anonymous referees for this helpful suggestion.
For each system pair, company experts evaluated “high” vs. “low” coupling in terms of frequency of coordination
need. See Steward (1981) for a discussion and methodology for identifying coupling among development tasks.

26

20

system (SEATS are the excluded category), three model generation dummies (the first observation for a
given model is the excluded category) and eight company dummies (company dummies are suppressed to
preserve confidentiality).

The empirical analysis explores each of these control structures to identify the

variation driving the core findings and to highlight the robustness of the results to alternative sources of
variation.
V.

Empirical Results
Our empirical analysis is divided into several steps.

First, we present our core findings,

examining the sensitivity of the degree of vertical integration in any one system to the “average” vertical
integration choice of other systems in that model. Our instrumental variables strategy allows us to
distinguish contracting complementarity from a firm-level “taste” for vertical integration, and to evaluate
the robustness of this finding to alternative control structures and specifications. We next present a
reduced-form approach (in the spirit of Arora, 1996), examining the impact of the instrumental variables
themselves on contracting choice. We then turn to more detailed findings, examining how the degree of
contracting complementarity depends on factors in the contracting environment, and whether the
interdependence among systems determines the degree of complementarity. Though the modest size of
the dataset makes us cautious in interpreting the findings, our results accord with a model where the
inability to contract with external suppliers for effective coordination induces contracting
complementarity among system-level vertical integration choices.
An Instrumental Variables Approach to Testing for Contracting Complementarity. We begin in
Table 2 with two OLS regressions of VERTICAL INTEGRATION on VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i
and our main control variables. To account for potential correlation within model-systems over modelgenerations, all standard errors in Table 2 are clustered at the model-system level. While (2-1) includes a
very simple specification with only two control variables (SUNK COST and LOW CAPACITY), (2-2)
includes the complete set of control variables, including all of the system-specific contracting measures,
system and model-generation dummy variables, and the UNION dummy. Many of these individual
system effects are significant (and different than each other), and LOW CAPACITY is negatively related
to VERTICAL INTEGRATION in both specifications. The most striking result is the quantitatively large
and statistically significant coefficient on VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i.27 According to these OLS
specifications, a shift of one unit in VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i. is associated with a 14 percentage
point increase in the VERTICAL INTEGRATION share for that system.
27

Though the bulk of the remaining results reflect our instrumental variables approach, the OLS findings
highlighted in the first two columns of Table 2 are robust across a wide range of specifications. The coefficient on
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i in a univariate regression (with a constant) is 0.143 (with a standard error of 0.021).
Also, as reported in the first two columns of Appendices C-1, C-2 and C-3, a similar coefficient (from 0.13 to 0.15
and always highly significant) is estimated in the context of an OLS between estimator and an OLS initial conditions
estimator over a wide variety of specifications.
21

These OLS results may be spurious, driven by firm-specific unobservables inducing a high
correlation among the contracting choices of the firm across systems.

We address this with an

instrumental variables strategy. In the final two columns of Table 2, we instrument for VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i with the sums of contracting measures such as SUNK COST or LOW CAPACITY for
other systems within that model-year but for system i.

While the excluded instruments for (2-3) are

LOW CAPACITY-i and SUNK COST-i, the excluded instruments for (2-3) also include PLATFORM-i
and COMPLEXITY-i. Except for our treatment of VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i as endogenous, (2-3)
and (2-4) are identical to the OLS specifications in (2-1) and (2-2), respectively. In both specifications,
the instrumental variables coefficient on VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i is positive and significant (and
larger in magnitude than the OLS coefficient). While a Hausman test cannot reject the exogeneity of
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i in (2-3), the Hausman test rejects the OLS specification at the 10% level
in the more detailed specification (2-4).28 The overall magnitude is similar to the OLS estimates – a shift
in the contracting environment that induces a one unit change in VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i is
associated with a 15-18 percentage point increase in the predicted level of VERTICAL INTEGRATION
for an individual system. This result is consistent with the importance of coordination in contracting –
namely that once an outside shock such as a change in underlying technology results in in-house
development of a system such as the suspension, there are incremental gains to be had by locating
development of related systems, such as the engine, in the same organization.
These results are reinforced when we focus on specific sources of variation in Table 3.29,30 In (31), we present the results of an instrumental variables “between” estimator which relies exclusively on
variation across models. This estimator abstracts away from all variation within model-systems over time
and the instrumental variables vector is calculated using the average of the system-specific contracting
measures (e.g., SUNK COST) across all model-generations. The estimate is consistent with our earlier
28

The exogeneity of the instrumental variables cannot be rejected in any of these specifications.
Appendix C includes a number of robustness checks focusing on specific sources of variation, and alternative
specifications. Each table in Appendix C includes OLS and IV estimates for a particular specification, presenting
the “between” estimator and the “initial conditions” estimator for that specification. While the between estimator
abstracts away from all variation within model-systems over time, the initial conditions estimator drops the first
observation associated with each model-system, and estimates the sensitivity of subsequent governance choices (i.e.,
subsequent model-generations) to the contracting environment associated with the initial contracting environment.
Our core finding – complementarity among system-level governance choices – is robust across all of these checks.
We have also explored a range of 3SLS estimator which jointly estimates the VERTICAL INTEGRATION and
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i equations, accounting for correlation across equations and including detailed controls
(including model-system fixed effects). The results remain similar in magnitude and significance.
30
In unreported specifications, the IV results are robust across a wide number of additional checks. The results are
similar using other system-specific measures, such as a measure of technology use and the severity of the major
model change. In addition, the results are robust to the use of company-specific time trends, and alternative
treatments of partially owned suppliers and spin-offs. Finally, the results are robust to treating the continuous
measure VERTICAL INTEGRATION as a discrete variable (e.g., based on a “threshold” level such as .25, .5, and
.75), and implementing an IV probit accounting for the discrete nature of the dependent variable.
29

22

findings, and our qualitative evidence. For example, one model in our sample features a vehicle body
associated with a high level of sunk costs and platform requirements throughout the sample, while its
steering system has a low level of system-specific sunk assets and few platform requirements. Despite
system-specific conditions favoring outsourcing in the steering system, the majority of steering system
components have been consistently maintained in-house, at least in part to facilitate coordination between
the steering system and in-house body development (respondent interviews).
The final two columns of Table 3 shift the focus towards variation within model-systems over
time.

These IV estimators rely exclusively on whether changes in the system-specific contracting

environment are associated with changes in the level of vertical integration. By focusing on variation
within model-systems, these estimators account directly for the possibility that our cross-sectional results
may result from a spurious correlation between the system-specific contracting environment and the level
of vertical integration. For example, it is possible that those firms who choose a lower level of vertical
integration (across all systems) maintain a low level of system-specific capacity and sunk assets. While
our qualitative evidence mitigates against this possibility, and our identification strategy relies on
variation in the contracting environment within a given model, it is useful to examine whether our
evidence for complementarity among governance choices depends on the cross-sectional variation in our
dataset. We present two alternative approaches. While (3-2) reports the results from a model-system
fixed effects instrumental variables estimator, (3-3) presents estimates associated with a first-differenced
IV estimator.31 As discussed in Section IV, while there is no variation in SUNK COSTS within modelsystems over time (and very limited variation in LOW CAPACITY), there is a considerable amount of
“within” variation in COMPLEXITY and PLATFORM, and so our within-model-system results depend
on the inclusion of these two measures. Though these results focus on a very narrow form of variation
within our dataset, the core results are similar; the coefficient on VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i is
precisely estimated and of a similar magnitude than results relying on cross-sectional variation. Though
the limited size of our dataset makes us cautious in interpreting these results, the evidence suggests that
the high level of correlation in vertical integration choices across systems does not simply reflect an
unobserved firm-level effect but seems to be grounded in observable variation in the contracting
environment across the different systems of a given automobile model.
A Reduced-Form Approach to Testing for Contracting Complementarity. Table 4 explores the
logic further by examining how contracting for a given system is impacted by the contracting
environment for other systems by directly including the excluded instruments from Table 2 in an OLS
specification. This reduced-form strategy follows Arora (1996), who derives the conditions under which
31

While (3-2) includes 133 observations and 49 model-system fixed effects, (3-3) uses only 84 first-differenced
observations; both specifications include controls for model-generation.
23

a reduced-form approach to testing for complementarity in organizational design is possible.

In

particular, our identification approach depends on measured differences in the contracting environment
across systems within a given automobile model. The reduced-form approach highlights this feature; if
the correlation was driven by similarities in the environment across systems, then the instrumental
variables would be collinear with the system-specific direct effects included in each model.32
In (4-1), both LOW CAPACITY and SUNK COSTS are included, as well as LOW CAPACITY-i
and SUNK COSTS-i.

Both the direct effects of LOW CAPACITY and LOW CAPACITY-i are

statistically and quantitatively significant (interestingly, a one-standard deviation of either variable is
predicted to have a similar impact). The remaining specifications, which include PLATFORM (and
PLATFORM-i) and COMPLEXITY (and COMPLEXITY-i) display a similar pattern. Specifically, even
after controlling for system fixed effects and year controls, both individual direct effects (e.g. SUNK
COST) and individual instrumental variables (e.g., SUNK COSTS-i) are individually significant. This is
consistent with our earlier example where an environment that favored vertical integration on the body
system seems to have induced vertical integration on related systems such as steering. Overall, Table 4
suggests that correlation in contracting across systems is not simply a firm-specific effect but is related to
variation in the contracting environment across systems within a given model-generation.
Does the Interdependence Among Systems Depend on Technological or Locational Constraints?
While our results so far suggest that governance choices are empirically linked, the sensitivity of the
vertical integration choice on one system to other choices in the same model might depend on other facets
of the environment. In particular, our qualitative work suggests that the importance of coordination with
other systems may matter less for decision-making when a firm faces technological or locational
constraints. For example, when one firm faced a lack of skills in complicated manual welding, the
decision was made to outsource body development, despite the strong need for coordination with other inhouse systems (respondent interview). Table 5 explores the impact of interactions between VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i and measures that might mitigate the importance of coordinated contracting. In (5-1),
we consider an interaction with DESIGN GOAL, under the hypothesis that coordination with other
systems may be less important when a particular system must achieve a high level of technological
performance. In (5-2), we examine whether constraints on the location-specific availability of systemspecific resources (i.e., SKILL SHORTAGE = 1) reduces the relative importance of coordinated
contracting. For each of these specifications, we extend our instrumental variables strategy, constructing
32

Within our dataset, there are significant differences between the control variables Zi and the instrumental
variables, Z-i. On a pairwise basis, SUNK COST and S_SUNK COST are negatively correlated (ρ = -0.16), LOW
CAPACITY and S_LOW CAPACITY are also negatively correlated (ρ = -0.38), PLATFORM and S_PLATFORM
are essentially uncorrelated (ρ = 0.04) and COMPLEXITY and S_COMPLEXITY are positively correlated (ρ =
0.32). These patterns are consistent with our earlier discussion suggesting that there exists significant within-model
across-system variation in the observed contracting environment.
24

instruments by multiplying each system-specific vertical integration driver and the instrumental variables
for VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i employed in Table 2. The results, though noisy, are suggestive. First,
the direct effect of VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i continues to be quantitatively and statistically
significant across both specifications. Turning to the interaction effects, VI-i*DESIGN GOAL is negative
though insignificant. While this coefficient is sometimes significant with the inclusion of additional
variables, we present this noisy result to emphasize its limited statistical power. On the other hand, the
coefficient on VI-i*SKILL SHORTAGE is negative and significant. These basic patterns are consistent
across a wide range of specifications, including one where we include both VI-i*PERFORMANCE and
VI-i*SKILL SHORTAGE in the same regression. Taken together, the results are consistent with the
hypothesis that the level of complementarity might be related to the marginal returns to system-to-system
coordination activities, a process which is more effectively conducted through joint in-house contracting.
Does Complementarity Arise Among Systems with a High Level of Interdependency? Finally, we
recognize that the relative returns to effective cross-system coordination may be different for different
systems. For example, while the level of interaction between suspension and steering is quite high, the
level of required coordination and interaction between body and brakes is relatively low. We therefore
explore whether the sensitivity of vertical integration choices on one system to vertical integration choices
on other systems are particularly salient for those systems that are themselves highly coupled. As
discussed in Section IV, to examine the impact of the degree of interdependency, we group system-pairs
into those with high and low coupling. Among our 21 potential system-pairs, 14 are rated as Tightly
Coupled Systems and 7 are rated as Loosely Coupled Systems. For each system, we calculate a measure
of the level of vertical integration for those systems that are Tightly Coupled and Loosely Coupled.33 We
also calculate instrumental variables for these two measures of vertical integration on other systems
within the same model-generation. Table 6 reports the OLS and IV estimates using this approach (these
specifications include system and model-generation dummies, and are clustered at the model-system
level). While the estimate of complementarity among tightly coupled systems is significant and similar in
magnitude to earlier results, the sensitivity to Loosely Coupled systems is insignificant, small in absolute
value, and negative in sign.

This engineering-driven definition of the relationship among systems

provides additional evidence for the sensitivity to governance choices across systems.
VI. Conclusions
This paper examines the impact of contracting complementarity across vertical integration
decisions in automobile product development.

Building on a detailed qualitative understanding of the

33

In order to make the magnitudes of the coefficients comparable with our earlier results, we calculate this measure
as 7*(average level of vertical integration for systems with a given level of coupling).
25

potential for interdependencies in contracting decisions, we test this hypothesis using an instrumental
variables approach that allows us to distinguish contracting complementarity from firm-level factors
inducing correlation among the firm’s governance choices. We find a consistent pattern of support for the
complementarity hypothesis. Using instrumental variables to account for the endogeneity of the vertical
integration choices for other systems within a model, the probability of vertical integration for each
automobile system increases in share of other systems that are vertically integrated.

This finding is

robust to the inclusion or exclusion of various control variables, and does not depend on whether we focus
exclusively on time-series or cross-sectional variation. The evidence in favor of complementarity turns
out to be strongest in those environments where we expect strong interdependence among vertical
integration choices (i.e., tightly coupled systems).
While we interpret these findings cautiously, it is possible to draw out some implications from the
analysis. First, our results suggest that assuming away contracting complementarity may be problematic
in contexts where coordination and integration activities are both important and difficult to monitor. As
emphasized by a number of “insider econometrics” studies (Ichniowski and Shaw, 2003), organizational
design choices are interdependent and economic analysis of individual choices in isolation are likely to be
biased. Second, the analysis suggests that there are empirical implications to contracting even when
where there are no ex ante differences in the ability to write contracts but there are ex post differences in
the ability to enforce and/or monitor agreements. In other words, our hypothesis is a simple but novel
implication of a model in which firms must make multiple interdependent and long-lived contracting
choices. Finally, the econometric framework offered by this paper offers a refinement on prior research
emphasizing the importance of choice-specific instruments in testing for complementarity in
organizational design.

Specifically, by collecting the data so that each choice-specific measure is

observed in a symmetric fashion across choices, this paper proposes and implements a less ad-hoc
instrumental variables test for complementarity in organizational design.
These findings have a range of implications for future work. In Novak and Stern (2007), for
example, we explore the performance implications of vertical integration over the product development
lifecycle. Building on recent work in organizational economics and strategy, we investigate whether
outsourcing may be associated with a performance premium at the earliest stages of the lifecycle (as
external suppliers exploit their specialized capabilities in meeting the terms of initial contracts), while
vertical integration may be associated with performance improvement over the lifecycle (as internal teams
can be motivated even after formal contractual requirements are fulfilled). We are able to exploit the
instrumental variables strategy developed in this paper to account for the endogeneity of vertical
integration within that analysis.
As well, the analysis highlights an important distinction between the need for coordination effort

26

across divisional boundaries and the expropriation risk that arises when proprietary information is shared
across firm boundaries. While our current analysis does not allow us to disentangle these two drivers of
contracting complementarity, identifying the drivers of interdependency among vertical integration
decisions seems like a promising avenue. At the same time, research should also consider how concerns
about the formal nature of contracts interact with potential for relational contracting, within and across
firms. For contract theory to have empirical relevance, theory must have implications for potential
observables, and empirical research must be tailored to measure these subtle but observable factors.

REFERENCES
Alexander, C. (1964), Notes on the Synthesis of Form, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence
and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies 58(2): 277-97.
Arora, A. (1996), “Testing for Complementarities in Reduced Form Regressions: A Note,” Economics
Letters 50(1): 51-55.
Athey, S. and S. Stern (2004), “An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories of Complementarity in
Organizational Design,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Azoulay, P. (2004), “Capturing Knowledge Within and Across Firm Boundaries: Evidence from Clinical
Development,” American Economic Review 94(5): 1591–1612.
Baker, G. and T. Hubbard (2004), “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board Computers and
Governance in U.S. Trucking,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 1443-1479.
Baker, G., R. Gibbons and K. Murphy (1994), “Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal Incentive
Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 1125-56.
Baker, G., R. Gibbons and K. Murphy (2002), “Relational Contracts and the Theory of the Firm,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 39-84.
Baldwin, C. and K.B. Clark (2000), Design Rules: Volume I, the Power of Modularity, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Bigelow, L. (2003), “Make-or-Buy Revisited: A Longitudinal, Population-wide Test of Transaction Cost
Alignment,” mimeo, Olin School of Management, Washington University.
Casadesus-Masanell, R. and D.F. Spulber (2000), “The Fable of Fisher Body,” Journal of Law and
Economics 43(1): 67-104.
Cassiman, B. and R. Veugelers (2007), “In Search of Complementarity in the Innovation Strategy:
Internal R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition,” Management Science, forthcoming.
Clark, K. and T. Fujimoto (1991), Product Development Performance, Strategy, Organization, and
Management in the World Auto Industry, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Coase, R. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica 4(16): 386-405.
Cockburn, I., R. Henderson and S. Stern (2003), “Balancing Incentives: The Tension between Basic and
Applied Research,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Eppinger, S. D., D.E. Whitney, R.P. Smith and D.A. Gebala (1994), “A Model-Based Method for
Organizing Tasks in Product Development,” Research in Engineering Design 6(1): 1-13.
Hart, O. (1995), Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Clarendon Press, Oxford, England.
Hart, O. and J. Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of Political
Economy 98: 1119-1158.

27

Helper, S. (1995), “Supplier Relations and the Adoption of New Technology: Results of Survey Research
in the U.S. Auto Industry,” NBER Working Paper 5278.
Helper, S. (1997), “Complementarity and Cost Reduction: Evidence from the Automobile Supply
Industry,” NBER Working Paper 6033.
Holmstrom, B. (1999), “The Firm as a Subeconomy,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
15(1): 74-102
Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1994), “The Firm as an Incentive System,” American Economic Review
84: 972-991.
Ichniowski, C. and K. Shaw (2003), “Beyond Incentive Pay: Insiders' Estimates of the Value of
Complementary Human Resource Management Practices,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1):
155-180.
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw and G. Prennushi (1997), “The Effects of Human Resource Management
Practices on Productivity,” American Economic Review 87(3): 291-313.
Joskow, P. (1988), “Asset Specificity and the Structure of Vertical Relationships: Empirical
Evidence,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 4: 95-117.
Kalogeridis, C. (2005), “The Ford/Firestone Fiasco: Coming to Blows,” Automotive Industries 185(1):
22-24.
Kiley, D. (2001), “Lawsuits broil over grille similarities,” USA Today February 15, 2001.
Klein, B., R. Crawford and A. Alchian (1978), “Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents and the
Competitive Contracting Process,” Journal of Law and Economics 21: 297-326.
Kumar, A. (2001), “After the Rollover Series: Deadly Combination: Ford, Firestone & Florida,” St.
Petersburg Times May 21, 2001.
Levin, J. (2003), “Relational Incentive Contracts,” American Economic Review 93(3): 835-855.
MacDuffie, J. (1995), “Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Performance: Organizational Logic
and Flexible Production Systems in the World Auto Industry,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 48(2): 197-221.
Masten, S. (1984), “The Organization of Production: Evidence from the Aerospace Industry,”
Journal of Law and Economics 27: 403-417.
Masten, S., Meehan, J. and E. Snyder (1991), “The Costs of Organization,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 7: 1-25.
Masten, S. and S. Saussier (2002), “The Econometrics of Contracts: An Assessment of Developments in
the Empirical Literature on Contracting,” in The Economics of Contracts: Theory and Application, E.
Brousseau and J-M. Glachant, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1990), “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, Strategy,
and Organization,” American Economic Review 80(6): 511-528.
Milgrom, P. and C. Shannon (1994), “Monotone Comparative Statics,” Econometrica 62(1): 157-80.
Miravete, E.J. and J.C. Pernias (2006), “Innovation Complementarity and Scale of Production,” Journal
of Industrial Economics 54(1): 1-29.
Monteverde, K. and D. Teece (1982), “Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical Integration in the
Automobile Industry,” Bell Journal of Economics 13: 206-213.
Nickerson, J. (1997), “Toward an Economizing Theory of Strategy: The Choice of Strategic Position,
Assets, and Organizational Form,” Dissertation, U.C.Berkeley.
Nickerson, J. and B. Silverman (2003), “Why Aren’t All Truck Drivers Owner-Operators? Asset
Ownership and the Employment Relation in Interstate For-Hire Trucking,” Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy 12(1): 91-118.
Novak, S. and S.D. Eppinger (2001), “Sourcing by Design: Product Complexity and the Supply Chain,”
Management Science 47(1): 189-204.

28

Novak, S. and P. Klibanoff (2004), “Contracting, Directed Parts, and Complexity in Automotive
Outsourcing Decisions.” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Novak, S. and S. Stern (2007), “How Does Outsourcing Affect Performance Dynamics? Evidence from
the Automobile Industry,” NBER Working Paper.
Pil, F. and J. MacDuffie (1996), “The Adoption of High-Involvement Work Practices,” mimeo, Wharton
School of Business.
Richman, B.D. and J. Macher (2006), “Transaction Cost Economics: An Assessment of Empirical
Research in the Social Sciences,” mimeo, Georgetown University.
Segal, I. (1999), “Contracting with Externalities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2): 337-388.
Steward, D.V. (1981), "The Design Structure System: A Method for Managing the Design of Complex
Systems," IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 28(3): 71-74.
Suh, N. (1990), The Principles of Design, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Suh, N. (1999), “A Theory of Complexity, Periodicity, and the Design Axioms”, Research in
Engineering Design 11: 116-131.
Tirole. J. (1999), “Incomplete Contracts: Where Do We Stand?" Econometrica 67(4): 741-782.
Ulrich, K. (1995), “The Role of Product Architecture in the Manufacturing Firm,” Research Policy 24:
419-440.
Ulrich, K. and S. D. Eppinger (1995), Product Design and Development, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2006), "Complementarities in Automobile Production,” NBER Working Paper
12131.
Whinston, M.D. (2003), “On the Transaction Cost Determinants of Vertical Integration,” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization 19(1): 1-23.
Williamson, O. E .(1979), “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contract Relations,”
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 22: 3-61.

29

FIGURE A
Confidence Intervals for Vertical Integration
By Model-Year
(90% confidence bands)

1
0.9
0.8

Mean VI

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

Models
(Orderded by Average VI)

TABLE 1
Variables & Definitions
VARIABLE

DEFINITION

MEAN

CONTRACTING VARIABLES
VERTICAL
Percentage of the system produced in house between 0 and 1 (1
INTEGRATION
indicates all in-house production)
VERTICAL
Sum of VERTICAL INTEGRATION for all systems excepting i on
INTEGRATION-i
model j
SYSTEM-SPECIFIC CONTRACTING ENVIRONMENT MEASURES
Dummy = 1 if pre-existing in-house sunk costs and/or plant
SUNK COST
investment for system i
Dummy = 1 if plant has insufficient capacity to manufacture system
LOW CAPACITY
design in-house
PLATFORM
Dummy = 1 if component are designed to be used for more than one
vehicle model
Degree of System Complexity, ranging from 0 to 1 (See Novak and
COMPLEXITY
Eppinger, 2001).
Measure for design-oriented performance goals at the system level,
DESIGN GOAL
ranging from 0 (low) to 1 (high)
Dummy = 1 if key worker skills are missing in existing plant
SKILL SHORTAGE
locations
MODEL-YEAR MEASURE
UNION

Dummy = 1if a component has been produced in-house and is
covered under union agreement

GENERATION X

Dummy = 1 if model-generation is equal to X, 0 else
(X = 2, 3, or 4)

30

STD.
DEV.

# OF
MODELS w/
V(Xj) > 0

.485

.324

19

2.910

1.495

19

.128

.335

13

.172

.378

17

.526

.501

19

.415

.272

19

.449

.309

19

.150

.359

17

.496

0

.421

TABLE 2
OLS and IV Regressions
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION (N=133)
OLS Regressions
Instrumental Variables Regressions
(2-1)
(2-2)
(2-3)
(2-4)
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i

.140***
(.018)
-.003
(.084)
-.153***
(.059)

.142***
(.023)
SUNK COST
.113
(.093)
LOW CAPACITY
-.160***
(.067)
PLATFORM
.018
(.047)
COMPLEXITY
.085
(.092)
UNION
.048
(.100)
SYSTEM AND MODEL-GENERATION DUMMY VARIABLES
SUSPENSION
-.414***
BRAKES
TRANSMISSION
ENGINE
STEERING
BODY
GENERATION 2
GENERATION 3
GENERATION 4
CONSTANT
R2
RHS Endogenous
Variables
Instrumental Variables

.106*
(.058)
.472

(.127)
-.131
(.083)
-.139*
(.077)
-.189**
(.098)
-.475***
(.095)
-.222**
(.093)
-.007
(.025)
-.017
(.031)
-.070
(.066)
.257***
(.064)
.690

.153***
(.036)
-.011
(.093)
-.146***
(.061)

.066
(.104)

.179***
(.046)
.138
(.106)
-.163***
(.069)
.040
(.058)
.087
(.095)
-.047
(.146)
-.422***
(.119)
-.139*
(.081)
-.150*
(.081)
-.208**
(.102)
-.505***
(.107)
-.238**
(.094)
-.006
(.026)
-.007
(.031)
-.045
(.072)
.183*
(.101)

VERTICAL
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
INTEGRATION-i
For system i of model j, sum each modelspecific measure for all systems but j:
⎛
⎞
Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟
l
=
1,...,7
⎝
⎠
⎧ SUNK COST ⎫
⎧ SUNK COST ⎫
Z =⎨
⎬
⎪LOW CAPACITY⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩LOW CAPACITY⎭
Z =⎨
⎬
⎪ PLATFORM ⎪
⎪⎩ COMPLEXITY ⎪⎭

Notes:

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.
(3) Equation (2-3): A Hausman test cannot reject exogeneity of VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i (p-value = 0.494). A
Hausman test cannot reject exogeneity of instruments (p-value = 0.87)
(4) Equation (2-4): A Hausman test rejects exogeneity of VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i at the 10% level
(p-value = 0.089). A Hausman test cannot reject exogeneity of instruments (p-value = 0.85)

31

TABLE 3
Instrumental Variables Regressions:
“Between” and “Within” Estimators
Instrumental Variables Regressions
(3-1)
(3-2)
(3-3)
“Between” IV
Model-System Fixed
Model-System FirstEstimator
Effects IV
Differenced IV
(N = 133, 49 groups)
Estimator
Estimator
(N = 133)
(N = 84)
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i

.170**
(.035)
.148
(.122)
-.159
(.111)
.036
(.072)
.056
(.146)

SUNK COST
LOW CAPACITY
PLATFORM
COMPLEXITY
GENERATION 2
GENERATION 3
GENERATION 4
UNION
CONSTANT
#Restr
6

.228*
(.118)
-.089
(.217)
F-Stat
33.80

.143**
(.071)

.158**
(.076)

.068
(.068)
.028
(.058)
.087
(.074)
-.002
(.023)
-.017
(.040)
-.035
(.071)

-.014
(.073)
.030
(.059)
.058
(.080)

.013
(.221)

-.003
(.021)

.238
.110
.822

.257
.151
.742

VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i

VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i

-.004
(.042)
-.019
(.081)

p-value
0.00

Parametric Restrictions
SYSTEM DUMMIES
σu
σε
ρ
(% variance due to μi)
RHS Endogenous
Variables

VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i

Instrumental Variables

For system i of model j, sum each model-specific measure for all systems but j:
⎛
⎞
Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟
⎝ l =1,...,7
⎠
⎧ ___________________ ⎫
⎪ SUNK COST ⎪
⎪__________________________ ⎪
⎪LOW CAPACITY⎪
Z = ⎨ ___________________
⎬
⎪ PLATFORM
⎪
⎪ _______________________ ⎪
⎪ COMPLEXITY ⎪
⎩
⎭

Notes:

⎧LOW CAPACITY⎫
⎪
⎪
Z = ⎨ PLATFORM ⎬
⎪ COMPLEXITY ⎪
⎩
⎭

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Robust standard errors throughout.
(4) Equation (3-2): H0: μi = 0 (all fixed effects are zero) is rejected :
F(48,77) = 10.73; p-value = 0.00)

32

TABLE 4
Reduced-Form Regressions
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION (N=133)
(4-1)
(4-2)
SUNK COST
.027
.244***
(.067)
(.089)
LOW CAPACITY
-.338***
-.103***
(.062)
(.090)
PLATFORM
.043
(.050)
COMPLEXITY
.163
(.089)
S_ SUNK COST-i
.040
.125*
(.060)
(.068)
S_LOW CAPACITY-i
-.212***
.041
(.050)
(.081)
S_ PLATFORM-i
.0002
(.021)
S_ COMPLEXITY-i
.073**
(.037)
Parametric Restrictions
#Restr
F-Stat
COMPANY DUMMIES
7
24.18
SYSTEM DUMMIES
6
5.55
GENERATION DUMMIES
3
4.46
Constant
.729***
.283*
(.088)
(.176)
R2
.234
.588
Notes:
(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.
(3) S_X-i denotes the sum of X across all systems but system i.

33

p-value
.000
.000
.008

TABLE 5
Instrumental Variable Regressions:
Interaction Terms
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION (N=133)
(5-1)
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i
VI-i*DESIGN GOAL

***

.233
(.067)
-.111
(.082)

VI-i*SKILL SHORTAGE
SUNK COST
LOW CAPACITY
PLATFORM
COMPLEXITY
DESIGN GOAL
SKILL SHORTAGE
UNION
Parametric Restrictions
SYSTEM DUMMIES
GENERATION DUMMIES
Constant
RHS Endogenous Variables
Instrumental Variables

.118
(.094)
-.174***
(.066)
.053
(.062)
.105
(.090)
.089
(.235)

(5-2)
.183***
(.037)

-.062**
(.030)
.159*
(.096)
-.185**
(.079)
.011
(.050)
.088
(.086)

.210***
(.103)
-.109
-.029
(.147)
(.121)
#Restr
F-Stat
p-value #Restr
F-Stat
p-value
6
6.27
.000
6
4.80
.000
3
0.12
.946
3
0.22
.883
.136
.181**
(.169)
(.081)
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i
VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i
VI -i*DESIGN GOAL
VI-i*SKILL SHORTAGE
For system i of model j, sum of each For system i of model j, sum of each
model-specific measure for all
model-specific measure for all
systems but j and interactions with systems but j and interactions with
SKILL SHORTAGE
DESIGN GOAL
1
1
⎛
⎞ ⎧
⎛
⎞ ⎧
⎫
⎫
Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟ • ⎨
⎬'
⎬ ' Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟ • ⎨
⎝ l =1,...,7
⎠ ⎩SKILLSHORTAGE⎭
⎝ l =1,...,7
⎠ ⎩DESIGN GOAL⎭
⎧ SUNKCOST ⎫
⎪LOWCAPACITY⎪
⎪⎪
⎪⎪
Z = ⎨ PLATFORM ⎬
⎪ COMPLEXITY ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩⎪ DESIGNGOAL ⎭⎪

Notes:

⎧ SUNKCOST ⎫
⎪ LOWCAPACITY ⎪
⎪⎪
⎪⎪
Z = ⎨ PLATFORM ⎬
⎪COMPLEXITY ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩⎪SKILLSHORTAGE⎭⎪

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.
(3) VI-i abbreviates VERTICAL INTEGRATION-i

34

TABLE 6
Testing the Impact of the Degree of Complementarity
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION (N=133)
(6-1)
(6-2)
OLS Estimator
Instrumental Variables Estimator
VERTICAL INTEGRATION
(TIGHTLY COUPLED
SYSTEMS)-i
.127***
.170**
(.032)
(.078)
VERTICAL INTEGRATION
(LOOSELY COUPLED
SYSTEMS)-i
-.002
-.007
(.020)
(.054)
SUNK COST
.093
.111
(.080)
(.086)
LOW CAPACITY
-.142**
-.137**
(.058)
(.057)
PLATFORM
-.006
.009
(.047)
(.059)
COMPLEXITY
.065
-.058
(.088)
(.093)
UNION
.047
-.060
(.096)
(.140)
Parametric Restrictions
#Restr
F-Stat
p-value #Restr
F-Stat
p-value
SYSTEM DUMMIES
6
5.61
.000
6
4.44
.001
GENERATION DUMMIES
3
0.10
.957
3
0.04
.989
Constant
.269
.191**
(.070)
(.114)
R-squared
.697
VERTICAL INTEGRATION (TIGHTLY
COUPLED SYSTEMS)-i
VERTICAL INTEGRATION (LOOSELY
COUPLED SYSTEMS)-i
For system i of model j, sums of each
model-specific measure for all systems but j
which are coupled at coupling level k (k
either TIGHT OR LOOSE)

RHS Endogenous Variables
Instrumental Variables

⎛
⎞
Z−i,k, j,t = ⎜ ∑Zljt − Zijt ⎟
⎝ l∈k
⎠

Notes:

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.

35

⎧ SUNKCOST ⎫
⎪LOWCAPACITY⎪
⎪
⎪
Z =⎨
⎬
⎪ PLATFORM ⎪
⎪⎩ COMPLEXITY ⎪⎭

APPENDIX A
A Model of Contracting Complementarity
This section develops a simple model of contracting complementarity even when the ex ante cost
of specifying contracts is the same whether or not the system is outsourced. We link complementarity to
specific features of the contracting environment, identifying the economic forces giving rise to
contracting complementarity when the firm makes multiple vertical integration decisions across
(interdependent) functional activities. Rather than develop a complete multilateral bargaining model, this
“reduced-form” model assumes how the value of internal and external contracting depends on other
aspects of the contracting environment. In so doing, we highlight the impact of multi-dimensional effort
supply and trade secrecy concerns on contracting complementarity.

The Firm’s Objective Function
We consider a simple production environment where the automobile producer (the “firm”) must
contract for the development of two automobile systems, A and B, in order to produce a new automobile
model. While system-specific performance is important, overall performance also depends on the level of
system-to-system coordination. Effective coordination imposes additional costs on the firm, and some of
these costs depend on the chosen vertical structure. We assume that a higher level of coordination can be
achieved by inducing a higher level of (non-contractible) coordination effort and/or by the disclosure of
crucial model-level design details to each team. However, these benefits are traded off against a lower
level of system-specific effort and an increased probability that trade secrets are publicly revealed.
Total profits depend on the performance of each system ( f

A

and f B ), the degree of coordination

between the systems ( f I ) and whether the design remains a secret ( c(θ ) ). System-specific performance
is a function of the level of system-specific effort, which depends on whether the system is outsourced or
not and the incentive scheme employed by the firm. For each system i, let yi = 0 be defined as an
outsourced team and yi = 1 as in-house development. Moreover, the firm can choose to implement an
explicit or subjective incentive scheme for each system. Let xi = 0 be defined as employing explicit
incentive scheme for agents responsible for system i and xi = 1 a subjective performance evaluation
scheme. Further, the firm can improve the degree of integration by disclosing design choices to both
teams (d = 1; 0 else).

Finally, for f i , let Zi be exogenous factors impacting the returns to i. This

structure yields the following total profit function:

Π = f A ( x A , y A ; Z A ) + f B ( xB , yB ; Z B ) + f I ( x A , xB , y A , yB , d ; Z I ) − c(θ ( y A , yB , d ))
For each system, performance depends on the pre-existing capability level of the team chosen, the
system-specific effort level, and a random component. As such, our approach differs implicitly from the
theoretical literature insofar as we are assuming that one cannot acquire external teams. In other words,

36

pre-existing system-specific sunk investments or capabilities that have historically maintained by the firm
internally predispose the firm to continue in-house production.
Moreover, the system-specific effort level ( eiSS ) depends on the chosen incentive scheme and
whether the system is outsourced or not, resulting in the following expression for system-specific
performance:

fi yi = h( Z iyi ) + eSS
i ( xi , yi ) + ηi

( xi ∈ {0,1}; yi ∈ {0,1})

There will be variation across model-systems as to whether external or in-house teams have a greater preexisting capability level (or current capacity to complete the work). Indeed, this form of variation –
factors impacting system-level performance but unrelated to the interdependencies among systems – is
the key to the empirical identification strategy described in Section IV.
For simplicity, we assume that the benefits from increased coordination can be separably
decomposed into the benefits arising from the interaction between the incentive scheme and the
outsourcing choice ( f xI ), and the benefits from a higher level of disclosure ( f dI ). The benefits to
coordination, f xI , is sensitive to the level of coordination effort by each team ( eiINT , i = A, B ). Because
effective coordination depends on interactions between the parties, we specify the net benefits from
integration effort as the product of the coordination effort by each team:
f xI =

∏e

i = A, B

INT
i

( xi , y i )

( xi ∈ {0,1}; yi ∈ {0,1})

As well, beyond a baseline level, effective coordination depends on disclosure (d = 1), the
benefits of which may depend on specific features of the product development environment ( Z dI ) but are
independent of the chosen ownership structure ( f dI = d Z dI ). However, the probability that model-level
design information is disclosed to competitors , θ, increases from θL to θH when d = 1 and either yA = 0 or
yB = 0. In other words, in the case where the integration benefit is realized, the disclosure probability
depends on whether at least one of the systems is outsourced.34 Taken together, these assumptions yield
the firm’s overall objective function:

Max

x A , xB , y A , y B , d

Π=

∑ (h( Z

i = A, B

yi
i

) + eSS
i (xi , yi )) +

∏e

INT
i

( xi , yi ) + d Z dI − (d (1 − y A yB )(c(θ H ) − c(θ L )))

i = A, B

Incentives, the Contracting Environment and Effort Supply
Optimal contracting and incentive scheme choices are based on the relative benefits of in-house
versus supplier development and how these choices interact with the potential costs of disclosure. For
each development team, the firm chooses between an explicit and subjective incentive scheme. While the

34

The baseline probability of disclosure is greater than zero in order to be consistent with the idea that disclosure
itself is non-contractible, as the “source” of competitive intelligence cannot be verified. As well, while the current
model assumes that the potential for expropriation does not increase when both teams are outsourced (relative to
θH), we can accommodate this extension as long as c (θ d = 1, y A = 0, yB = 0) − c (θ H ) ≤ c (θ H ) − c (θ L ) .
37

explicit scheme is contract-based and payoffs are contingent on observable and verifiable criteria, the
subjective scheme depends on “soft” information across a wider range of dimensions (Baker, Gibbons
and Murphy, 1994; 2002; Levin, 2003). We assume that explicit contract terms can only be provided for
system-specific performance measures, and the ability to contract on the degree of coordination is limited
by the absence of verifiable information. As mentioned earlier, even though formal contracts in the
automobile industry do specify that coordination requirements, the inability to document the source of
failure over a coordination issue limits the effectiveness of formal contracts for this purpose. In other
words, while the ex ante costs of writing contract specifications is the same for in-house and external
teams, ex post differences in the contracting environment lead to differences in the effort levels of inhouse versus external teams under each incentive scheme.
Under an identical explicit incentive scheme, external teams will provide a higher equilibrium
level of system-specific effort than in-house teams.

This difference arises because performance is

observed with a long lag, and the terms of contracting are subject to renegotiation when performance is
observed.35 Once performance is observed, external suppliers can expect to have little bargaining power,
as they will likely have no ongoing contractual relationship with the firm.36 As such, when contract
specifications are not met (e.g., a verifiable system-specific failure occurs), the manufacturer can (and
will) enforce whatever contractual penalties are specified. By writing an enforceable contract with severe
penalties in the case of system failure, the firm can induce a high level of system-specific effort by
choosing an external supplier. Auto manufacturers and their suppliers can (and do) litigate disputes
through arbitration or formal litigation on a regular basis. In contrast, enforcing severe penalties against
in-house product development teams is more difficult. By the time performance is observed, team
members will be working on new projects for the firm; as a result, the threat of hold-up counter-balances
the threat of penalties by the firm. The continuing involvement of the in-house teams with the firm
reduces the ability of the firm to commit to explicit contract-based penalties associated with system
failure.37 As a result, even though the ex ante costs of specifying contracts is identical, the equilibrium
level

of

system-specific

effort

will

be

lower

for

in-house

development

teams

under

( eiSS ( 0, 0) > eiSS ( 0,1), i = A, B ). Further, because coordination effort is non-contractible, employing an
explicit incentive scheme limits the ability to induce effort towards coordination, and there is no
difference in the level of effort devoted by an in-house or external team. For simplicity, we normalize

35

More precisely, the timing associated with observing a failure is uncertain, as it depends on the accumulation of
user evidence (e.g., consumer complaints, crash rates, etc.). The assumption is that the expected ability to
renegotiate contracts differs across in-house versus external suppliers at the time of initial contracting.
36
Typically, time between major changes is 3-5 years, and it is unlikely that the same supplier is working on a new
project for the same manufacturer in the same vehicle segment at the time when failure is observed.
37
Moreover, the ability to specify performance incentives for individual employees is limited by the fact that (a)
employees are dispersed throughout the firm and so the cost of enforcing provisions may have a large impact on
projects throughout the firm and (b) individual liquidity constraints constrain the ability of the firm to specify
monetary damages of the type that are routinely used in supplier contracts.
38

the level of coordination effort under explicit incentives to 0 for both in-house and external teams (i.e.,

eiINT (1, 0) = eiINT (1,1) = 0 ).
In contrast to an explicit incentive contract, a subjective incentive scheme can induce effort along
both dimensions, even though coordination effort is non-contractible. More specifically, the firm can use
the potential for repeated interaction to establish relational contracts inducing effort on dimensions over
which managers can make (non-verifiable) inferences about the level of effort (Baker, Gibbons and
Murphy, 1994; 2002; Levin, 2003). Inducing effort on non-contractible dimensions comes at the expense
of high-powered incentive contracting on dimensions for which contracting is feasible; as a result, for a
given team (in-house or external), the equilibrium level of system-specific effort is lower under subjective
relative to explicit incentives ( eiSS (0, .) > eiSS (1, .) ). However, relative to an external team, an in-house
team provides a higher level of coordination effort under subjective incentives than an external team:

eiSS (1, 0) < eiSS (1, 1)
eiINT (1, 0) < eiINT (1, 1)
Those factors limiting the ability of the firm to enforce formal contract terms against in-house employees
are precisely those which allow the firm to implement relational contracting. For example, while a longterm employment relationship with the firm limits the power of formal contracts (because of the potential
for hold-up), this relationship allows the firm to use subjective promotion decisions to induce effort on
non-contractible dimensions.

While relational contracting across firms may also be feasible (as

emphasized in Baker, Gibbons and Murphy (2002)), the effectiveness of inter-firm subjective contracting
is limited – relative to what is achievable for employees within the firm -- by the lower probability of a
repeated relationship across firm boundaries.38
Finally, we also assume that the firm cannot specify specific penalties for trade secrecy
violations; while an occasional instance of industrial espionage will result in a supplier being caught “redhanded,” most expropriation occurs without the firm’s knowledge and with few clues as to the precise
source of the disclosure of competitive intelligence.

Optimal Contracting, Disclosure and Complementarity
The firm simultaneously chooses whether to vertically integrate each product development team,
the incentive scheme to provide each team, and whether to facilitate coordination through disclosure.
Interdependencies across vertical choices arise through the coordination effort decisions and through the
disclosure decision.
Proposition 1: Π ( x A , xB , y A , yB , d ) is supermodular in x A , xB , y A , yB , and d.

38

If overall effort supply is inelastic, it is possible that ei (1, 0) > ei (1, 1) . This does not change the overall
SS

SS

analysis as long as subjective incentives are pairwise complements with in-house production.
39

Proof of Proposition 1: The proof proceeds by showing pairwise complementarity among each of the
choice variables. Letting Δ i refer to the difference in Π from shifting i from 0 to 1 (and Δ ij is
analogously the double-difference operator), we need to show that

∀ pairs (i, j ) ∈ {x A , xB , y A , yB , d },

Δ ij − Δ i − Δ j > 0 ∀ x A , xB , y A , yB , d
We begin with the pair ( x A , y A ). Since d does not interact with xA, we abstract away from the level of d.
As well, when xB = 0, f x = 0
I

∀ x A , y A , yB . In the case when xB = 0, we thus need only show

e (1, 1) + e (0, 0) − e (1, 0) − eASS (0, 1) > 0 . This follows from two observations:
e (1, 1) > e (1, 0) (in-house subjective effort is higher than external subjective effort)
e (0, 1) < e (0, 0) (in-house explicit effort is lower than external explicit effort).
When xB = 1, we also consider whether
eBINT (1, .) *(eAINT (1, 1) + eAINT (0, 0) − eAINT (1, 0) − eAINT (0, 1)) > 0 .
INT
INT
Complementarity among ( x A , y A ) is ensured because eA (0, 0) = eA (0, 1) = 0 , . An identical
argument holds for ( xB , yB ).
We next consider ( y A , yB ). When x A or xB = 0 and d = 0, there is no interaction between ( y A , yB ).
When x A and xB = 1 (maintaining d = 0) , we must determine the sign of:
eAINT (1, 1) eBINT (1, 1) + eAINT (1, 0) eBINT (1, 0) − eAINT (1, 0) eBINT (1, 1) − eAINT (1, 1) eBINT (1, 0).
SS
A
SS
A
SS
A

SS
A
SS
A
SS
A

SS
A

This can be rewritten as:

eAINT (1, 1) (eBINT (1, 1) − eBINT (1, 0)) − eAINT (1, 0) (eBINT (1, 1) − eBINT (1, 0))
which can be further rewritten as:

(eAINT (1, 1) − eAINT (1, 0) ) (eBINT (1, 1) − eBINT (1, 0))
Each of these terms is positive by assumption since in-house subjective incentives induce higher effort than
external subject incentives. Finally, when d = 1, we must also consider the term c (θ H ) − c(θ L ) , which
is also positive by assumption, yielding complementarity between ( y A , yB ).
We next consider ( x A , yB ). When xB = 0, there is no interaction between these two variables. Assuming

xB = 1, we can write the inequality for complementarity as:

eAINT (1, .) eBINT (1, 1) + eAINT (0, .) eBINT (1, 0) − eAINT (0, .) eBINT (1, 1) − eAINT (1, .) eBINT (1, 0) > 0
INT
INT
INT
INT
Since eA (0, .) = 0 , this reduces to eA (1, .) (eB (1, 1) − eB (1, 0)) > 0 which follows from the
assumption that in-house subject incentives induce higher effort than external subjective incentives. An
identical argument holds for ( xB , y A ).
We now consider complementarity between ( x A , xB ), or the sign of the following:

eAINT (1, .) eBINT (1, .) + eAINT (0, .) eBINT (1, .) − eAINT (1, .) eBINT (0, .) − eAINT (0, .) eBINT (0, .) > 0
INT
INT
INT
This inequality is strict because eA (0, .) = eB (0, .) = 0, and ei (1, .) > 0 .
The final pairwise complementarity to check is ( y A , d ). The complementarity inequality for this pair
reduces simply to (1 − y A )(c (θ H ) − c(θ L )) ≥ 0 which holds by assumption about the costs of
disclosure.

There are two distinct drivers of complementarity among vertical integration choices in this model. First,
because coordination requires interaction (and so coordination efforts are complements) and in-house
development teams are more sensitive to subjective incentive schemes that induce a positive level of
coordination effort, the contracting choices for the two teams become interdependent. In other words,
contracting complementarity results because the benefits of coordination are sensitive to the least effort
40

provided, and the level of coordination effort is sensitive to the vertical integration choice. As well,
contracting complementarity arises because of the non-contractibility of the trade secrecy clause and the
fact that the probability of expropriation increases most steeply with the first instance of external
contracting.

Another interpretation of this second channel for contracting complementarity is that the

types of investments to ensure against expropriation result in economies of scale in outsourcing; the
marginal “costs” of external governance are declining in the level of external governance.
Simplifying notation so that Zi are system-specific factors favoring vertical integration for system
i, Proposition 1 implies the comparative statics motivating the empirical strategy:
Remark: x*A , xB* , y*A , yB* , and d* are weakly increasing in ZA and ZB, and weakly decreasing in
ZD and c (θ H ) − c(θ L ) .
Proof: Since each of the exogenous variables has a monotone relationship with each of the yi, the
comparative statics with respect to Zi and c (θ H ) − c(θ L ) are a direct consequence of Milgrom
and Shannon (1994, Proposition 4).

APPENDIX B
Pairwise Correlations
VI

SUNK
COST

LOW
CAP

PLATFORM

VERTICAL
INTEGRATION
1.00
SUNK COST
-.01
1.00
LOW CAPACITY
-.25*
.30*
1.00
PLATFORM
.07
.05
-.00
1.00
COMPLEXITY
-.15
.02
-.11
-.13
UNION
.55*
.22*
-.15
.17
DESIGN GOAL
-.13
-.14
-.17
-.10
SKILL SHORTAGE
-.26*
.47*
.59*
.10
Note: A star denotes statistical significance at 5% significance level.

41

COMPLEXITY

1.00
-.31*
.24*
-.06

UNION

1.00
-.23*
-.02

DESIGN
GOAL

1.00
-.14

SKILL
SHORTAGE

1.00

APPENDIX C-1
BETWEEN ESTIMATORS AND INITIAL CONDITIONS ESTIMATORS
(BOTH OLS AND INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES)
PRE-EXISTING CAPABILITIES AND RESOURCES SPECIFICATION
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION
OLS Regressions
Instrumental Variables Regressions
(C1-1)
(C1-2)
(C1-3)
(C1-4)
Between
Initial Conditions Between IV Estimator Initial Conditions IV
Estimator
Estimator
(N = 133,
Estimator
(N=133,
(N = 84)
49 groups)
(N = 84)
49 groups)
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
SUNK COST
LOW CAPACITY

.138***
(.023)
.022
(.115)
-.192**
(.098)

SUNK COST0
LOW CAPACITY0
CONSTANT
R2 Within
R2 Between
R2 Overall
RHS Endogenous
Variables
Instrumental Variables

.107*
(.072)
.016
.498
.470

.133***
(.022)

.017
(.072)
-.217***
(.062)
.142*
(.077)

.155***
(.029)
.011
(.116)
-.180*
(.099)

.062
(.087)

.153***
(.034)

.008
(.084)
-.209
(.065)
.079
(.105)

.440
VERTICAL
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
INTEGRATION-i
For system i of model j, sum each modelspecific measure for all systems but j:
⎛
⎞
Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟
⎝ l =1,...,7
⎠
⎧ ___________________ ⎫
⎧ SUNK COST0 ⎫
⎪ SUNK COST ⎪ Z = ⎨
⎬
Z = ⎨__________________________ ⎬
⎩LOW CAPACITY0 ⎭
⎪⎩LOW CAPACITY⎭⎪

Notes:

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Equation (C1-1) and (C1-3): Standard errors are unadjusted as procedure is at the model-system level.
(3) Equation (C1-2) and (C1-4): Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.
(4) Equation (C1-2) and (C1-4): Z0 is the initial value for the system-specific measure Z for a given model-system
(Z is either SUNK COST or LOW CAPACITY). The initial observation for each model-system is dropped so that
the initial conditions estimators relies exclusively on variation across models in the level of pre-existing capabilities
and resources prior to the time of the first vertical integration contracting choice for that model-system.

42

APPENDIX C-2
BETWEEN ESTIMATORS AND INITIAL CONDITIONS ESTIMATORS
(BOTH OLS AND INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES)
DESIGN AND MANUFACUTING CHALLENGE INDICES
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION
OLS Regressions
Instrumental Variables Regressions
(C2-1)
(C2-2)
(C2-3)
(C2-4)
Between
Initial Conditions Between IV Estimator Initial Conditions IV
Estimator
Estimator
(N = 133,
Estimator
(N=133,
(N = 84)
49 groups)
(N = 84)
49 groups)
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
PLATFORM
COMPLEXITY

.146***
(.024)
.038
(.073)
.038
(.157)

PLATFORM0
COMPLEXITY0
CONSTANT
R2 Within
R2 Between
R2 Overall
RHS Endogenous
Variables
Instrumental Variables

.019
(.118)
.074
.456
.447

.151***
(.025)

.089
(.078)
.164
(.137)
-.056
(.108)

.179***
(.061)
.042
(.075)
.082
(.177)

-.089
(.217)

.195***
(.039)

.102
(.082)
.240
(.159)
-.219
(.173)

.404
VERTICAL
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
INTEGRATION-i
For system i of model j, sum each modelspecific measure for all systems but j:
⎛
⎞
Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟
⎝ l =1,...,7
⎠
⎧ ___________________ ⎫
⎧ SUNK COST0 ⎫
⎪ SUNK COST ⎪ Z = ⎨
⎬
Z = ⎨__________________________ ⎬
⎩LOW CAPACITY0 ⎭
⎪⎩LOW CAPACITY⎭⎪

Notes:

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Equation (C2-1) and (C2-3): Standard errors are unadjusted as procedure is at the model-system level.
(3) Equation (C2-2) and (C2-4): Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.
(4) Equation (C2-2) and (C2-4): Z0 is the initial value for the system-specific measure Z for a given model-system
(Z is either PLATFORM or COMPLEXITY). The initial observation for each model-system is dropped so that
the initial conditions estimators relies exclusively on variation across models in the level of design and
manufacturing challenges prior to the time of the first vertical integration contracting choice for that model-system.

43

APPENDIX C-3
BETWEEN ESTIMATORS AND INITIAL CONDITIONS ESTIMATORS
(BOTH OLS AND INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES)
FULL SPECIFICATION
Dependent Variable : VERTICAL INTEGRATION
OLS Regressions
Instrumental Variables Regressions
(C3-1)
(C3-2)
(C3-3)
(C3-4)
Between Estimator
Initial Conditions Between IV Estimator Initial Conditions IV
(N=133,
Estimator
(N = 133,
Estimator
49 groups)
(N = 84)
49 groups)
(N = 84)
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
SUNK COST
LOW CAPACITY
PLATFORM
COMPLEXITY

.148***
(.026)
.135
(.120)
-.162
(.110)
.025
(.070)
.063
(.144)

SUNK COST0
LOW CAPACITY0
PLATFORM0
COMPLEXITY0
UNION
Parametric Restrictions
SYSTEM DUMMIES
GENERATION DUMMIES
CONSTANT
R2 Within
R2 Between
R2 Overall

.008
(.091)
#Restr F-Stat
6

5.60

.269**
(.110)
.021
.745
.683

.136***
(.031)

.170***
(.035)
.148
(.122)
-.159
(.111)
.036
(.072)
.056
(.146)

.151
(.096)
-.228***
(.067)
-.019
(.056)
.187
(.166)
.065
.228*
(.095)
(.118)
p- #Restr F-Stat
p- #Restr F-Stat p-value #Restr
value
value
0.00
6
4.67
0.00
6
33.80 0.00
6
2
0.06
0.94
2
.230
(.148)

-.089
(.217)

.170***
(.033)

.168
(.103)
-.225***
(.071)
.005
(.057)
.204
(.171)
-.010
(.105)
F-Stat p-value
4.82
0.04

0.00
0.96

.148
(.143)

.692
VERTICAL
VERTICAL
INTEGRATION-i
INTEGRATION-i
For system i of model j, sum each modelspecific measure for all systems but j:

RHS Endogenous Variables
Instrumental Variables

⎛
⎞
Z−i, j,t = ⎜ ∑ Zljt − Zijt ⎟
⎝ l =1,...,7
⎠
⎧ ___________________ ⎫
⎧ SUNK COST0 ⎫
⎪ SUNK COST ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪__________________________ ⎪ Z = ⎪⎨LOW CAPACITY0 ⎪⎬
⎪LOW CAPACITY⎪
⎪PLATFORM0
⎪
Z = ⎨ ___________________
⎬
⎪⎩COMPLEXITY0 ⎪⎭
⎪ PLATFORM
⎪
⎪ _______________________ ⎪
⎪ COMPLEXITY ⎪
⎩
⎭

Notes:

(1) Stars denote 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10% (*) statistical significance level.
(2) Equation (C3-1) and (C3-3): Standard errors are unadjusted as procedure is at the model-system level.
(3) Equation (C3-2) and (C3-4): Standard errors are clustered at the model-system level.
(4) Equation (C3-2) and (C3-4): Z0 is the initial value for the system-specific measure Z for each model-system

44

