                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE SAME YET DIFFERENT:
WORKER REPORTS ON LABOUR PRACTICES AND OUTCOMES IN A SINGLE FIRM ACROSS COUNTRIES

                                               Richard B. Freeman
                                                 Douglas Kruse
                                                  Joseph Blasi

                                              Working Paper 13233
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w13233


                            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            July 2007




       The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
       National Bureau of Economic Research.

       © 2007 by Richard B. Freeman, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. All rights reserved. Short sections
       of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
       credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Same Yet Different: Worker Reports on Labour Practices and Outcomes in a Single Firm
Across Countries
Richard B. Freeman, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi
NBER Working Paper No. 13233
July 2007
JEL No. J0,J00

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines cross-country differences in labour policies and practices and employee performance
and attitudes toward work from a sample of nearly 30,000 employees in a large multinational manufacturing
firm. The analysis shows: 1) large establishment and country differences in work practices, performance,
and attitudes toward work across countries; 2) qualitatively similar responses of workers to work practices
across countries; 3) a strong link between the establishment average of employee reports on the quality
of labour-management relations and establishment average measures of employee performance 4)
a positive relation between average employee performance and average employee-management relations
at the country level, but no relation between country level performance in the firm and measures of
the extent of national labour regulations or practices.

Richard B. Freeman                                   Joseph Blasi
NBER                                                 School of Management and Labor Relations
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                            Rutgers University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  94 Rockafeller Road
and NBER                                             Piscataway, NJ 08854
freeman@nber.org                                     jrbru@hotmail.com

Douglas Kruse
School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu
       Consider a multinational firm producing similar goods and services in the same industry

in many countries. How much do labour practices, employee attitudes, and worker behaviour

differ among the establishments of the firm? Are there identifiable differences in practices,

attitudes, and behaviour across the countries? Do workers in different countries respond

similarly to similar policies? Are aggregated measures of labour practices by country related to

aggregated measures of worker behaviour and outcomes by country?

       This paper examines these questions using data from a 2005-2006 survey of workers in

272 establishments in a single large multinational manufacturing firm that operates in 19

countries. With the assistance of the firm, we undertook a web based survey and a paper survey

of the workers. The firm convened employee meetings in each facility to induce employees to

respond to the survey, which gave us a sample of 29,353 respondents, with a response rate of

greater than 60%.1 This is one of the largest individual level data sets on labour practices,

employee attitudes toward work, and self-reported workplace performance across countries in a

single firm since Geert Hofstede’s (1984, 1991) study of IBM based on surveys in 1968 and

1972.2 Our study differs from Hofstede’s classic work in three ways. First, whereas Hofstede’s

surveys focused on European and Middle Eastern countries, our sample contains a large number


1 The web surveys were submitted directly to our web site and not to company administration.
To protect the confidentiality of workers who filled out paper surveys, each worker placed his or
her anonymous survey in a sealed envelope that went into box controlled by a committee of 3
non-management employees who were instructed to drive it to an express mail/shipping facility
immediately. These protections of confidentiality set the stage for a high “comfort zone” for
open responses to the questions. In addition, the surveys were translated into the language of
each country so that it would be accessible to most of the workers filling out the surveys who
were native speakers. The company’s policy is to rely on local management teams and workers
with very selective and infrequent use of expatriates. To the extent there are immigrants in the
company’s workforce this will mute the estimates of country differences.

2 Hofstede collected about 60,000 employee surveys in each year for a total of 116,000 surveys.

                                                                                                   3
of observations from the US and from developing and developed countries in Latin America and

Asia as well as from Europe. Second, our data are for manufacturing, whereas Hofstede’s 1968

study included many workers outside manufacturing and his 1972 sample excluded

manufacturing. Finally, while Hofstede looked primarily at employee values and beliefs as they

related to organizations and national culture or character, our focus is on employment relations,

the organization of work, and the economic behaviour of workers in response to labour policies

and practices in their establishment.3

       Our data reveal that:

       1) Workplace practices, worker reports of performance, and attitudes toward performance

differ significantly across establishments and among establishments in the different countries in

which the firm operates. In all of our analyses, estimated dummy variables for the establishment

where a worker works show that the establishment is a major factor in responses to questions

about workplace practices, attitudes toward work, and performance. Replacing establishment

dummy variables with dummy variables for the country in which the establishment is located

identifies significant cross-country variation in labour practices and outcomes as well.

       2) Worker attitudes toward their workplace and workplace behaviour are affected by

work policies and practices in qualitatively analogous ways across countries. Statistically,

regressions linking measures of worker attitudes or performance to measures of the quality of

labour-management relations and the presence of high performance work practices yield positive

estimated slope coefficients in most countries, although with differing magnitudes.

       3) Aggregating worker responses by establishments to make the establishment the unit of

observation, we find that the average employee performance across establishments is strongly


3 In areas where the two surveys overlap, we compare results between Hofstede’s and our
analysis. See Blasi, Freeman, Kruse (forthcoming, 2007).

                                                                                                    4
related to the average reported quality of labour-management relations across establishments.

This relation holds for establishments outside the US and for establishments within the US.

       4) Taking country as the unit of observation, workers in countries where workers report

better employee-management relations and compensation above market levels also report better

employee performance. By contrast, we find no relation between the average measures of

worker performance among countries with widely used country level indices of labour practices.

The Data and Primary Variables

       Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 give the sample size and number of facilities by country in

our survey. Because the firm is headquartered in the United States and expanded from there to

other countries, the US has the largest number of establishments and workers (73% and 72% of

the totals, respectively). The company began to expand internationally in the 1960s with regular

acquisitions outside the US that accelerated throughout the 1980s and 1990s. The high

representation of American establishments allows us to estimate the level and interrelation of

variables in the US with considerable precision, which gives us a good base with which to

compare the level and interrelation of variables for other countries. But the low representation of

establishments in any other single country limits our ability to compare operations among the

non-US countries. The difference in the number of observations for the US and other countries

and the way the multinational developed its overseas operations as outgrowths of US operations

dictates the research strategy with which we examine the data. Just as Darwin and Wallace (July

1858) examined how species develop “varieties” from an “original type” or existing population

as it spread across geographic areas, for instance from a mainland to islands, we treat the

American mode of operating as the original type and the practices in other countries as varieties

that depart from the original type in response to differing national regulatory and economic



                                                                                                    5
environments.

       The survey asked a large number of questions about employee opinions and attitudes on

the organization of work, labour-management relations, supervision, employee involvement, and

compensation systems. With respect to worker behaviour, it asked about expected turnover,

behaviour toward co-workers, the effort of workers at their job and the effort of fellow

employees, and a unique module of questions regarding worker perception and responses to

seeing fellow workers shirk, their willingness to take innovative action at their workplace, and

their views of how their facility performs. Most of the questions use a five-point Likert scale,

with higher numbers reflecting more positive assessments, though some questions are

dichotomous.4

       One way to analyze a survey with many questions in different domains is to select a few

specific questions and focus on responses to them. This has the advantage of linking the analysis

to what respondents reported without any filter or pre-processing of the data. An alternative

mode of analysis is to create summary statistics of variables in the same domain, for instance

through summated rating of the responses or factor analysis (Bartholomew and Knott, 1999), and

to analyze those summary statistics. Averaging responses across similar items produces a latent

variable that has less random measurement error than does any single item, and that can

accordingly help assess models that analyze broader behaviour than responses to a single

question. We use both approaches in the study. For the most part, for the sake of specificity, we

examine responses to individual items. Where research has found that certain practices fit



4 In addition to the worker survey, we obtained administrative records from the firm on the
economic performance of 79 divisions, with each division containing facilities producing a
similar product, or in some cases, geographic units that report performance to top management.
Here we relied on data that the firm normally gathers from its facilities to assess their
performance. We have analysed these data in Blasi, Freeman, and Kruse (2007).

                                                                                                    6
together in a group, such as in the form of “high performance workplaces,” however, we analyze

an index of several variables. To make sure that our results do not depend on the particular

variables or indices on which we focus, we also estimated models that used all of the questions in

the relevant domains and note the results from these calculations.

        We have structured our analysis around the distinction between policies or practices that

in principle the firm’s management controls, which we take as exogenous to workers, and

attitudinal or behavioural variables that reflect worker responses to the policies or practices.

This structure ignores the potential feedback from worker behaviour to management’s choice of

labour policies or practices. We focus on three independent variables as our primary measures of

management policies or practices.

        The first variable is the employee-reported quality of employee-management relations.

While we recognize that employer-employee relations reflect the joint behaviour of workers and

management, management sets the main tenor of the relationship with its human resource or

personnel policies. As part of its overall business strategy (Boxall and Purcell, 2003),

management can choose to take account of employee concerns in various ways (so-called high

road labour relations) or it can ignore employee concerns and operate in a harder more

hierarchical manner (so-called low road labour relations). The choice of labour policies has

consequences for economic outcomes, which in our analysis are worker reports of their work

performance and response to work-related events, and the performance of their co-workers and

of their facility.5

        The second measure of management policy or practices is the absence or presence of a

set of the specific work practices that are considered important to high performance work


5 For an analysis of labour-relations practices and aggregate economic outcomes, see Blanchard
and Philippon (2006)

                                                                                                    7
systems (Appelbaum, Bailey, Berg, and Kalleberg, 2000). Since research has found that a firm

needs many of these practices to improve outcomes (Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi 1997), we

measure the extent to which a firm has a high performance workplace as an index based on

questions relating to the presence of: employee involvement teams, training; information sharing;

employee selection; profit or gain sharing; and job rotation, as described in the source to Table 1.

         The third measure is the rate of compensation at the facility relative to compensation in

the broader labour market. In principle management cannot obtain workers by going below

market rates (at least for the long run) but management can pay wages above market rates, either

to reduce turnover or as an efficiency wage to give workers an incentive to work harder (Akerlof,

1982).

         Taking these variables as exogenous to worker behaviour, we examine how they affect

four self-reported measures of worker behaviour or potential behaviour: 1) whether workers are

likely or unlikely to look for a new job in the next six months (an outcome variable widely

studied in analyses of job satisfaction); 2) workers’ professed willingness to work hard for the

company (taken as an indicator of effort); 3) workers’ professed willingness to innovate products

and services (taken as an indicator of the more creative dimension of work, which has arguably

become more important over time in most workplaces); and 4) the worker’s willingness to

intervene when he or she sees a co-worker shirking. The fourth variable is one that we created to

help test the hypothesis that modern team production and group incentive employment systems

overcome the free rider problem inherent in any group incentive system through worker self-

monitoring (Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi, 2006; Kruse, Blasi, and Park 2006). The variable is

based on a four-part question that asks workers the likelihood that if they observe a fellow

employee not working as hard or well as he or she should, they would undertake any of the



                                                                                                     8
following actions: talk directly to the employee; speak to a supervisor or manager, talk about the

worker in a work group or team, or do nothing. By asking about responses in four ways, we

obtain a more finely graded measure than if we had asked about any single response. Analysing

this variable for all US workers in the 2002 and 2006 General Social Survey and for workers in a

sample of companies that we surveyed shows that workers are more willing to take action

against shirking when they are paid by group incentive systems, and that workers who are

willing to act against shirkers believe that their facility is more effective and that fellow workers

work harder than do workers who are not willing to act against shirkers (Freeman, Kruse, and

Blasi, 2006). Given this, we seek to determine whether there are establishment or country

differences in acting against a shirking worker. Finally, to move beyond worker reports of their

own behaviour or likely behaviour, we also asked about how hard their co-workers work, and

how well their facility operated.

Empirical Strategy

       We have undertaken a three-step analysis of our data. Each of these modes of analysis

has statistical problems that we address.

       In the first step we test whether employment practices and worker performance vary

across establishments and countries. Without such differences, this study would come to a quick

and decisive conclusion. If the only source of variation were among individual workers, there

would be little point to examining how establishment practices or country labour systems

affected workers. With 272 establishments, we tested for differences in variables among

establishments using an ANOVA type design, and as we shall see, found statistically significant

results. It is more difficult to identify country effects in our data because the survey has only a

few establishments in specific countries outside the US (the largest number of establishments in



                                                                                                      9
a non-US country is fourteen while there is just one establishment in five countries). These numbers

make it difficult to differentiate the effects of country institutions on outcomes from the effects

of establishments per se. In the cases where countries have only a single establishment, there is

no way to know whether the observation reflects something about the country or about the

establishment. Even in cases where the firm has more establishments in a country, it is possible

that work practices or performance will differ from those in the US or in other countries for

reasons beyond the country institutions of concern to us. If contiguity of establishments is

associated with similarity in practices and performance, countries could differ in their practices

or performance because the establishments are closer to each other geographically than they are

to the establishments in the US and other countries. For instance, in the US, labour practices and

performance differ between private sector firms and workers in New York and Mississippi

although they are covered by the same national labour regulations.6 If workers in, say, Germany

or Belgium report different practices and performance than workers in the US, how are we to tell

if those differences are due to differences due to national labour regulations or modes of

operating, or to differences that might occur among establishments in different parts of the same

country?

       Our data contain enough establishments in the US to allow us to address this problem by

estimating the variation in practices and outcomes for the firm’s establishments across US states

and then using this variation as an indicator of the effect of geographically contiguous areas on

practices and outcomes in the firm. If we assume that regional contiguity operates orthogonal to

national institutions and is similarly sized in other countries as in the US, the variation in

practices and outcomes across countries in our analysis would equal the effect of regional


6 This is not true for government employees. In the US federal labor law covers private sector
workers but state labor laws cover government sector employees.

                                                                                                      10
contiguity differences in the US plus differences due to different national labour institutions.7

Following this logic, we estimate the contribution of US states to the variation in practices and

outcomes in the US; and then compare this variation to the variation across countries. If country

institutions matter in determining a particular variable, the variation in that variable across

countries should exceed the variation in the same variable across US states. Put differently, our

test for whether national labour institutions affect practices or outcomes is that the variation

associated with countries exceeds the variation associated with states in the US.

       In the second step of our analysis, we assess the linkages of worker behaviour to

management practices by regressing the four measures of employee behaviour described earlier

on the measures of company policy and practice. The problem with identifying this relationship

is that both the independent and dependent variables are self-reports from workers. It is possible

that workers report practices/policies based on their idiosyncratic position or views rather than

on the overall situation at the workplace. For instance, worker A at establishment E might report

that the establishment has good work practices and that the worker is willing to work hard while

worker B at the same establishment might report that the establishment has bad work practices

and that the worker is unwilling to work hard. This pattern would produce a strong relation

between work practices and willingness to work hard at the individual level but no relation

between practices and working hard at the workplace or establishment level of interest. We deal

with this problem by analyzing the averages of variables among establishments as well as the

responses of individual workers. Averaging responses across establishments eliminates the

danger that variables are correlated because individuals have consistent but different perceptions



7 This assumption would not be valid if, for example, cultural differences lead to greater regional
variation among countries than among US states, and these cultural differences are associated
with differences in labour institutions.

                                                                                                    11
about the establishment and thus the correlations may not hold at the establishment level.

       Third, finding country effects in our data, we relate the estimated country effects in

worker outcomes (the coefficients on country dummy variables) to estimated country effects in

labour practices and policies (again as reflected in the coefficients on dummy variables for

countries). In addition, we estimated the relation between country differences in labour

outcomes and measures of country labour practices from the Fraser Institute’s indices of

economic freedom and the World Economic Forum’s measures of competitiveness.

Cross-country Patterns

       Columns 3-5 of Table 1 report the average level of our three indicators of workplace

policy or practice: how the worker grades the firm on the quality of labour management

relations; the index of high performance workplace policies; and a measure of whether the firm

pays compensation above that in the local market.8 The table note gives the exact questions used

and the way in which we coded them for analysis. The mean values of the three policy or

practice measures show sizable country differences. For example, workers in the Czech Republic

and Taiwan give higher ratings to the quality of labour-management relations than those in Italy

or Australia (column 3); workers in Canada report that their establishments have more policies

associated with high performance workplaces than those in France (column 4); workers in China

report that their total compensation relative to the market is significantly lower than workers in

the United States (column 5), and so on. The F-statistics for differences in country means given

at the bottom of the table are sizable and highly significant.



8 These are self-reported measures and not objective measures of company practices.
However, these perceptions may be the key to worker behaviour because workers will respond
to what they see as reality as opposed to what management may be trying to accomplish or what
policies actually are. See Chan and Steven (2003)for evidence that employee retirement
decisions reflect perceptions of the rules governing pension plans rather than the actual rules.

                                                                                                     12
        Columns 6-9 of the table give the means for our measures of the performance of

individuals at their workplace: the likelihood that they will stay at the job; their willingness to

work hard; their willingness to offer innovative thoughts; and their willingness to take action

against a shirking fellow employee. Again, the table note gives the specific questions that define

these outcome measures. These columns also show sizable differences in the country means and

F-statistics that indicate that the differences are statistically significant.

        Going beyond workers’ assessment of their own behaviour, column 10 records responses

to our question on how they view the work effort of other employees.9 To see if employee

reports on how hard other workers work at their facility differ from the self-reports of how hard

they work, we correlated the two variables. The measure of the willingness of co-workers to

work hard is correlated at 0.122 with the measure of the worker's own work effort, so the two

measures are indeed reflecting different perceptions. Moreover, the mean values for the worker

assessment of the work effort of fellow employees vary substantially among countries.

Employees in Brazil are more likely to report that fellow workers work hard than employees in

Australia. Finally, column 11 records workers views of the effectiveness of their facility. Here

too there is considerable variation among establishments and countries. Employees in Argentina

are more likely to report that their establishment operates effectively than employees in Taiwan.

        Because the characteristics of workers differ across establishments, it is possible that the

cross-establishment and cross-country differences in management policies or practices and

worker behaviour are due to differences in the characteristics of workers and jobs rather than to

the differences among establishments and countries of concern to us. To see whether observable



9 Division performance data supplied by the company is strongly correlated with these worker
reports of facility effectiveness aggregated to the division level, indicating that these reports
appear to measure an operational variable.

                                                                                                      13
worker and job characteristics explain the differences in response across establishments and

countries, we estimated the following equations:

(1) Yijc = a + bXijc + Dj + uijc

(2) Yijc = a + bXijc + Dc + uijc

          where Y is a specified practice or outcome variable; i refers to the worker; j to the

establishment employing the worker, c to the country in which the establishment is located, and

where X ijc are covariates for the individual, Dj is a vector of dummy variables for the

establishment; Dc is a vector of dummy variables for the country in which the establishment is

located, and uijc is an error term. The coefficients on Dj capture the establishment effects while

the coefficients on Dc capture the effects of a given country relative to the deleted country, which

is the US. Since establishments are located in a single country, the estimated country effects are

averages of establishment effects for the establishments in the country.

          The survey gives us detailed information on employee characteristics such as age, gender,

marital status, family size, number of children, education, ethnicity, and whether the employee

has a disability or not. There is also detailed information on occupational and job characteristics

such as fixed pay, tenure, supervisory status, managerial level, and whether the employee is

hourly or salaried or is engaged in administrative support, production, professional/technical,

sales or customer service work. We estimated two functional forms for equations (1) and (2):

ordered probits when the outcomes have several values with a natural ordering (e.g., "not at all

true, not very true, somewhat true, and very true"), and OLS regressions with the dependent

variables measured from 1 to 5, reflecting the five point scales used in the survey. The statistical

results were similar. For ease of presentation, we give the results of the OLS regressions in the

tables.



                                                                                                   14
       To begin with, we examined whether the reports of workers within an establishment

coalesce at the establishment level. If workers in an establishment report consistently on the

quality of its labour-management relations, this is more likely to reflect establishment policy or

practice than if worker reports vary greatly within the same establishment. Formally, we asked

the extent to which establishment dummy variables contributed to the variation in individual

responses, as given in the relevant F-statistics, conditional on the covariates used in equation (1).

Table 2 summarizes the results of analyses of the variation among establishments for the

policy/practice and performance variables on which we have focused. The table shows sizable

F-statistics for establishments, implying that workers’ reports about both practices and outcomes

have a significant establishment component. The implication is that establishments truly differ

in the way in which they operate.

       Given that worker responses vary by establishment, we ask next whether these responses

have a country component. To do this we estimated equation (2) and tested for the significance

of country dummy variables (replacing the establishment dummy variables). The first column in

Table 3 records the F-statistics for the country dummies with the establishments from all

countries in the data set. They are sizeable and significant.10 As noted, however, with the small

number of establishments outside the US, the differences could reflect differences in local

management practices and employee behaviour among establishments that are closer

geographically, producing regional effects separate from national institutions. To see whether the

estimated country differences reflect more than the regional variation in variables found in a

single country, we formed 19 dummy variables for states or groups of states in the US (thus



10 In addition, we also estimated the ANOVA model for the thirteen countries for which we
have more than a single establishment and obtained larger F-statistics. The F-statistics for the 13
country sample are: 26.04, 38.00, 29.08, 20.42, 31.05, 24.30, 17.43, 26.08, and 14.30.

                                                                                                   15
mimicking the number of countries in our country data set) and estimated the contribution of

these dummies to the variation in US outcomes using the ANOVA model of equation (1). The

computations show significant differences in the value of the variables among the US states.11

But the F-statistics in column 2 of Table 3 are markedly lower than F-statistics for the country

dummies in column 1 save for the measure of overall plant effectiveness, where they barely

differ. With this exception, these data thus imply that the country dummies reflect more than

“normal” regional variation in labour practices and outcomes across establishments.

       The remainder of Table 3 examines another measure of the difference in estimated

country or US state/region effects on the variables — namely, the variance in the estimated

coefficients on the country dummies. This measure is independent of the number of respondents

in the countries and thus resembles country comparisons that treat countries as observations

irrespective of their populations. For comparison, we also calculated the variance of the

estimated coefficients for the state dummy variables in the US. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3

show huge differences between these measures: the variance of the country dummy variables is

3.8 to 13.9 times as great as the variance in state dummy variables in the US. The greater

variation in outcomes across the countries than across the states in the US in which the firm

operates suggests that some of the variation across countries is due to genuine country effects

rather than to regional effects that occur within the same country.12

       Finally, to make sure that our results are not dependent on the specific variables under



11 For simplicity we refer to the geographic divisions in the US as states, although in some cases
we used groups of states as our measure, both because some states have few observations and we
wanted to have the same number of groups as countries.
12 We also find, in results not reported here, that the variation among Continental European
countries is similar to the variation among English-speaking countries, suggesting that the
variation reflects real country effects and not underlying differences due to broader regional or
cultural factors.

                                                                                                   16
investigation, we analysed all of the relevant survey questions relating to labour practices,

attitudes, and performance. There are seventy-nine such variables. The results of this analysis

are reported under the heading “All 79 outcomes” at the bottom of Table 3. For the variables

that give a clear linear ordering of outcomes, we use F-statistics from OLS regressions to

measure the country or regional contribution to overall variation. For the remaining variables

that have a clear but not necessarily linear ordering, we use chi-square statistics from ordered

probit regressions. As a summary of these computations, the table gives the mean F-statistic or

chi-squared statistic for the relevant variables and records the proportion of outcomes in which

the variation across countries exceeds the variation across states in the US. Thus, taking all of

the variables, the variation due to countries exceeds that due to states in the US, as it does for the

variables on which we focus.

        In short, our data show that labour practices, attitudes, and economic performance vary

across establishments and among establishments across countries by more than one would expect

from either of two null hypotheses: that there are no country effects; or that country effects are

no larger than region effects within the US. In all cases, the F-statistics for country differences

are highly significant.

Worker Responses to Practices

        We turn next to the question: Do labour policies and practices affect the behaviour or

performance of workers, and if so, are their effects similar across countries? Taking practices as

exogenous, we estimate the following equation that relates worker reports on their performance,

the performance of fellow employees, and establishment effectiveness to company practices or

policies:

(3) Pic = a + bXic + cYic+ uic



                                                                                                     17
       where Pic is a measure of performance, i refers to the worker; c to the country in which

the establishment is located, the Xic are covariates for the individual, and Yic measures the

policies or practices described earlier – labour management relations, high-performance work

places, compensation relative to market compensation. The error term uic is assumed to be

independent and identically distributed.13

       We estimated equation (3) separately for workers in the 14 countries in the data set that

have more than a single establishment, since we cannot differentiate the establishment effect

from country effects in countries with only a single establishment. Each regression contains all

of the independent variables: the measures of employee-management relations, the high

performance work index, and total compensation relative to the market. Thus, the results reflect

the impact of each of these policies while accounting for the impact of the other policies. On the

basis of studies that link good workplace policies and workplace outcomes in single-nation

studies, we expect that employee-management relations and high performance work practices

will be positively related (Appelbaum, Bailey, Berg, and Kalleberg 2000; Huselid 1995;

Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi 1997; Cappelli and Neumark 2001). On the basis of analyses

of gift exchange (Akerlof, 1982), we expect that establishments with above-market

compensation will also have better outcomes.

       The regression coefficients in Table 4 show that in all countries the vast majority of

outcomes are significantly positively related to measures of labour relations and high

performance workplace practices. For example, workers who report more positive labour

management relations or whose establishments have high-performance work practices are more



13 The establishment regressions in the next section control for correlated errors within
establishments.


                                                                                                   18
likely to remain with the firm, more willing to work hard, more likely to take action against

fellow workers who shirk, and more willing to make innovative suggestions in almost every

country. In addition, these workers are also more likely to report that their co-workers work

hard, and that their establishment operates effectively. Of the 78 estimated coefficients on labour

management relations in Table 4, 53 are significantly positive. Of the 78 estimated coefficients

on our measure of high performance work practices, 51 are significantly positive. By contrast

with these results, the estimated coefficients on the relation of outcomes to the measure of total

compensation relative to the market in Table 4 show a weaker positive relation: 22 of the 78

estimated coefficients are significantly positive. The implication is that within the variation

observed, labour practices are more important factors than are levels of pay. This is consistent

with empirical research within single countries that compensation systems do not constitute a

“silver bullet” in employment relations (see Heneman, Fay, and Wang, 2005).

       The evidence in Table 4 indicates that regardless of the overall labor system in a country

-- regulated Western European countries, developing countries, or the market-driven US –

workers respond similarly to workplace practices. However, there are some noticeable

differences in the magnitude of the estimated coefficients in Table 4 and differences in the

effects of particular policies on outcomes across countries. For example, employment relations

have a smaller impact on the workers' expected turnover behaviour in China than in Canada, and

a smaller impact on their willingness to work hard in Korea than in Canada. In France the

estimates show a slight negative impact of employment relations on expected turnover,

willingness to innovate, and the anti-shirking index, in contrast to the positive estimated impacts

in most other countries. Further, that the French are willing to work harder than Americans in a

high performance work system.



                                                                                                   19
       To see whether these differences reflect differences in behaviour across countries or

random variation in the coefficients, we computed statistics that compare the variation in slope

coefficients for each policy variable on each outcome across the countries. Then we estimated

regressions of equation (3) for US states or groups of states and, following the logic we used

earlier to analyze country dummy variables, we contrasted the variation in slope coefficients

among countries to the analogous variation in slope coefficients among states and groups of

states in the US. If responses truly differ by country, the variation in the slope coefficients

among countries should exceed the variation in slope coefficients among US states.

       Table 5 summarizes the results of these computations. Column 1 gives the F-statistics

that test for equality of slope coefficients from a pooled regression with country dummy

variables that allow for separate intercepts but impose identical coefficients on covariates. The

F-statistics reject the equality of the slope coefficients. They show that there is significant cross-

country variation in the magnitudes of coefficients estimated in Table 4. Column 2 gives F-

statistics for the equality of slope coefficients from the comparable analysis for US states. These

F-statistics are smaller than those for the countries, suggesting that workers responses to the

relevant policies or practices differ more across countries than across states. Still, the difference

in F-statistics between the country contrasts and state contrasts are smaller in the Table 5

analysis of slopes than in the Table 4 analysis of constant terms. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5

record the variances of the estimated slope coefficients from the regressions for countries and

states, respectively. The variances for the estimated coefficients are 1.2 to 8.6 times larger among

countries than among US states. These differences are smaller than the analogous difference

found in Table 4 between the variance in the estimated country and state dummy variables.

From these statistics, it appears that country effects are greater for the level of employee



                                                                                                   20
performance or work attitudes than for the response of performance or attitudes to establishment

level practices and policies.

       Finally, going back to the Table 4 regressions, we note that the estimated impact of

particular policy variables are similar across countries on some outcomes and different on other

outcomes. There are relatively modest differences across the countries (and across US states) in

the impact of workplace policies on willingness to work hard. By contrast, there are noticeable

differences across countries in the impact of policies and practices on the likelihood that a

worker will seek a new job and in their assessment of the effectiveness of their facility. In

addition, the quality of employee-management relations and total compensation relative to the

market have a significant impact on country differences in workers’ reports of their co-workers'

willingness to work hard, while the presence of a high performance work system does not. The

greatest variation across countries in the estimated slope coefficients is in the relationship of

high-performance policies to workers' willingness to interfere with a shirking fellow employee.

This suggests that the effects of policies on anti-shirking may be greatly affected by country

cultures and institutions.

       In sum, we conclude that the relationship between workers' responses and policies and

practices are qualitatively similar across the countries, but that there are still notable differences

in the magnitude of responses to policies and practices and in the relation between particular

policies and outcomes across countries.

Establishment Level Patterns

       The analyses thus far have related worker reports of their work behaviour or that of their

co-workers to reports of practices and policies at their workplace. As pointed out, however,

relations found in variables at the level of individuals need not generalize to the establishment,



                                                                                                     21
much less to countries. Just as there are problems in making inferences about individual

behaviour from correlations in regional or other aggregated data due to the ecological correlation

problem14 there are problems in making inferences from analyses of responses of individuals to

workplace policies or practices to how workers at the workplace would respond to the policies or

practices. While the evidence in Table 3 that workers give broadly similar reports about their

establishment suggests that regressions based on individuals should generalize to entire

workplaces or facilities, the only way to see whether variables are related at the establishment

level as they are among individuals is to estimate relations using establishment level measures of

variables.15 Accordingly, we computed the establishment averages of the three workplace policy

and practices variables and of the six employee reports of their workplace performance and

regressed the establishment averages of the outcome variables on the establishment averages of

the workplace practices or policies.

       Table 6 records the estimated regression coefficients and standard errors for the policy or

practice variables. To allow for any differences between the US and other countries, these

regressions include a dummy variable for the US. The results in the first column show that the

average quality of employee-management relations in establishments has a statistically

significant effect on the establishment average of the six outcome variables. Figures 1 to 3

display the positive relation between the establishment average employee assessment of the

quality of labour-management relations and a) employee perceptions of the effort of co-workers



14 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_correlation. Also, see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_fallacy.

15 See Lubinski, D., & Humphreys, L. G. (1996). Seeing the Forest From the Trees: When
Predicting the Behavior or Status of Groups, Correlate Means. Psychology, Public Policy, and
Law, Volume 2, pps. 363-376.


                                                                                                   22
at the work site; b) employee willingness to engage in anti-shirking activity; and c) facility

effectiveness. The figures differentiate between US and non-US establishments. Both show

similar positive slopes for the relation between the quality of labour-management relations and

the outcomes. The pattern for the outcome variables not given in the figure is similar.

       The regressions in Table 6 show much weaker results for the impact of high performance

work places and compensation above market levels on the outcome variables. In only one of the

six regressions is the coefficient on high performance work systems a significant predictor of an

establishment level outcome. Also, in only one of the six regressions is the coefficient on total

compensation relative to the market a significant predictor of the establishment level outcome

variables.

       Should we take the establishment level regressions as valid, showing that worker

perceptions of labour-management relations is the key factor in differentiating employee

behaviour and work performance within the firm, while high performance workplaces and

compensation are of minor importance? If each establishment had a single set of practices that

affected all workers the same, the calculations in Table 6 would provide the best estimate of the

effect of those policies or practices in our data. But some of the variation in worker reports of

policies or practices within an establishment could reflect genuine differences in practices within

the establishment rather than measurement error or idiosyncratic reporting by workers. Workers

who report bad employee-management relations when the majority of workers say employee-

management relations are good, or who report that their firm has high performance workplace

practices, or that compensation is above average when other workers report the opposite, may in

fact be accurately reporting their situation. On average, supervisors may be good, but the

individual’s supervisor may be horrible. On average, the firm may have the practices that



                                                                                                    23
constitute a high performance workplace at some worksites but not at others. And so on. If all

of the within-establishment variation in reported policies or practices were due to within-facility

differences in the presence or absence of the policies or practices, the correlations among

variables at the individual level would give a more accurate picture of relations than the

correlations at the establishment level. In this case, it is the analyses of the establishment level

variables that would be subject to measurement error and underestimate the impact of policies

and practices on behaviour and outcomes. Given that variation of worker reports on

establishment practices is likely to reflect both genuine within-establishment variation and

idiosyncratic reporting by workers, the two estimates are likely to bound the true behavioural

impact of the policies or practices.

       These considerations offer an explanation for the weaker estimated effect of high

performance workplaces in the establishment level regressions in Table 6 than in the individual

level regressions in Table 3. High performance workplaces are likely to cover only part of

establishments – the activity of production workers using a particular technology or engaged in

particular tasks, for example. If high performance workplaces have good effects on various

outcomes, the workers in that part of the establishment would report those outcomes, giving

strong results in the regressions for individuals. If the high performance workplace increased the

effectiveness of the overall facility, which all workers recognized, the result would be a stronger

result on that outcome in establishment level regressions than on outcomes such as the likelihood

of leaving the workplace that presumably depend solely on whether the individual worker was

covered by the high performance practices. This could produce differential estimated effects of

high performance workplaces on particular outcome variables of the type found in Table 6 – a

positive link between worker reports on the effectiveness of their facility and the proportion



                                                                                                       24
reporting a high performance workplace but no such link between some of the other outcomes

connected with high-performance practices found in the regressions for individuals. To

determine whether this interpretation is correct would require information on the actual variation

of practices within facilities, which we do not have.

       The weak relation between total compensation relative to the market and outcome

variables in Table 6, by contrast, is consistent with the story told at the individual worker level in

Table 3, where worker reports on total compensation relative to the market were the most weakly

related policy variable to measures of success. This underlines the conclusion from Table 3 that

compensation systems do not constitute a “silver bullet” in employment relations systems.

Country Level Patterns

       Finally, to see whether the relations between practices and policies and outcomes hold for

country aggregates, we examine the correlations between the estimated coefficients on the

country dummy variables for each of the policies/practices under study and the estimated

coefficients on the country dummy variables for each of the country level outcomes from the

estimates of equation (2) underlying Table 3. The coefficients on the dummy variables show

whether a country is relatively high or low in a given practice or outcome compared to the

omitted country, the US. The correlation between the coefficients thus gives the cross-country

relation between the relevant variables.

       The correlations in the top panel of Table 7 show moderately sized positive relations

between each of the policy/practice variables and the performance or outcome measures at the

country level of aggregation. Consistent with the results for establishments, the strongest

correlation is between the country measures of employee-management relations and the country

measure of facility effectiveness. In addition, the country level calculations show that employee-



                                                                                                   25
management relations is moderately positively correlated with country measures of being likely

to stay with the firm, and with the willingness of workers to innovate and the likelihood that they

would intervene with shirking co-workers. As with the establishment level analyses, the

country-level measure of the high performance work system index is not correlated with country-

level outcomes, possibly for the same reason -- that high performance work systems are

concentrated among certain groups of workers and firms. Total compensation relative to the

market at the country level is highly correlated with country-level measures of willingness to

innovate and moderately correlated with country-level measures of anti-shirking. Overall, given

the small number of establishments used to obtain the estimated country effects, the results are

reasonably consistent with the patterns found within countries.

       The bottom panel of Table 7 relates the country dummy measures of performance or

outcomes to indicators of the strength of institutions in country labour markets from the

Economic Freedom Index of the Fraser Institute and the Global Competitiveness Reports of the

World Economic Forum. The Fraser Institute's index rates countries with less labour market

regulation of wages, dismissal, employment, and collective bargaining as having higher scores in

economic freedom.16 The Market Efficiency component of the Global Competitiveness Index

(Lopez-Claros, 2006), based on a poll of 11,000 business executives, gives higher scores to

countries where executives report that: wages are not determined by a centralized bargaining

process, labor-employer relations are cooperative, hiring and firing of workers is flexibly




16 To earn high marks in the labor market regulation index (5B), a country must allow market
forces to determine wages and establish the conditions of dismissal, avoid excessive
unemployment benefits and refrain from the use of conscription” (Gwartney and Lawson 2006,
p. 12) Many of the Fraser Institute measures of economic freedom use data from the Global
Competitiveness Index See Gwartney and Lawson (2006: 181-182).

                                                                                                   26
determined by employers, and pay is related to worker productivity.17

       The correlations in the bottom panel of Table 7 show that these global indicators of

country labor market institutions are not correlated positively with the worker reports of

economic performance in the establishments in the firm under study. The Fraser Institute’s

Labor Market Regulation score (for which higher values indicate less labor market regulation) is

negatively correlated with the country measure of the work effort of co-worker. The World

Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Index is negatively correlated with the country

measures of willingness to work hard, willingness to innovate, and perceived co-worker effort

and facility effectiveness. As for the more detailed measures of institutional practices, the

countrywide measure of regulation in hiring and firing practices is negatively correlated with the

country measures of willingness to innovate, anti-shirking, and seeing co-workers as working

hard; the countrywide measure of flexibility of wage determination is negatively correlated with

the anti-shirking index; the measure of pay being closely tied to productivity is negatively

correlated with country measures of willingness to innovate, anti-shirking, seeing co-workers as

working hard, and facility effectiveness; and so on. These patterns do no imply that the

aggregate measures of country practices are invalid, but rather that what matters within a firm are

its own establishment workplace relations and practices, as opposed to country-level regulations

and reputation affecting competitiveness.

Conclusion

       This study has examined work practices, employee performance, and attitudes toward

work at the level of individual workers, establishments, and countries using a survey of nearly



17 The individual country data and the text of the questions asked in the poll can be found on
pps. 485-489. (Lopez-Claros, 2006, Chapter 1.1)


                                                                                                  27
30,000 employees in a large US multinational manufacturing firm that operates 272

establishments in 19 countries. The survey is one of the largest surveys of workers across

countries in a single firm.

       Our analysis found that employment policies and practices, and employee performance

and attitudes toward work, vary among establishments and across countries. To help identify

any independent effect of country labour institutions or practices on workers and establishments,

we compared the variation in practices and outcomes across the countries in which the firm

operates with the variation in practices and outcomes across states or groups of states in the US

in which the firm operates. This comparison revealed greater variation across countries than

across states – a pattern consistent with the notion that country institutions have an independent

effect on labour practices and performance, beyond any effects related to contiguity of facilities.

We also found that worker performance and attitudes were strongly related to policies and

practices in broadly similar ways across these countries, though we noted some divergences for

particular policies or outcomes.

       To deal with the problem that patterns found among individuals need not generalize to

establishments or countries, we analysed the relation among establishment level averages of

variables. This analysis found a strong relation between the quality of labour-management

relations and employee behaviour and outcomes consistent with our analysis of data for

individuals. But the analysis of establishment averages also found weak or negligible relations

between high performance work places and employee behaviour and outcomes, whereas the

analysis of individuals found stronger relations. This could reflect genuine variation in

workplace policies or practices within establishments, or idiosyncratic reports on policies,

practices, and performance by individuals that biases upward the estimates of the relation



                                                                                                  28
between policies/practices and outcomes at the level at which those policies and practices are set.

We found only weak relations in both the individual and establishment analyses between the

worker reporting above-market compensation and performance or attitude toward work.

       At the country level, our analysis revealed a positive relation between the average quality

of employee-management relations at the country level and average employee performance. By

contrast, we found no relation between our measures of employee behaviour or attitudes and

measures of national labour relations that differentiate countries by their degree of institutional

vs. market determination of outcomes. This suggests that the establishment level policies and

practices of the multinational trump the effect of these broader features of labour markets in

determining how workers behave within the firm.

       Overall, our analyses support the idea that while labour practices and performance vary

across countries, good labour management relations is an important factor in worker behaviour

and workplace performance in virtually all situations, while the effects of high performance

practices and compensation on performance and attitudes are weaker. Moreover, employee-

management relations has a strong relation not only to standard performance measures such as

likely turnover and willingness to work hard, but also to our innovative measure of how workers

would respond to a shirking co-worker. Further research is needed to identify the specific ways

in which management treats workers and communicates with them that underlies worker feelings

that labour-management relations are good.




                                                                                                      29
Bibliography

Akerlof, George A. “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 97, No. 4 (Nov., 1982), pp. 543-569

Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and Arne L. Kalleberg. 2000. Manufacturing
Advantage: Why High Performance Work Systems Pay Off. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press.

Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski, Richard B. Freeman, and Morris Kleiner. 2005. “Can A
Workplace Have an Attitude Problem? The Impact of Workplaces on Employee Attitudes and
Economic Outcomes”. NBER Working Paper 9987. Cambridge, Ma. : National Bureau for
Economic Research.

Bartholomew, D. J. and M. Knott, Latent Variable Models and Factor Analysis, Oxford
University Press, 1999

Blanchard, Oliver and Thomas Philippon, “The Quality of Labor Relations and Unemployment”
http://econ-www.mit.edu/faculty/download_pdf.php?id=1429

Blasi, Joseph and Douglas Kruse, “US High Performance Work Practices at Century’s End,”
Joseph Blasi and Douglas Kruse, Industrial Relations, Volume 45, No. 4, (October 2006).

Blasi, Joseph, Freeman, Richard B. 2007 forthcoming. “Worker Attitudes Across Countries in
the Same Firm: a new look at Hoftstede’s Culture’s Consequence Analysis “

Boxall, Peter and Purcell, J (2003) Strategy and Human Resource Management, Basingstoke
Palgrave MacMillan,

Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark.2001. “Do "High-Performance" Work Practices Improve
Establishment-Level Outcomes?,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume 54, Number
4, July.

Chan, Sewin & Ann Huff Stevens, 2003. "What you don’t know can’t help you: pension
knowledge and retirement decision-making," NBER Working Papers 10185, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc

Darwin, Charles and Alfred Russel Wallace. 1858. "On the Tendency of Varieties to Depart
Indefinitely from the Original Type," part of the Darwin-Wallace paper "On the Tendency of
Species to form Varieties, and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of
Selection," Journal of the Proceedings of the Linnean Society (Zoology), 3 (July 1858), pps. 53-
62

Freeman, Richard B., Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi 2006. “Worker Responses to Shirking”.
Prepared for the Russell Sage Foundation/NBER Conference in New York City, October 6-7.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau for Economic Research.


                                                                                              30
Freeman, Richard B., Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi 2007. forthcoming “Labor Practices and
Worker and Firm Reports of Economic Performance Across Establishments in Different
Cjountries”

Gwartney, James D., and Robert A. Lawson. 2006. Economic Freedom of the World: 2006
Annual Report. Vancouver, British Columbia (Canada): The Fraser Institute.

Heneman, Robert L, and Charles R. Fay, and Zhong-Ming Wang. 2002. “Compensation Systems
in the Global Context,” in Handbook of Industrial, Work, and Organizational Psychology,
Edited by Neil Anderson, Deniz S. Ones, and Handan Kepir Sinnangil. Thousand Oaks, Ca.:
Sage.

Huselid, Mark. 1995.“The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices on Turnover,
Productivity, and Corporate Financial Performance,” Academy of Management Journal, Volume
38, Number 3, pps. 635-672.

Hofstede, Geert. 1984. Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-related
Values. Beverly Hills, Ca.: Sage.

-----. 1991. Culture and Organizations: Software of the Mind. London: McGraw-Hill.

-----. 2001. Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and
Organizations Across Nations. Beverly Hills, Ca.: Sage

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanni Prennushi. 1997. "The Effects of Human
Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines." American
Economic Review, Vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 291-313

Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi, and Rhokeun Park. 2006. “Shared Capitalism in the U.S.”
Prepared for the Russell Sage Foundation/NBER Conference in New York City, October 6-7.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau for Economic Research

Kruse, Douglas, Richard B. Freeman, and Joseph Blasi. 2006. “Do Workers Gain By Sharing?
Employee Outcomes Under Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Broad-based Stock
Options.” Russell Sage Foundation/NBER Conference, October 6-7.

Lubinski, D., & Humphreys, L. G. (1996). “Seeing the Forest From the Trees: When Predicting
the Behavior or Status of Groups, Correlate Means,” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law
Journal, Volume 2, pps. 363-376.

Lopez-Claros, Augusto. 2006. The Global Competitiveness Report 2006-2007. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Osterman Paul. 1994. “How Common Is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts It?”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume 47, pps. 173-188.


                                                                                             31
32
              Table 1: Country Means of Key Variables and Questions that Define them
                                           WORKPLACE POLICIES            OWN PERFORMANCE                                               CO-WORKER/FACILITY
                                                                                                                                       PERFORMANCE
                  No. of           No. of       Grade on    High-       Total comp   Likely to    Willing     Willing     Anti-
                  employees        facilities   ee-mgt.     perf.       relative     stay         to work     to          shirking     Co-workers    Facility
                                                relations   index       to mkt                    hard        innovate    index        work hard     effectiveness

                                                0-4 scale   0-6 scale   1-5 scale    1-4 scale    1-5 scale   1-4 scale   4-16 scale   0-10 scale    0-4 scale
Overall                   29,353        272          2.27        2.93         2.69         0.59        3.94        3.01         9.78          6.89            2.69

Argentina                     28           1        2.96        3.33          2.50         3.46       4.27        3.39         12.13         8.00            3.16
Australia                    103           2        1.72        2.83          2.46         2.96       3.44        2.94          9.75         6.07            2.31
Brazil                     1,126           5        2.31        3.38          2.75         3.21       4.04        3.16         10.68         8.19            2.52
Canada                       415           2        2.46        3.98          2.94         3.60       3.95        3.06          9.66         6.79            2.84
China                        937           7        2.01        3.14          1.98         3.04       3.94        2.86         10.13         7.62            2.66
Czech Republic                87           1        2.55        3.69          2.61         3.47       3.88        3.12         11.16         7.18            2.75

Finland                      101          1         2.28        2.45          2.58         2.63       3.28        2.76          9.16         7.08            2.57
France                       215          5         2.08        3.32          2.55         3.52       3.33        2.66          9.60         5.80            2.63
Germany                      479         14         2.46        3.19          2.75         3.60       3.69        3.35         11.15         7.04            2.53
Italy                        808          3         1.79        2.35          2.43         3.50       4.14        2.94         10.45         7.20            2.79
Korea                        445          3         2.08        2.92          2.38         3.43       3.88        2.60          9.18         7.55            2.60
Mexico                     2,460          7         2.32        2.98          2.69         3.25       3.97        3.03         11.05         7.34            2.92

Netherlands                   74          6         2.39        2.67          2.52         3.68       2.96        3.07         11.65         6.79            2.51
South Africa                  49          1         2.70        2.83          2.59         3.65       4.43        3.33         10.47         7.50            3.09
Sweden                       234          4         2.13        2.91          2.24         3.47       3.48        2.52          9.02         7.03            2.51
Switzerland                  115          1         2.33        3.66          2.31         3.62       3.67        2.68          9.91         6.27            2.74
Taiwan                        27          1         2.52        3.63          2.48         2.89       4.00        2.78          9.32         6.63            2.33
United Kingdom               415          9         2.08        3.41          2.66         3.33       3.78        3.35         10.10         6.85            2.56
United States             21,235        199         2.29        3.28          2.75         3.44       3.95        3.01          9.59         6.72            2.67


F-stat. for differences                            18.20       29.49        38.39         30.86      25.24       24.13         32.63        49.56           24.06
P-value for differences                             0.00        0.00         0.00          0.00       0.00        0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00

                                                                                                                                                             33
 Source: Obtained from firm-based survey questions as given below:

                                                                WORKPLACE POLICIES

Grade on Employee-Management Relations. 0-4 scale. “If you were to rate how well this company takes care of workers on a scale similar to
school grades, what grade would you give in these areas? (C is an average grade.) Overall relations with employees.” (A=4, B=3, C=2, D=1,
F=0).

High Performance Work System Index. 0-6 scale. Composed of one point for each of the following components: Employee Involvement
Team: "Some companies have organized workplace decision-making in ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are you personally involved
in any team, committee or task force that addresses issues such as product quality, cost cutting, productivity, health and safety, or other workplace issues?"
(0=no, 1=yes), 1 point; Training. "In the last 12 months have you received any formal training from your current employer, such as in classes or seminars
sponsored by the employer?" (0=no, 1=yes), 1 point; Information Sharing: “If you were to rate how well this company takes care of workers on a
scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in these areas? (C is an average grade.) Sharing information with employees.” (A,
B, C, D, F), 1 point for A, .75 for B, .5 for C, .25 for D, and 0 for F; Employee Selection: “On a scale of 1 to 7 please evaluate how
effective your work area or team functions in the following areas: Selecting the very best people to be part of our team/area.” (1=very
ineffective, 4= neutral, 7=very effective),” 1 point for a score of 7, .83 points for a score of 6, .66 points for a score of 5, .5 points for a score
of 4, .33 points for a score of 3, .17 points for a score of 2, 0 points for a score of 1; Profit or Gain Sharing: “In your job are you eligible for
any type of performance-based pay such as individual or group bonuses or any type of profit sharing? (0=no, 1=yes), 1 point; Job Rotation:
“How frequently do you participate in a job rotation or cross-training program where you work or are trained on a job with different duties
than your regular job?” (1=never, 2=occasionally, 3=frequently), 1 point for “frequently”, .5 points for “occasionally”, 0 points for “never”,

Total compensation relative to the market. 1-5 scale. "Do you believe your total compensation is higher or lower than those of employees
with similar experience and job descriptions in other companies in your region? (1=lower, 2,3,4, 5=higher).

                                                                  OWN PERFORMANCE

 Unlikely to Look for New Job. 1-4 scale. “How likely is it that you will decide to look hard for a job with another organization within the
 next twelve months? (1= already looking; 2= very likely, 3= somewhat likely, 4= not at all likely).”




                                                                                                                                                           34
Willing To Work Hard. 1-5 scale. “To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement? “I am willing to work harder than I have
to in order to help the company I work for succeed.” (1= strongly disagree; 2=disagree; 3= neither agree nor disagree; 4= agree; 5= strongly
agree).”

Willing to Innovate. 1-4 scale. “I would be willing to be more involved in efforts to develop innovative products and services. (1= Not at
all, 2= very little, 3= to some extent, 4= to a great extent).”

Anti-shirking Index. 4-16 scale. “If you were to see a fellow employee not working as hard or well as he or she should, how likely would
you be to: a) Talk directly to the employee, b) Speak to your supervisor or manager, c) Talk about it in a work group or team, d) Do nothing.
(reverse-coded) (Answers on all four parts of this question were coded on 1-4 scale for a summated rating with 1= not at all likely, 2= not very
likely, 3=somewhat likely, 4= very likely).”

                                    EVALUATION OF CO-WORKERS AND FACILITY PERFORMANCE

Co-workers Work Hard. 0-10 scale. “At your workplace, how hard would you say that people work? Please rate on a scale of 0 to 10. (0=
not at all hard, 10= very hard).

Facility Effectiveness. 0-4 scale. “If you were to rate the facility you work in on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give
in these areas? Getting the job done that has to get done efficiently. (C is an average grade.) (4=A, 3=B, 2=C, 1=D, 0=F).”




                                                                                                                                             35
  Table 2: Statistical Tests for Establishment Level Effects in Labor
                           Practices/Policies

Based on regressions that control for job and demog. characteristics,
with 245 establishment dummy variables
                                                    F-stat. for
                                                    establishment
                                                    differences
Policies
            Grade on ee-mgt relations                        8.52
            High-perf. index                                10.15
            Total comp relative to mkt.                      6.75
Own performance
            Likely to stay                                   7.70
            Willing to work hard                             5.00
            Willing to innovate                              3.73
            Anti-shirking index                              4.14
Co-worker/facility performance
            Co-workers work hard                             5.28
            Facility effectiveness                          10.77




                                                                        36
             Table 3: Statistical Tests for Country Effects Compared to Regional
    Effects in US Establishments

Based on regressions that control for job and demographic characteristics
                                                          F-stat for F-stat for       Variance of dummy coeffs.
                                                          country      U.S. state
                                                          diffs.       diffs.         Countries   U.S. states    Ratio (4/5)
                                                              (1)           (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
Policies
         Grade on ee-mgt relations                             18.43          11.27      0.072         0.015            4.94
         High-perf. index                                      26.85          10.13      0.168         0.026            6.48
         Total comp relative to mkt.                           20.27          10.78      0.053         0.014            3.78
Own performance
         Likely to stay                                        18.17          15.36      0.075         0.011           6.85
         Willing to work hard                                  23.56           8.93      0.111         0.008          13.91
         Willing to innovate                                   18.06           6.05      0.055         0.005          10.17
         Anti-shirking index                                   12.50          10.34      0.687         0.081           8.51
Co-worker/facility performance
         Co-workers work hard                                  18.47           6.22      0.292         0.041            7.04
         Facility effectiveness                                11.65          10.90      0.051         0.011            4.45

All 79 outcomes
            Average F-statistic (37 outcomes)                  24.86         10.43       7.891         1.904            4.14
            Average Chi-sq. statistic (42 outcomes)           259.65        160.34       0.078         0.013            5.84
            Percent of outcomes with higher
            statistics for country dummies (79 outcomes)                      83%                                     100%

No. of country/state dummies                                       19           19          19            19




                                                                                                                37
           Table 4: Regression Coefficients Linking Policies to Performance Measures

Regressions are done separately by country.
Dependent variables are at the top of each column. Each regression contains the three independent variables at
left, plus basic job and demog. characteristics.

                        Likely to         Willing         Willing          Anti-            Co-workers         Facility
                        stay              to work           to             shirking         work hard          effectiveness
                                          hard            innovate         index

Ee-mgt rels. coeff.
  All countries              0.22   ***     0.19    ***       0.03   ***       0.32   ***       0.34     ***      0.32    ***
  Australia                  0.10           0.18             -0.01             0.36             0.99     *        0.56    ***
  Brazil                     0.15   ***     0.16    ***       0.01             0.30   ***       0.08              0.33    ***
  Canada                     0.30   ***     0.21    ***      -0.05             0.63   ***       0.29     **       0.35    ***
  China                      0.17   ***     0.14    ***       0.09   **        0.13             0.37     ***      0.27    ***
  France                    -0.04           0.25    **       -0.15            -0.08             0.88     ***      0.24    ***
  Germany                    0.28   ***     0.20    ***       0.01             0.17            -0.04              0.34    ***

   Italy                     0.14   ***     0.16    ***      -0.02             0.22             0.14              0.17    ***
   Korea                     0.32   ***     0.12              0.11             0.09             0.61     ***      0.21    ***
   Sweden                    0.20   ***     0.10             -0.10             0.02            -0.06              0.27    ***
   United Kingdom            0.38   ***     0.24    ***       0.10   **        0.09             0.38     ***      0.31    ***
   United States             0.25   ***     0.21    ***       0.02   ***       0.34   ***       0.38     ***      0.34    ***
   Mexico                    0.10   ***     0.13    ***       0.08   ***       0.18   **        0.20     ***      0.19    ***

Hi-perf. index coeff.
   All countries             0.06   ***     0.08    ***       0.07   ***       0.31   ***       0.13     ***      0.08    ***
   Australia                 0.32           0.24             -0.03             0.00             0.34              0.22    *
   Brazil                    0.08   ***     0.10    ***       0.04   *         0.14             0.05              0.06    ***
   Canada                    0.03           0.17    ***       0.08   *         0.44   **        0.31     ***      0.13    ***
   China                     0.02           0.07    **        0.15   ***       0.52   ***       0.09             -0.01
   France                    0.23   ***     0.14    *         0.25   ***       0.45            -0.06              0.03
   Germany                   0.00           0.13    ***       0.04             0.06             0.19     *        0.05    *

   Italy                     0.10   **      0.09    **        0.12   ***       0.32   **        0.03              0.07    *
   Korea                     0.06           0.06              0.14   **        0.12             0.06              0.19    ***
   Sweden                    0.21   ***     0.16    **        0.13   **        0.13             0.30     **       0.06    *
   United Kingdom            0.06           0.08              0.02             0.34   *         0.21     **       0.07    *
   United States             0.05   ***     0.07    ***       0.07   ***       0.32   ***       0.16     ***      0.08    ***
   Mexico                    0.08   ***     0.08    ***       0.06   ***       0.35   ***       0.08              0.10    ***

Total comp relative to market
   All countries            0.09    ***     0.05    ***      -0.01             0.00             0.02              0.03    ***
   Australia                0.05            0.17             -0.01            -0.01            -0.04             -0.15
   Brazil                   0.14    ***     0.05             -0.05            -0.06            -0.10              0.02
   Canada                   0.11    **      0.01             -0.02            -0.33            -0.01             -0.06
   China                    0.12    ***     0.05              0.02             0.18            -0.14             -0.04
   France                   0.10            0.19    *        -0.09             0.09            -0.31              0.12
   Germany                  0.06            0.10             -0.02             0.04            -0.20             -0.01



                                                                                                                     38
   Italy                       0.18 ***     -0.01           -0.14   ***   -0.01       -0.02         -0.09   **
   Korea                       0.03          0.13           -0.12          0.53   *    0.57   **     0.04
   Sweden                      0.10          0.12           -0.06          0.40       -0.33   *      0.07
   United Kingdom              0.03          0.05           -0.09   *      0.12        0.35   **     0.00
   United States               0.09 ***      0.05 ***        0.00          0.00        0.01          0.03   *
   Mexico                      0.08 ***      0.06 **         0.06   ***    0.05        0.21   ***    0.02
* Significantly different from zero at p<.10 ** p<05 *** p<.01




                                                                                                       39
                        Table 5: Statistical Analysis of Slope Coefficients
 Based on separate regressions for each country and state, controlling for job and demographic characteristics
                                                 F-stats. for equality of        Variance of coeffs. across
                                                 coeffs.                         countries/states

                                                                     U.S. state                U.S.     Ratio
                                                     All countries     diffs.     Countries   states    (3/4)
 Dep. var.                 Indep. var.                    (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)
 Likely to stay
                            Grade on ee-mgt
                            relations                     9.90***        2.20**      0.014     0.002        8.543
                            High-perf. index              3.08***        1.98**      0.006     0.001        6.747
                            Total comp relative to
                            mkt.                           1.89**          1.69      0.005     0.001        3.505
 Willing to work hard for co.
                            Grade on ee-mgt
                            relations                      1.97**          1.38      0.002     0.001        1.234
                            High-perf. index                 1.16          0.43      0.001     0.000        2.844
                            Total comp relative to
                            mkt.                             1.22          0.69      0.007     0.001        9.660
 Willing to innovate
                            Grade on ee-mgt
                            relations                     3.11***        2.50**      0.006     0.002        3.241
                            High-perf. index              3.10***       3.05***      0.004     0.001        3.456
                            Total comp relative to
                            mkt.                           2.52**          1.68      0.005     0.001        3.948
 Anti-shirking index
                            Grade on ee-mgt
                            relations                        1.13          1.31      0.085     0.016        5.346
                            High-perf. index               2.85**          1.82      0.045     0.012        3.807
                            Total comp relative to
                            mkt.                             0.78          1.24      0.055     0.014        3.887
 Co-workers work hard
                            Grade on ee-mgt
                            relations                     4.25***        2.31**      0.066     0.013        5.153
                            High-perf. index                 1.46          0.78      0.010     0.002        4.640
                            Total comp relative to
                            mkt.                          3.12***          1.62      0.063     0.010        6.163
 Facility effectiveness
                            Grade on ee-mgt
                            relations                    13.57***       3.49***      0.013     0.001        8.624
                            High-perf. index              4.77***          1.25      0.002     0.000        6.854
                            Total comp relative to
                            mkt.                           2.60**          1.80      0.004     0.001        4.181
 No. of countries/states                                      12             12         12        12

Note: * Significantly different from zero at p<.10 ** p<05 *** p<.01




                                                                                                       40
Table 6: Relation Between Establishment Average Policies and Establishment
Average Outcomes
Each row represents separate regression, with dependent variable at left.
                                                                              Total
                                         Grade on            High-            comp
                                         ee-mgt.             perf.            relative
                                         relations           Index            to mkt              U.S. dummy
Establishment-level regressions
predicting survey measures
   Likely to stay                                0.433             -0.035           0.244          -0.007
                                               (0.050) ***        (0.035)         (0.049)   ***   (0.038)
  Willing to work hard                           0.248              0.047          -0.037           0.233
                                               (0.051) ***        (0.035)         (0.049)         (0.039)   ***
  Willing to innovate                            0.152              0.058          -0.055          -0.032
                                               (0.053) ***        (0.037)         (0.052)         (0.041)
  Anti-shirking index                            0.824              0.145           0.034          -0.793
                                               (0.187) ***        (0.131)         (0.182)         (0.143)   ***
  Co-workers work hard                           0.497             -0.043          -0.033          -0.291
                                               (0.124) ***        (0.087)         (0.121)         (0.095)   ***
  Facility effectiveness                         0.378              0.068           0.060           0.017
                                               (0.051) ***        (0.035) *       (0.049)         (0.039)
Note: * Significantly different from zero at p<.10 ** p<05 *** p<.01; n=258




                                                                                                     41
        Table 7: Correlations Among Policies and Economic Outcomes at the Country Level.

Based on 19 countries
                                                                Willing                       Anti-           Co-
                              Outcomes^:         Likely to      to            Willing to      shirking        workers    Facility
                                                                work                                          work
                                                 stay           hard          innovate        index           hard       effectiveness
Worker reports on labor practices
at their facilities^
       Grade on ee-mgt relations                      0.344         0.230           0.352            0.384       0.187   0.606
       High-perf. index                               0.143         0.118          -0.150           -0.027      -0.147   0.020
       Total comp relative to mkt.                    0.103         0.239           0.613            0.346       0.071   0.228

Country indicators of labor
conditions
Fraser Institute EFI ^^
       Labor Market Regulations
       part                                           0.061         0.090          -0.004           -0.096      -0.442   0.082

Global Competitiveness Report^^^
      Overall Global
      Competitiveness Index                           0.010        -0.571          -0.399           -0.213      -0.693   -0.391
      Hiring and firing practices                    -0.240        -0.105          -0.313           -0.415      -0.343   -0.211
      Cooperative labor-employer
      relations                                      -0.073        -0.458          -0.107             0.001     -0.451   -0.396
      Flexibility of wage
      determination                                  -0.091        -0.039          -0.287           -0.470      -0.208   -0.173
      Pay and productivity                           -0.222        -0.252          -0.407           -0.507      -0.456   -0.420
      Overall mkt efficiency                         -0.057        -0.406          -0.177           -0.221      -0.691   -0.352
      Restrictive labor regulations                   0.262        -0.347           0.014            0.325      -0.288   -0.048
      Innovative factors                              0.121        -0.434          -0.346           -0.194      -0.590   -0.336
^ The outcomes and worker reports on labor practices are based on 19 country coefficients,
controlling for basic job and demographic characteristics (occupation, supervisory status, hours,
tenure, union, gender, race, marital status, education, disability status).
^^The Economic Freedom of the World 2006 Annual Report, James Gwartney and Robert A. Lawson. Vancouver, B.C.: The Fraser
Institute, 2006.
^^^ The Global Competitiveness Report 2006-2007, Dr Augusto Lopez-Claros, Editor. NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.




                                                                                                                                    42
                                                                       Figure 1: Employee Relations and Co-worker Effort
Average perception of co-worker effort at work site
   5       6       7       8        9       10




                                                               1              1.5             2           2.5             3     3.5
                                                                                      Average grade on employee relations

                                                                                                 non-US      US




                                                                   Figure 2: Employee Relations and Anti-shirking Activity
                                                       14
               Average score on anti-shirking activity
               6        8        10         12




                                                                   1            1.5             2           2.5             3         3.5
                                                                                        Average grade on employee relations

                                                                                                    non-US        US
   Average perception of facility effectiveness at work site




                                                               Figure 3: Employee Relations and Facility Effectiveness
       1.5       2         2.5         3       3.5




                                                               1               1.5             2           2.5             3          3.5
                                                                                       Average grade on employee relations

                                                                                                   non-US         US




                                                                                                                                            43
