                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE INFORMATIONAL CONTENT OF BOND RATINGS


                      Louis H. Ederington

                          Jess B. Yawitz

                         Brian F. Roberts



                     Working Paper No. 1323




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 19814




The authors, respectively, Professor of Economics at Georgia State
University; John E. Simon Professor of Finance at Washington
University; and doctoral candidate at Washington University.
Financial support was provided by the Institute of Banking and
Financial Markets, Graduate School of Business, Washington
University (St. Louis), and by the Research Council, School of
Business Administration, Georgia State University. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors arid not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1323
                                                     April l984



                        The Informational Content of Bond Ratings


                                          ABSTRACT


          This paper explores the risk structure of interest rates. More

specifically, we ask whether yields on industrial and commercial bonds

indicate that market participants base their evaluations of a bond issue's

default risk on agency ratings or on publically available financial sta-

tistics. Using a non—linear least squares procedure, we relate the yield

to maturity to Moody's rating, Standard & Poor's rating, and accounting

measures of creditworthiness such as coverage and leverage. We find that

market yields are significantly correlated with both the ratings and with a

set of readily available financial accounting statistics. These results

indicate Ci) that market participants base their evaluations of ap issue's

creditworthiness on more than the agencies' ratings and (2) that the

ratings bring some information to the market above and beyond that con-

tained in the set of accounting variables. In addition, our results

suggest that the market views Moody's and S&P's ratings as equally reliable

measures of risk. Although the accounting measures also affect yields on

new or recently reviewed issues, our analysis suggests that the market may

pay more attention to the accounting measures and less to the ratings if

the   rating has not been reviewed recently.


Louis H. Ederington            Jess B. Yawitz           Brian E. Roberts
Georgia State University       Washington University Washington University
Department of Economics        Campus Box 1133           Campus Box 1133
University Plaza               St. Louis, MO 63130       St. Louis, MO 63130
Atlanta, GA 30303
                       THE INFORMATIONAL CONTENT OF BOND RATINGS



      Publicly Issued corporate bonds are normally rated by one or both of the two

 major rating agencies: Moody's and Standard and Poor's.    Although there is clearly

 a demand for this service, several authors have concluded from the empirical

 evidence •that these ratings contain little new information.   For instance, it has
 been shown that approximately two—thirds of the ratings can be predicted on the

basis of a handful of readily available financial
                                                    statistics (see below). In
addition,   several studies have concluded that bond and stock prices adjust before,
not after, rating changes on outstanding Issues are announced (Hettenhouse and
Sartorls, 1976; Weinstein, 1977).

     On the other hand, extant statistical models have not been able to predict all

ratings while other studies (Katz, 1974; Grler and Katz, 1976; Griffin and

Sanvlcente, 1982) indicate that markets do react to rating change announcements.

Furthermore, there is some theoretical basis for the view that ratings provide an

informational service. First, obtaining and properly evaluating public Information

Is costly. It may be cheaper for a specialized agency to evaluate the

creditworthiness of a firm or a bond issue than for all (or most) potential

purchasers to do so. Second, ratings may provide a means of conveying relevant

inside information to bondholders without providing full information to the entire

marketplace (especially the firm's competitors). Standard and Poor's (1979),

Belkaoul (1983) and Sherwood (1976) all claim that in fact rating agencies do

receive a considerable quantity of sensitive information, including projections and

plans, which are held In strictest confidence. Consequently,
                                                                ratings may provide
relevant Information without providing the details. The final basis for believing

that ratings may possess Information is the fact that bond issuers and purchasers

are willing to pay for rating services.1
                                              —2—




        This question of the informational content of bond ratings is the subject of

the present paper. Specifically we seek to answer the following questions:



   1. Do market yields (prices) on bonds Indicate that market participants view
       ratings as reflecting only readily available Information, I.e., as providing
       no new information?

   2. Do market yields indicate that market participants view all relevant informa-
       tion regarding an issue's creditworthiness as adequately represented by its
       rating(s)?

   3.        If the market views ratings as important, do market participants rely relati-
             vely more on one rating agency than the other?

   4. Does the information content of ratings decline over time, i.e., do market
       participants regard recently released ratings as better indicators of credit
       risk than ratings which have not been reviewed recently?

        In the following section we review previous research which Is particularly

relevant to this question of the information content of bond ratings. This research

may be divided into three groups:        (1) studies of the determinants of bond ratings,

(2) studies of market adjustments to rating changes, and (3) cross—sectional studies

of bond yields. In section II, we explain our approach to these questions which

Involves estimating the cross—sectional relationship between the market yields on

bond issues, Moody's and Standard and Poor's ratings, and readily available

accounting measures of creditworthiness. Results are then presented and discussed

in section III.

                                      I. Previous Research

        In    this section several of the more Important   studies which have addressed

questions germane to our study are discussed. This analysis is fairly thorough in

order    to provide the   appropriate benchmark for evaluating our approach and contribu-

tion.
                                               —3—




A. Investigations of Bond Ratings

      While not explicitly examining the infolination content question, studies of the

determinants of bond ratings do call into question the importance of these

ratings. As noted above, numerous studies (surveyed in Altman, 1981 and Belkaoui,

1983) have found that roughly two—thirds of the ratings on new Issues can be

predicted on the basis of a handful of financial statistics. Of course, this also

means that for approximately one—third of the bond issues actual ratings differ from

what these models predict. If this disparity occurs because ratings reflect

additional information which is not readily available, then ratings do bring

information to the market.      If they differ because the models do not adequately or

accurately reflect the agencies' use of readily available information or because of

random differences in judgment on borderline issues, then no new information is

being provided.2



B. Market Adjustment to Rating Changes

      Most recent studies of the informational content of ratings haye focused on

reactions in debt and equity markets to rating changes. While the measures of

market reactions differ, all bond market studies have followed somewhat similar

procedures In attempting to separate the effect of the rating change from other

influences on bond prices and yields. Each uses an index or measure of the yield,

price change, or holding period return on the rerated issue relative to some chosen

benchmark. The various measures and benchmarks are summarized in Table 1 which also

provides a description of the data and tests. For instance, Katz's (1974) measure

was
                                              Yft Y0
                                     jt   —
                                               *N
                                              'jt —
                                                   ,JtD
                                                   *0 j


where          =   yield   to maturity on issue j as of time   t
                                        —4—



       *0    =   estimated yield on an issue of the same coupon, maturity, and size
                 as j but with issue i's original rating. The estimate was obtained
                 by substituting values for coupon, etc. into a regression estimated
                 for that rating and month.
       *N    =   estimated yield for issue j given its new rating category.
                 1 if downgraded, —1 if upgraded.

     According to Katz, 'jt should equal zero before any adjustment to a change in

the risk of default and one after the adjustment is complete. He found that indeed

the average Ijt was approximately equal to zero before the rating change, to .3 the

month of the rating change, and to one thereafter. Grier and Katz (1976) also

concluded that the market reacts after, not before, a rating change though they

performed no test of this hypothesis. However, with a different data set, index,

and benchmark, Hettenhouse and Sartoris (1976) concluded that the adjustment occurs

prior to the rating change.3

     A somewhat different approach was taken by Weinstein (1977). Examining the

difference between the holding period return on bonds with changed ratings and on

bonds with the original unchanged rating from 18 months before the rating change to

6 months after with the signs reversed for bonds rated downward, he concluded that

the adjustment generally occurred in the earlier period——well before the rating

change was announced. However, none of the 23 excess holding period return averages

which Weinstein presented in the paper were significantly different from zero.

     There are several problems and limitations associated with Investigations of

market reactions to rating changes which make It difficult to draw conclusions from

them regarding the information content of ratings.

1. While there should be no market adjustment if the rating change provides no new

information, it is not clear that the size of the adjustment will be positively

related to the information contained in the rating change. The problem here is that

the magnitude of the adjustment depends on the rating house's promptness In revising

ratings as well as on the informational content. If rating agencies are prompt, a
                                           —5—




rating will be changed as soon as It crosses the borderline between the ratings.

The informational content of this change is high but the market adjustment may be

small because the market knows that the riskiness of the issue lies near this

borderline between the old and new ratings. If, on the other hand, the rating

agencies review Issues only intermittently and are slow to react, the riskiness of

the Issue may lie well within the new rating interval. The Informational content of

the rating change is lower In this case but the price adjustment would tend to be

larger.

2. The large price adjustments tend to occur in cases in which the companies are

receiving extensive negative publicity at about the same time the rating change is

announced. As a result it Is difficult to distinguish between the two effects.4

3. Price adjustments observed before a rating change by one agency may be due to an

earlier rating change by the other agency —      not   to public Information which eventu-

ally leads to the second rating change.5 When, for Instance, Weinstein observed

some adjustment over the 18 month period before Moody's changed its rating, it may

have been because some Issues were in the process of adjusting to a change in S&P's

rating which occurred during this period. When Katz found that yields were still

adjusting months after a S&P rating change, it may have been because of subsequent

rating changes by Moody.

4. Obviously all of these studies concentrate on revisions in ratings. We feel the

more important question Is whether the overall body of ratings, some years old,

bring Information to the market —   not   whether the small sample of revised ratings

provide Information.

C. West's Cross—Sectional Study

     West's (1973) is the only study of which we are aware which considers the

effect of all ratings — new, old, and recently revised — on yields. Using the

results of Fisher's yield to maturity study (1959)6, West argued that if ratings
                                        —6—




mattered independently of "the underlying economic factors" then high (low) rated

issues should tend to have lower (higher) yields than predicted i.e., negative

(positive) residuals. While little pattern was observed in the residuals of the

1927, 1932, and 1937 regressions, a significant (5Z level) majority of the issues

rated Baa or lower had positive residuals in 1949 and 1953. West concluded that

since this pattern was observed in '49 and '53 but not earlier, it probably was due

to the regulations introduced in the late 1930s and 1940s requiring that bonds rated

Baa or below be carried on banks.' books at market value.7

     There are problems with the West—Fisher approach as well. Important measures

of default risk such as interest coverage and subordination status were not included

In Fisher's equation, nor were call protection and the tax advantages of discount

bonds considered. Moreover, it is not obvious that the yield relationship is log—

linear as they assumed. If It is not, then ratings may appear to influence yields

because of this specification error. Finally, as West acknowledges, the possibility

that ratings are revised to reflect market rates cannot be ruled out, i.e., yields

any influence ratings—not vice versa.



                              II. The Method and Data


A. Overview and Data

     In this study we seek to determine the information content of ratings by

regressing the yields to maturity of various bond Issues both on dummy variables

representing Moody's and Standard and Poor's ratings and on variables representing

readily available Information regarding the issuing firm and the bond Issue

Itself. This approach avoids the previously discussed problems associated with

rating change studies and our specification avoids most of the problems of the West—

Fisher study though reverse causation cannot be completely ruled out. Implicit In

this approach Is the assumption that any information provided by ratings is
                                                 —7.-




primarily information concerning the Issue's creditworthiness. While we do not rule

out the possibility that information on marketability, etc. is also provided by

ratings and that such information may affect bond yields, the rating agencies

describe and sell their ratings as measures of creditworthiness or ability to pay.8

      The relationship which we estimate is

               =    f   (Ci. R. Xj. uj)
                                                                      (1)

where

      Vj       is the yield to maturity on issue j,

        Cj     represents a set of publicly available financial accounting data
               pertaining to the Issuing firm and known characteristics of the bond issue
               which may be regarded as relevant in assessing its creditworthiness,

               includes both Moody's and Standard and Poor's ratings of the issue,

        x represents characteristics of the issue, other than measures of credit-
             worthiness, which might be expected to influence its yield, e.g., call
                protection    and term to maturity, and
                is a random error term.
      The hypothesis that ratings provide          no information beyond the publicly

available information in Cj and that ratings do not Influence yields because of

regulatory constraints          that require or encourage certain bond buyers to hold only
bonds rated above a certain           level, implies that   ratings can be suppressed in the
estimation         of equation (1), i.e.,

             Yj =   f(C,   Xj, uj).                                   (2)

The   hypothesis that market participants base their evaluation of creditworthiness
solely on ratings          implies that the information set Cj   can be suppressed or that
                   = f (Rd,                                           (3)
                              X, u)
        In order to test these hypotheses and the relative importance of Moody's rat-
ings versus Standard and Poor's, data were collected on a sample of bonds issued by

industrial and commercial firms. Since it was feared that dealer quotes on thinly

traded issues might not reflect true market equilibrium prices, the sample was
                                         —8—




restricted   to bonds listed on the UYSE or ASE which traded during the three day

period: February 27 — March 1, 1979. The sample was also restricted to bonds or

notes with at least five years to maturity, to bonds rated by both rloody's and S&P,

and   to issues of firms with five years of data on the COMPUSTAT tape prior to
December 31, 1978.   Finally, we included no more than two     bond   issues of any one
firm.1° The final sample consisted of 176 bond Issues.


B. Characteristics Reflecting the Creditworthiness of the Issue and Issuer.

      The specification of the components of   Cj and of   their   relationship to Yj Is
crucial to any test of the first hypothesis ,    I.e.,   that ratings possess no informa-

tion content. Ideally C should Include all publicly available Information on both

the bond issue and issuer which market participants view to be Important In

determining the issue's creditworthiness. While some evidence on this issue is

presented below, there is no a priori assurance that our chosen C Is exhaustive.

Consequently, If the hypothesis that ratings do not Influence yields Is rejected by

our data, we can only conclude that ratings add information over an above that

contained in the chosen data set Cj.11 This additional information may Itself be

readily available.12 If, however, the R are Insignificant for our chosen Ci, they

should also be Insignificant for the true Cj as well.

      While financial analysts have suggested that numerous measures are useful in

assessing a firm or bond's creditworthiness, most seem to fall Into four general

categories (Altman, 1981; Standard & Poors, 1979): (1) measures of balance sheet

leverage, (2) measures of Interest coverage, (3) measures of profitability or cash

flow and (4) characteristics of the bond contract, e.g. subordination status. In

addition, rating studies have Invariably found a strong correlation between firm

size and ratings and market participants may well regard large firms as less risky,

ceteris paribus. On this basis, the following variables were chosen for Inclusion

in data set Ci:
                                        —9—




    LEY —    the   ratio of long term debt to total capitalization,

    COy —    a five year average of interest coverage measured as the pretax income

              (before extraordinary items) plus interest charges divided by interest

             charges,

   DCOV      deviations of coverage from a five year trend line measured as the

              square root of the sum of the squared deviations,

    PRO       the ratio of pretax income to total assets — a five year average,

   DPRO       deviations of profits from a five year trend line measured as for

              DCOV,

  ASSET —     the firm's total assets,'3
    SUB —     a dummy which equaled one if the issue was subordinated and zero

              otherwi Se.

    Except for SUB, all data were taken from the COMPUSTAT tapes for fiscal years

ending before December 31, 1978, i.e., two months were allowed for release of the

data. Since Interest coverage and profitability often vary considerably from year

to year, one would expect that analysts consider more than just the •most recent

figures. Accordingly, five years of data were collected on these two variables.

Since we expected that the market would attach more importance to more recent years,

we initially attempted to utilize a weighted average with geometrically declining

weights where the rate of decline was estimated as part of our non—linear least

squares estimation described below. Since the non—linear least squares could not

converge on weights for PRO and choose approximately equal weights for CDV in Ini-

tial runs, simple averages were used for simplicity.14 DCCV and DPRO were Included

because we expected that companies whose coverage and profitability deviated from

trend would be viewed as more risky. These were calculated by regressing CCV and

PRO on time, squaring and summing the deviations from these trend lines, dividing by

five and taking the square root.
                                              —10-




       The functional form of the relationship between the accounting measures and Y,j

is important but unknown. Y should be positively related to leverage and the

deviation measures and negatively related to the other variables but the exact form

of this relation Is uncertain. In such situations researchers, e.g. Fisher and

West, normally assume a particular form —       usually   linear or logarithmic. Such a

procedure is particularly dangerous here. If the specified relation between Yj and

a variable such as leverage differs from the true relation, ratings may appear as

significant only because they are serving as proxies for the difference between the

true and chosen forms. To minimize any specification error, a power transformation

was applied to each continuous variable In Cj. In other words the specified form

was

         =   f 1(C.)
                 j
                     + f (R.) + f (x.) + u.
                        2 j      3 j
                                                                                (4)


where
                          x1           '2
    f1(C) =      + 1(I_E\') + 2(COV) + 3(DCOY) +            (ASSET) + 5SUB      (5)




        Both the coefficients    and exponents X were estimated using non—linear least

squares which provides maximum likelihood estimates of both if Uj is normally

distributed. This is a very flexible form yet one which —         unlike   say the polynomial

—   meets our requirement that the signs of the first derivatives not change.
If      = 1, the relation is linear and for X close to zero it approximates the
logarithmic.15 Of course this specification also includes the reciprocal, square,
and square root forms as special cases.
C. The Ratings
        To capture the effect of ratings on V. dummy variables were Included to repre-

sent both Moody's and S&P's ratings of the Issue. Separate dummy variables were

defined for each rating except triple A, that Is SPAA,SPA,...,

SPB,SPCCC for S&P and MAA,MA,...MB for Moody's. [There were no Moody's ratings
                                                   —11—




below B in the sample.]         For instance SPAA          1 if issue j was rated AA by S&P and


SPAAJ
        =0 otherwi se.
        We chose to express f2 (Rj) in equation 4 as

             =                                             +
   f2(R)         i MAA +        a2   MA + a3 MBAA + a4 MBA           a5   MB]
                 + (1 —    y) [c SPAA + a2 SPAj + a3 SPBBBj                             (6)
                      +               +        SPB. +
                          a4 SPBB         a5            a6 SPCCC].
        This specification assumes that a given Moody's rating, e.g., A, i s viewed as

representing the same degree of risk on average              as the same rating from S&P. There
is evidence (Ederington, 1983) that this is the case.'6 However, It                is   not neces—

sarily assumed that market participants             view the two ratings as equally accurate      or

reliable. The third question we sought to answer in this study was whether the

market attaches more weight to one agen cy's ratings than to the other.                  If the two
ratings are viewed as roughly equal in accuracy and reliability, then y should be

approximately equal to .5.           If Moody's rating is viewed as more (less) reliable than

S&P's, then y >    (<)    .5.




0. Other Factors Influencing Yields

        While attention in the present study is focused on the effect on Y of variables

associated with the risk of default, yield to maturity may also be affected by the

issues' marketability, term to maturity, tax treatment, callability, and possibly

other provisions of the bond indenture. Since all issues In our sample were listed

on either the NYSE or ASE and all were actively traded during the observation

period, the observations do not differ greatly In marketability and accordingly no

variable to measure marketability was Included.'7

        For the dates on which our sample was collected, the government security yield

curve    was continuously — but only slightly — downward             sloping over the terms to

maturity In our sample. Five year government bonds selling near par carried a yield
                                                   —12-



about ten       to fifteen basis points above those on the longest term bonds. Assuming,

as Fisher did, that the slope of the yield curve for corporate bonds should be

similar to that for government bonds, we chose to adjust the dependent variable, Y,

to a 25 year bond basis, Y, using the government bond yield curve.'8 These

adjustments were generally quite small—averaging only four basis points.

        At equal pretax yields, bonds selling at a discount are obviously more attrac-

tive to taxable investors than otherwise equivalent bonds selling at par both

because they are less likely to •be called and because taxation of the discount may

be at a lower capital gains rate and/or deferred until maturity. If the difference

in callability is Ignored, the marginal investors' after tax expected yields over

the holding period should be equal for discount bonds and for bonds selling at

par.     If the yield curve is fairly flat so that no change In             the yields on par bonds
Is expected over the period, equation (7) expresses the equality in after tax

returns on par and discount bonds.


       C (1—t)      C (1—t) +    E   (P d) (1—td
        p           =d                                                (7)

          pp

where

   Cp,Cd =           coupons on par and discount bonds respectively,
                =
                     prices   of par and discount bonds

                t    =   the tax rate on interest income,

               td
                     =   the effective, tax rate on the discount.19
                     =   the expected price appreciation over the period on the discount
        E(Pd)
                         bond.

If no changes in market rates are expected during the period, then observed market

yields on the two issues may be expressed as
                                                         —13—



                     C                C +   E(P)
                 =           an   1d — ___________
                         p                  d



 After substituting these into equation 7, one obtains



                 =           -        )(-                                    (8)


 Consequently, the variable TAX = (Y — .)                was    included as an.Jndependent variable in
                                                     p
 the    estimated equation. Since TAX is a positive linear function of Y, spurious

_correlation may bias Its coefficient toward 1.20 However, since a negative coeffi-

 cient is expected and unbiased estimation of this coefficient is not our primary

 Interest, this is not expected to create serious problems.

         Call   protection may take         the form of a stated restriction on callablifty and/or

 a    difference     between the market price and the call price. The latter is difficult

 to    separate empirically from the tax advantages just discussed, and the TAX variable
 just    defined undoubtedly represents both effects. Since only 20% of the issues in

 our sample carried an unexpired call restriction, the number of years to the first

 call date, CALL, was simply added to the equation in a linear form.


                                                 III RESULTS

 A.    Ratings
        Before investigating the impact of both ratings and financial accounting vari-

 ables on *, the effect of each was examined separately beginning with ratings. The

 distribution of Moody's and S&P's ratings is shown in Table 2 while the results of

 the regression of * on the ratings (in the manner described In equation 6) as well

 as on TAX and CALL are shown In the first column of Table 3. The results are

 generally as expected — the lower the rating, the higher the adjusted yield to

 maturity. While the estimated differences between yields on AAA, AA, and A rated

 Issues are small and insignificant, '(*             increases sharply when the rating falls below
                                                    -14—




A    and further reductions lead to ever increasing yields. I statistics                   for the
differences    between adjacent ratings are shown in Table 4.

        The coefficient of the TAX variable is of the expected sign and is significant

at the .05 level. The positive coefficient for CALL was unexpected but the coeffi—

dent is minis cule and insignificant.

        Since the weighting factor y is significantly different from both 0 and 1, the

null hypothesi s that the market considers only S&P' s rating and the null that it

considers only Moody's rating can both be rejected.                  As explained

above, y >    (<) .5 would indicate that market partic ipants view Moody' s (S&P's)
ratings as the more accurate or reliable measure of risk. Since the estimated

'y is quite close to .5, 'It appears that the market weights the two agencies' ratings

roughly equall y, though      there is       a suggestion of a slight preference for Moody's.

        As explal ned above, our spec ification of the yield—rating relationship assumes

that neither agency Is viewed as assigning consistently higher or lower ratings than

                                         i
the other. Although there is ev dence to support this assumption, S&P's ratings

tended to be slightly lower In ou r sample than Moody's, as shown in. Table 2, so this

assumption merits mv estigatlon.             In   addition, our specification assumes that If one

agency's ratings are viewed as more reliable than the other agency's, they will be

so viewed across all rating levels.               In other   words, the specification does not
allow one agency to be viewed as be tter in distinguishing among low rated issues and

another as better in distinguishing among high rated issues. To test this

specification,    Y was regresse.d on Moody's and S&P's ratings without these

restriction 21      There were no sign ificant differences between the coefficients for

Moody's and those     f or   S&P's ratings         Indeed, if anything, the results suggested

that the market may view a given Moody              rating as signifying a lower level of risk
    than the same S&P rating —    the opposite of          the suggesti on from Table 2.     Since the

assumptions     underlying the specification 'In           equation 6 could not be rejected, we
                                             —15—



conclude that this specification is a reasonable model of the yield—rating

relationship.22

B. Accounting Indicators of Creditworthiness

          Next1 the relationship between Y and the accounting variables, as well as SUB,

TAX, and CALL, was estimated. For each accounting variable both a coeffi-

cient, P, and an exponent, X, were estimated as described above. Both profitability

variables, PRO and DPRO proved insignificant, with extremely large standard

errors. Indeed, the non—linear estimation procedure failed to converge after nurne—

rous Iterations when they were included in the equation —      apparently   because of high

correlation with the coverage variables.23 Consequently, the equation was estimated

without these variables with the results shown in the second column of Table 3.

          We had hypothesized that risk of default and * would
                                                               be directly related to
LEY and DCCV and inversely related to ASSETS and COY. Since for
                                                                a particular van—
able X, o        to x =   xx1,   the sign of the partial derivative depends on the sign

of product of p and X. This Implies that for LEY and DCOV,
                                                                  and X should be of the
same sign and for ASSETS and COV of opposite sign. These expectations
                                                                      were met for
each variable except DCOV, deviations of coverage from trend, but Its coefficient is

not significant. However, It should be noted that, when a power form Is estimated,

t—statistjcs for a variable's       do not provide a complete or reliable test of the
null hypothesis that * does not depend on that variable. The null hypothesis that

''   is   independent of DCCV implies that DC0V =     and/or XDCOV =   — . This   null may

be tested by estimating the equation with and without DCCV and testing the

hypothesis using a likelihood ratio test or an F test. The resulting F statistics

for all four variables are shown in the first column of Table 5. The critical value

of F with 2 and 166 degrees of freedom Is about 3.05 at the .05 level of

significance, so the null hypothesis that Y* is unrelated to DCCV can be rejected at

the .05 level. Similar null hypotheses are clearly rejected for the other three
                                        —16—




variables.

     Since our equation includes only four accounting measures of the firm's

creditworthiness, the sufficiency of our chosen set, Cj may be questioned.

Fortunately, evidence on this issue is available. While we included no more than

two bond issues for any one firm, our data set does contain multiple issues for

forty. firms. If important firm specific risk of default variables have been

excluded, then one would expect that the residuals from our estimated regression

would be positively correlated for issues of the same firm. If the market regards a

firm as more (less) risky than our equation estimates, then both residuals will tend

to be positive (negative). However, the r2 between the two was only .04 — versus

.66 for Y. Consequently, It appears that if important risk of default variables

have been excluded, they concern the specifics of the bond contract and not the

firm's credi tworthiness.

     In section II we argued that the relationship between ADJY and the financial

accounting variables was probably neither linear nor log—linear and, as a result,

chose a more general form. Since each of the estimated exponents, X, is signifi-

cantly different from both zero and one, our supposition appears justified. For

further comparison, the equation was estimated in linear form and again with the

accounting variables in log form with the following results:




        Specification:            Unexplained Sum of Squares:

         linear form                           147.2

         logarithmic form                      102.2

         power form (Table 3)                     56.5




 Clearly our form results in a much closer fit.

      Since the chosen form includes the linear as a special case and can approximate
                                         —17—




the logarithmic, exact and approximate tests (respectively) of hypotheses that the

relation is linear and logarithmic can be constructed. Both hypotheses are rejected

at the .05 level.24

     The power transformation makes it difficult to estimate the impact on ADJY of a

change in coverage, leverage, or firm size from the    coefficients in Table 3.

Consequently, estimates of the partial impact of a change in each are provided in

Table 6. Percentile values of each variable are shown in the first three columns of

Table 6.   In other words, 20% of the bond issues in our sample were from firms with

less than $594 million in assets and 20% from firms with more than $7424 million.

The fourth column presents the estimated change in Y in basis points resulting from

a rise in each variable from Its 20th percentile value to Its median value, holding

the other three variables constant. Consider for Instance two firms with identical

alues for CDV, LEV, and DCOV. If one firm has assets of $2.424 million (the median

value) and the other assets of $594 million, the parameter estimates in Table 3

indicate that the latter's bond issues will carry an adjusted yield to maturity

approximately 48 basis points higher than the former's. The impactof a change in

each variable from its median to its 80th percentile value Is shown in the fifth

column.

     The non—linearity of the relationship between the accounting variables and

yield is readily apparent from Table 6. Consider for Instance the effect of changes

In leverage. The 20th and 80th percentile values of leverage are approximately

equidistant   from the median. Yet, while an issue of a firm   with the 80th percentile

value   of the ratio of long—term debt to total capitalization would have a market
yield about 38 basis points above that of the median firm, there Is only an 8 basis
point   difference between the median and 20th percentile   firm. It appears   that

beyond a certain level, further decreases In the leverage ratio are regarded as

relatively unimportant.
                                       —18—



     While there are many possible measures of the relative importance of various

variables, the estimated difference in Y* between the 20th and 80th percentile

values of each would provide one such indication. Using this yardstick, size would

appear to be the most important followed in order by leverage and coverage. This is

somewhat disconcerting since it suggeststhat small firms face substantially higher

borrowing costs than large firms with identical coverage and leverage ratios.25



C. Comparing the Information Content of Ratings and Accounting Information

     It is Interesting and instructive that the adjusted R2 for the second equation

in Table 3 is slightly higher than the adjusted R2 for the first equation. This

suggests that these four accounting measures and the indication of subordination

status have at least as much information content as Moody's and Standard and Poor's

ratings combined. However, this does not necessarily mean that the ratings provide

no additional information since they may reflect different aspects of

creditworthiness.

     In order to test the hypothesis that the ratings bring no inftrmation to the

market beyond that contained in the four accounting measures and SUB, an equation

including both ratings and accounting measures was estimated with the results shown

in the third colunii of Table 3. Based on a comparison of the unexplained sums of

squares of the second and third equations, the hypothesis that ratings provide no

additional Information is rejected at the .05 level, Of course the null hypothesis

that the C set of variables adds no information beyond that contained in the

ratings is also rejected.26

     When the ratings and accounting variables are combined, the coeffictents of

both the ratings and the accounting variables are reduced. This was expected since

ratings depend at least partially on these variables. The final pair of columns in

Table 6 shows the estimated impact on Y (in basis points) of changes in each inde-
                                                     —19—




pendent variable using parameter estimates from the combined equation from Table

3. Since ratings were included in this regression, these may be interpreted as

estimates of the impact on *           of   changes in each accounting variable given that the

issue's rating does not change.

     F statistics for the individual accounting variables are shown in the final

colurm of Table 5. When ratings are added, leverage and subordination status (as

well as DCOV) are no longer significant at the .05 level. This is not sirprising

since subordination status does not change over time and leverage probably changes

very little, so old ratings continue to reflect this information. Coverage remains

highly significant —        possibly   because it Is more likely to have changed since the

ratings were last reviewed. This may also be true of the measure of firm size,

ASSET, or it may be significant because the market attaches more weight or

importance to size (or coverage) than do the rating agencies.

     The coefficients of the rating variables are also reduced when other measures

of creditworthiness are included. Since the financial accounting variables are held

constant, the coefficients of this expanded equation provide a more accurate esti-

mate of the likely market reaction to a rating change than the coefficients from the

earlier regression on ratings only (or, equivalently, than would be expected from

differences between mean               of   the various ratings classes). Indeed, according to

our estimated equation, a change from an AAA rating to AA or even A would probably

not to lead to a noticeable change In the market yield on the issue.27 A change in

Moody's rating from Baa to Ba should lead to a rise in the issue's market yield
     *        —         =   .44 (1.35 — .51)
of                                               =    .37 or 37 basis points. While not an
         BA       BAA
inconsequential change, it Is much smaller than the difference between the average

Baa yield for our sample (10.15) and the average Ba yield (11.08). This is to be

expected since only Moody's rating has changed —             not   S&P's or the accounting

van ables.
                                           —20—




     Finally, one will note that the estimated weighting factor, 'y, remains in-

significantly different from .5. However, it is now slightly less than .5 which

would imply —   if   the difference were significant —    that     the market attaches slightly

more weight to S&P's ratings than Moody's after considering the information in the

accounting variables.

     Having compared the explanatory power of ratings and accounting variables on an

overall basis, a comparison of their ability to explain yield differences among

issues at different ends of the risk spec trum appears warranted.            It is possible

that the non—accounting information supposedly embedded In ratings may be viewed by

the market as more (less) important in distinguishing among the issues of small,

less creditworthy firms than In dis tinguishing among the large, weli—known, and

generally less risky firms. It is clear from the equations in Table 3 that ratings

explain very little of the observed differences in adjusted yield to maturity among

Aaa, Aa, and A rated issues and much more of the differences among lower rated

Issues. The results in Table 6 suggest this pattern may hold for accountirg van—

ables as well, but the relative expl ana tory power of ratings and accounting van—

ables at different ends of the risk spectrum      1 S   unclear.
     In order to examine the relativ e ability of ratings and accounting van ables to

explain differences In * among high quality issues separately from thel r ability to

explain differences among low qual Ity issues, the sample was split into issues rated

A or above and issues rated below A.28      Intra—group variances in adjusted yiel ds are

shown In the first column of Tabi e 7.     For example, the variance of observed

adjusted yields of the 98 issues rated A or above about the mean ADJY for those

three ratings was .276 percentage points. Clearly this Intra—group variance was

much larger for the lower quality issues In our sample, i.e., there is a much

greater variation to be explained.

     The mean squared residuals from the rating and accounting measure regressions,
                                        —21—



respectively, are shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table 7. Clearly neither ratings nor

accounting variables explain much of the variation in yields among higher quality

issues. This suggests that the market may have viewed risk differences between

these issues as insignificant at this time so that *   basically   varied among these

issues for reasons unrelated to creditworthiness. On the other hand, accounting

variables explain more of the variation among lower quality issues.29 Indeed, it is

apparent that the lower    of the accounting variables equation versus the ratings

equation in Table 3 arises from the ability of the former to explain yield differ-

ences among lower quality issues rather than among higher quality issues or between

the two groups.

     For the combined regression, the average mean squared error Is approximately 22

basis points and is approximately the same for high and low quality issues —

slightly higher for the former surprisingly. While the source of this unexplained

variation in yields is unclear, It appears that it does not represent unexplained

differences in the perceived creditworthiness of various firms. If unexplained

differences in creditworthiness remained, then one would expect a positive

correlation between the residuals for issues of the same firm.     In fact, the

correlation is nil (adjusted r2 = .001) and negative in sign.




D. Rating Depreciation

    The rating agencies insist their analysts monitor all corporate rati ngs on an

ongoing basis, and S&P (1979, p.18) maintains all its ratings are formally reviewed

at least once a year. However, rating reviews are announced only interniittently and

rating changes tend to be clustered around new offerings, exchange offers    etc.

rather than continuously distributed across time. Consequently, one woul d expect

that a new or recently reviewed rating would be viewed by the market as a more

reliable indicator of an issuess creditworthiness than a rating which has riot been
                                              — 22-




reviewed recently. If a rating review has not been announced In years, bond pur—

chasers may focus more on recent accounting information and less on the rating.

     To test this hypothesis, data were collected on the length of time, tj, since a

rating change or review was last announced by Moody's. Only Moody's ratings were

considered because dates of reviews which did not necessarily result in rating

changes were available for Moody's but not S&P. We assumed that ratings five or

more years old were viewed as equally reliable, i.e., tj = 5 for all issues not

formally reviewed within the last five years (14% of our sample).

     Equation 4 was then respecified as

    *      [B/(l+D)3]f(R)
                            +   [1-{B/(1+D)
                                               j      +
                                                          f(X)   +
                                                                     u      (9)


where      includes only Moody's ratings. In other words, a decay or depreciation

rate, D, was estimated for Moody's ratings. A D > 0 implIes that as time since

review, t,j, increases less weight Is attached to the rating Information and more to

the accounting information in determining market yields.3°

        When the revised equation was estimated using non—linear least squares, the

estimated value of D was .054, a plausible, positive figure. This estimate would

imply that the market attaches about 15% more weight to a new or just reviewed

rating than to one set three years ago. However, the estimated asymptotic standard

error of D was .063 so this estimate is not significantly different from zero.

Consequently, the question of whether the information content of ratings declines

over time cannot be viewed as settled.

        Finally we would note that the estimated      In equation 9 is significantly less

than i.31 This would imply that accounting measures affect yields on new as well as

old issues. In other words, the accounting variables are not significant in the

combined equation in Table 3 merely because the rating agencies are slow to adjust

 their ratings to reflect this new information. These results suggest that the

market considers both ratings and accounting measures In evaluating the creditworth-

 iness of new issues as well.
                                             —23—




                                       IV.   CONCLUSIONS

      In summary, we find:


1) Market participants base their evaluations of a bond issue's creditworthiness on

     more than Moody's and Standard and Poor's ratings. Specifically, it is clear

     that they consider recent financial statistics.


2)   Market yields also vary with    ratings independently of the financial accounting

     variables   we consider.

3)   The   relationship between accounting measures of creditworthiness and market
     yields    is not a simple one. Both linear and log linear forms are rejected.


4) The market apparently views Moody and S&P ratings as interchangeable and as

     equally reliable indicators of an Issue's creditworthiness.


5) Though the relationship Is a weak one, our data suggest that market participants

     pay less attention to ratings and more to publicly available accounting Informa-

     tion if   the   rating has not been reviewed in some time. Nonetheless, both are

     important in the case of new and old issues.


      Questions regarding bond    ratings and creditworthiness or risk of default con-
tinue to fascinate financial market researchers. The number of studies seeking to

relate ratings to accounting measures of risk is now legion [see Belkaoui (1983) or

Altman, 1981)]. Strangely enough, however, few since Fisher (1959) have asked how

market yields are related to measures of credit risk —     either   rating or accounting

measures. We obviously feel that the latter question, which we have analyzed In

this paper, is the more important one. We also feel It is the more fruitful field

for further research. Certainly numerous questions remain which the general

approach we have outlined above seems .ipable of answering. For instance, one might
                                       —24—




ask if other measures of creditworthiness are important? Or, do the unexplained

yield differences represent additional differences in the perceived

creditworthiness, differences in marketability, other systematic differences or

random variations? Finally, are unrated issues viewed as more risky than rated

issues with the same size, coverage, and leverage characteristics?32 Perhaps our

efforts will stimulate additional research in this area.
                                       —25—



                                     Footnotes



1tintil 1968. publicatIon sales to subscribers (presumably bond purchasers) consti-
tuted the rating houses' sole source of revenue. Currently, however, fees paid by
the issuers constitute the major revenue source (Weinstein, 1977). According to
Standard and Poor's (1979) these fees ranged from $500 to $15,000 per issue in the
late 1970's. WeinsteIn (1977) has expressed some puzzlement at the fact that bond
issuers rather than bond purchasers — "the users" — pay the major cost. One may
conjecture that this occurs partially because the rating agencies find it difficult
to restrict use of the ratings to subscribers only and partially because failure to
obtain a rating may be taken as a negative signal by bond purchasers. Purchasers
may suspect that the issuer did not seek a rating because a low rating was anticipa-
ted or because they had something to hide. While issuers would not be willing to
pay for the establishment of rating houses, they may find it advantageous to have
their debt rated once the houses are established.

2Moocjy's and S&P's ratings on new industrial issues differ about one—third of the
time from what the models predict and about 15Z of the time from each other. Ede—
rington (1983) attributes these split ratings to random differences In judgment
rather than to any systematic difference between the two agencies. Consequently,
some of the misciassifications are probably due to random fluctuations in judgment
on borderline cases but It isn't clear that all are.

3whether their results warrant such a conclusion is debatable. The significant
differences are generally from the index value six months before the rating change
to the index value six months after — which leaves the timing of the shift
unclear. Moreover, Hettenhouse and Sartoris show that their index should equal 1
before any market adjustment and 0 after it is complete. •However, for issues which
were subsequently downgraded, the index was above 1 before the change and only fell
to 1 afterwards.

4This is particularly true since none of these studies consider the price or yield
just before and just after a rating announcement but at the beginning and end of the
month.

5A1tman found a median lag of six months between rating changes by the two agencies
though It was quite variable. Hettenhouse and Sartoris (1976) considered market
reactions to rating changes by both Moody's and Standard and Poor's — the only study
to do so — but they did not distinguish between the initial and the second rating
change. Along the same line, it should be noted that in recent years S&P has
normally announced the ratings it Is reviewing and the likely direction of any
change before the rating Is formally revised.

6For individual issues, Fisher had regressed the logarithm of the yield to maturity,
adjusted for term structure, on the logs of (1) the coefficient of variation of the
firm's earnings, (2) the number of years without any default, (3) the ratio of
market value of equity to par value of debt and (4) the total market value of the
firm's publicly traded bonds. Separate cross—sectional regressions were estimated
for 1927, 1932, 1937, 1949, and 1953.
                                           —26—



7However, examination of West's results suggests that the dividing line may have
been between Baa and Ba issues, rather than between A and Baa issues as he argued.
While the residuals on bonds rated Ba and below were strongly positive, the residu-
als on Baa bonds were split roughly 50—50 over the two sample years combined. In
the 1949 sample, 8 of the Baa issues had positive residuals and 12 negative. In
1953 the split was 15 and 8. For bonds rated Ba and below the split was 12(+) and
2(—) in 1949 and 14(+) and 2(—) in '53.

8Our analysis is in terms of yields and yield spreads. While a price format might
seem theoretically preferable and more consistent with the conventional approach to
asset valuation, yield spreads are more meaningful intuitively and have some the-
oretical advantages as well. Tt has been shown elsewhere [Bierman and Hass (1975),
and Yawitz (1977)] that under certain reasonable conditions the relationship between
yields and default risk is independent of the bond's maturity and whether. it sells
above or below par. However, the impact of default risk on price is not independent
of term to maturity for bonds not selling at par.

9The bond market was basically stable over these three days with declines approxima-
tely equaling advances. If the bond traded February 28, this price was used to
calculate Y. If it did not, March 1 or February 27 prices were used. Small trades
were excluded.

101f the firm had two bond issues with different ratings — invariably because of
different subordination status — one of each was included. If there was a choice of
issues with the same rating, the issue(s) with the longest term to maturity was
chosen.

110r that ratings influence yields because of government regulations.

121he inclusion of all possible measures in c is, however, to be avoided for theor-
etical as well as statistical reasons. If th true C1 is quite large then the
processing of this information may be quite costly. In that case ratings would be
useful simply because they are a more efficient source of the information.

13Total sales were also tried empirically as an alternative measure of size. The
results were similarto those presented below but the goodness of fit was reduced.

14The weighted average form which was estimated was
      Coy' =                                      + w5Ct_4)   (W +   +   + w4   +   w5)
               (WC + w2C_1 + w3C_2 + '/C_3
where C is the most recent coverage figure. Since the estimated W was .998, this
is essentially a simple average, and that was used for computationalease.

15Closely related to the power transformation y is the Box-Tidwell or Box—Cox

transformation, (y — 1)    /   x.   The latter has the advantage that it is continuous at

zero and urn [(yX — 1) / X] = in (y), so it includes the log form as a special
         x+o
case. However, estimation of a large Box—Tidweil model where X varies from variable
to variable is difficult and proved to be impossible here. Consequently the power
transformation was chosen. This form is not continuous at zero hut can approximate
the   log form with suitable choices of the exponent and coefficients.
                                            —27—




16Neither Moody's nor S&P consistently rates Industrial bond issues higher than the
other (Ederington, 1983) and neither seems to assign any particular rating more
often. Moreover, several bond portfolio managers have indicated to the authors that
they view them as representing roughly equal risk levels. Nonetheless this assump-
tion is tested below.

17Remaining differences in marketability may however be reflected in the variable
ASSET.

'8Using government bonds selling within SZ of par value, we estimated the following
yield curve:
    yield    a + .088 [1/YEARS] + u = where YEARS represents
years to maturity. We then adjusted all Y to a 25 year bond basis using:

         = Y —   .088 Ni/YEARS) —   .04].
'9This is the effective rate faced by the marginal investor which may be lower than
t because the discount is taxed as capital gains and/or because this tax is deferred
until the issue is sold or matures. In the latter case, t will vary with the term
to maturity but this is ignored.

20A rise (fall) in U. after the bond is issued, i.e., the coupon rate is set, will
cause an equal rise n both V and TAX.

211n other words, ' of equation 6 was dropped and separate 's were estimated for
Moody's and S&P's ratings with the following results:

                                 Moody's             S&P's
          Rating               Coefficient         Coefficient
                                  —.10                  .18
          AAorAa
            A                     —.08                  .24
          BBB or Baa                 .04               1.10
           BB or Ba                  .75               1.09
            B                       1.81               1.41
           CCC                                         3.18

22The sum of the squared errors from the unrestricted equation was 59.46 which
yields an F of 2.33 with 4 and 162 degrees of freedom.

23There were also a couple of issues for which PRO was negative. Since PROX
is an imaginary number for —1 < X < 1, these had to be dropped from the sample when
PRO was included.

24F statistics were constructed from the unexplained sum of squares shown in the
paper. The two F statistics were 65.4 for the linear form and 33.2 for the log form
while the critical value of F with 4 and 163 d. f. is 2.45 at the .05 level.

250f course size may be correlated with measures of riskiness other than coverage
and leverage and may be simply a proxy for these variables. This seems particularly
likely since the smaller firms which turned to the bond market may have done so
because they found it difficult to arrange private financing.
                                       —28—



26For the hypothesis that the ratings provide no additional information beyond that
contained in Cj the F statistic is 9.35 while the critical value of F at the .05
level is 2.07. For the null hypothesis that the accounting measures and SUB add no
information beyond that contained in Cj, the F statistic is 11.64 while the critical
value is 1.94.

     is tempting to hypothesize that the AA and A dummies are insignificant because
information on these firms is more readily available and that the lower ratings are
significant because information on these is less readily available so market parti-
cipants rely on ratings. However, this can not explain why the AAand A dummies are
insignificant when * is regressed on ratings only.

28lssues rated A by one agency and Baa or BBB by the other were excluded from this
analysis.

29However, the hypotheses that the variance of the residuals is the same for the two
groups cannot be rejected at the .05 level though it can be rejected at the .10
level. Since the difference in average yields between ratings is much larger for
the lower ratings, ratings cannot be expected to capture all differences in risk of
default so this result is not too surprising.

300n the other hand, a positive 0 could be observed because rating agencies use
observed market yields as a guide to selling ratings so that recent ratings are more
closely related to market yields.

31 = .52 with an estimated standard error of .24.
32Virtually all long—term industrial and commercial bond issues meeting our require;
ments (e.g., five years of historical data) are rated by at least one agency, so
this question could not be addressed here. However, this may not be true for com-
mercial paper and municipal bonds.
                                                         TABLE   1


                               Summary of Studies of Bond Market Reaction To Rating Changes

                                                    Measurement of Market                          Major Hypotheses Tested
Study               Rating Changes Examined              Adjustment          Benchmark                  Statistically


Katz (1974)         66 utility ratings changed      Change in yield   to     Estimated yield on    Yields are different •1
                    by S&P between 1966 & 1972      maturity                 issue with same       to 15 months after the
                                                                             coupon and maturity   rerating than they were
                                                                             as the old rating     1 to 12 months before:

                                                                                                   significant

Grier    &   Katz   96 industrial and utility       Dollar and percentage    Single issue with      No statistical tests
                    issues downrated by S&P         change in market price   approximately the
                    between 1966 and 1972                                    same coupon and matu-
                                                                             rity as the old rating

He ttenhouse        71 utility ratings changed      Change In yield to       S&P average for old   Yields change before
& Sartoris          from or to Aa by Moody's        maturity                 rating                rerating: significant;
(1976)              and/or S&P in 1973 or 1974                                                     yields change after re-
                                                                                                   rating: insignificant

Weinstein           100 utility and industrial,     Holding period           Changing sample of    Positive holding period
(1977)              ratings changed by Moodyss      returns                  the old rating        returns can be obtained
                    between 1962 and 1974                                                          before transaction costs
                                                                                                   by buying and selling at
                                                                                                   various points before
                                                                                                   and/or after the rerating:
                                                                                                   all insignificant.
                                TABLE 2

                 The Sample Stratified by Moody's and
                       Standard & Poor's Ratings




                             MOODY'S RATING

S          Aaa          Aa          A          Baa      Ba   B
T
A   AAA   .23           2           0          0        0    0
N
D
A   AA     5            24          5          1        0    0
R
D

A   A      0           4            35         3        0    0
N
D
    BBB    0            0           5          16       0    0
P
0
0
    BB     0            0           0          7        12   2
S

R
A   B      0            0           0          0        5    24
I
I
N   CCC    0            0           0          0        0    3
G
                                                Table 3

                                           Estimation Results

                         Estimated Parameters and (Asymptotic Standard Errors)

                                    Ratings            Non—Rating Measures
Variable                              Only           of Creditworthiness Only    Combined

AA or Aa rating                        .077                                       —.016
                                      (.088)                                      (.076)
 A rating                              .179                                        .011
                                      (.079)                                      (.078)
BBB or Baa rating                     1.116                                        .509
       -                              (.094)                                      (.111)
BB or Ba rating                       1.763                                       1.345
                                      (.097)                                      (.143)
 B rating                             3.2O4                                       2.300
                                      (.087)                                      (.183)
CCC rating                            7.125                                       3.364
                                      (.615)                                      (.519)

ASSET: coefficient                                                .730             .160
                                                                 (.210)           (.125)
           exponent                                              499              —.788
                                                                 (.085)          (2.39)

COV:       coefficient                                           1.630                .481
                                                                 (.281)           (.310)
           exponent                                             —1.342           —2.865
                                                                 (.272)          (1.011)

LEV:       coefficient                                           2.668            1.209
                                                                 (.996)           (.957)
           exponent                                              2.873            2.971
                                                                (1.062)          (2.355)


DCOV: coefficient                                                 .047             .216
                                                                 (.082)           (.376)
           exponent                                             —1.828            —.814
                                                                (1.152)           (.971)

SUB                                                               .598            —.042
                                                                 (.108)           (.123)
                                       — .059                                     —   .085
TAX                                                              —.164
                                       (.025)                    (.080)           (.069)
CALL                                    .006                     — .006            .049
                                       (.078)                    (.025)           (.022)
y weighting factor                      .548                                       .438
                                       (.128)                                     (.161)
Intercept                              9.120                     8.708            8.963
                                       (.129)                    (.183)           (.347)

Adjusted R2                             .799                      .818                .869


Unexplained Sum of Squares            62.892                    56.48            38.97
                                            Table 4

                          Tests of Yield Differences Between Ratings




Null Hypotheses:                       Asymptotic t—statistics from regression:
No difference in
'f* between                            Without accounting        With accounting
issues rated*                               variables               variables

Aaa&Aa                                             .88                     —.21
Aa & A                                            1.29                      .41
A & Baa                                          10.52                     5.92
Baa & Ba                                          6.17                     8.22
Ba & B                                           14.24                     9.36
B & Caa                                           6.35                     2.23


*   tloody's symbols are used to represent both Moody's and Standard and
    Poor's ratings.
                                         TABLE 5

                        Significance Tests on Accounting Variables




                                    F Statistic for null hypothesis
                                    that * is unrelated to that
                                              variable

Variable                            without ratings     with ratings

ASSET                                     67.368*           14.517*
COV                                       55.658*           60.230*
LEV                                        9.145*            2.108
DCOV                                       3.612*            1.857


*significant at .05 level
                                            Table 6

                  Estimated Changes in Yield to Maturity Resulting From
                           Changes in Each Accounting Variable




                                  Estimated Changes in Y in basis points resulting from
                                            changes in independent variables
                                Ratings not Held Constant      Ratings Held Constant
                                      Change from:                  Change from:
   •     Percentile Values:      20th percen— Median to 80th 20th percen— Median to 80th
Variable 20th Median 80th       tile to median   percentile   tile to median   percentile

ASSET
(billions) .594 2.424 7.424         —47.7             —20.1      —16.1           —4.7
COV      2.794 5.291 10.368         —23.5             —10.4       —2.1            —.3
LEV        .206   .327   .552         8.0              37.8        3.3           16.4
STDCOV     .805 1.499 3.002          —4.7              —1.6       —7.0           —5.5
                                             Table 7

                                 The Explanatory Power of Ratings
                                    and Accounting Information
                                    Separated by Issue Quality



                                              Mean Squared Error*
                      Intragroup          (and Z of Variance Explained)
                      Variance of                     Accounting
                                          Ratings      Measures
Groups                                   Only         Only       Both

Issues rated              .276               .259         .271       .228
A or above                                  (.06)        (.02)      (.17)

Issues rated             1.473               .492         .352       .204
Baa or below                                (.67)        (.76)      (.86)




*In percentage points, i.e., .276 = 27.6 basis points.
                                        REFERENCES

    Altman, E.; Avery, R.; Elsenbeis, R., and Sinkey, J. 1981 "The Application of
        Statistical Classification Methods to Bond Quality Ratings" in Application
        of Classification Techniques In Business, Banking, and Finance. JAI
        Press.

    Belkaouj, Ahmed, 1983. Industrial Bonds and the Rating Process. Quarum
        Books.

    Blerman, H. and Hass, H. 1975. "An Analytical Model of Bond Risk Differen-
        tials,° Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. December: 757—73.

    Ederington, L. 1983 "Why Moody's and Standard and Poor's Bend Ratings Dis-
        agree." Unpublished Working Paper.

    Fisher, L. 1959. "Determinants of Risk Premiums on Corporate Bonds." Journal
—       of Politjcal Economy 67: 217—230.
    Grier, P. and Katz, S. 1976. "The Differential Effects of Bond Rating Changes
        Among Industrial and Public Utility Bonds by Maturity." Journal of
        ness 49: 65—78.

    Griffin, P.A. and Sanvicente, A.Z. 1982. "Common Stock Returns and Rating
        Changes: A Methodological Comparison." Journal of Finance. March: 103—
        120.

• Hettenhouse, G., and Sartoris, W. 1976. "An Analysis of the Information
      Value of Bond Rating Changes," Quarterly Review of Economics and Business
      16: 65—78.

    Katz, S.  1974. "The Price Adjustment Process of Bonds to Rating Reclassifi—
        catlons: A Test of Bond Market Efficiency." Journal of Finance 29: 551—
        559.

    Sherwood, H. C., 1976. How Corporate and Municipal Debts Is Rated. John
        Wiley and Sons.

    Standard and Poor's Rating Guide. 1979. McGraw—Hill.

    Weinstein, M. 1977. "The Effect of a Rating Change Announcement on Bond
        Price," Journal of Financial Economics 5: 329—350.

    Weinstein, M. 1981. "The Systematic Risk of Corporate Bonds."   Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis. September: 257—278.

    West, R.  1973. "Bond Ratings, Bond Yields, and Financial Regulation: Some
        Findings." Journal of Law and Economics 16: 159—168.
    Yawitz, J. 1977. "An Analytical Model of Interest Rate Differentials and
       Different Default Recoveries." Journal of Financial and Quantitative
        AnalysIs. September: 481—490.
