                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CAN HIGHER PRICES STIMULATE PRODUCT USE? EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD
                          EXPERIMENT IN ZAMBIA

                                             Nava Ashraf
                                             James Berry
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro

                                         Working Paper 13247
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w13247


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                 July 2007
We are grateful to Gary Becker, Stefano DellaVigna, Dave Donaldson, Erik Eyster, Matthew Gentzkow,
Jerry Green, Ali Hortaçsu, Emir Kamenica, Dean Karlan, Larry Katz, Michael Kremer, Stephen Leider,
Steve Levitt, John List, Kevin M. Murphy, Sharon Oster, Amil Petrin, Matt Rabin, Mark Rosenzweig,
Peter Rossi, Al Roth, Philipp Schnabl, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, Jean Tirole, Tom Wilkening,
Jonathan Zinman, and seminar participants at the Harvard Business School, the University of Chicago,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the London School of Economics, the Paris-Jourdan Sciences
Economiques, the Institut d'Economie Industrielle, Toulouse, the UQAM/CIPREE Conference on
Development Economics, Yale University, Washington University in St. Louis, and Princeton University
for helpful comments and Rob Quick at the Centers for Disease Control for his guidance on the technical
aspects of water testing and treatment. We wish to thank Steve Chapman, Research Director of Population
Services International D.C., for his support, and the Society for Family Health in Zambia for coordinating
the fieldwork, particularly Richard Harrison and T. Kusanthan, as well as Cynde Robinson, Esnea
Mlewa, Muza Mupotola, Nicholas Shiliya, Brian McKenna, and Sheena Carey de Beauvoir. Marie-Hélène
Cloutier provided outstanding assistance with our in-depth interviews on alternative uses of Clorin,
and Kelsey Jack provided numerous insights based on her field experience. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Division of Faculty Research and Development at Harvard Business School.
E-mail: nashraf@hbs.edu, jimberry@mit.edu, jmshapir@uchicago.edu. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2007 by Nava Ashraf, James Berry, and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Higher Prices Stimulate Product Use? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Zambia
Nava Ashraf, James Berry, and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 13247
July 2007, Revised October 2008
JEL No. C93,D12,L11,L31

                                             ABSTRACT

The controversy over whether and how much to charge for health products in the developing world
rests, in part, on whether higher prices can increase use, either by targeting distribution to high-use
households (a screening effect), or by stimulating use psychologically through a sunk-cost effect. We
develop a methodology for separating these two effects. We implement the methodology in a field
experiment in Zambia using door-to-door marketing of a home water purification solution. We find
that higher prices screen out those who use the product less. By contrast, we find no consistent evidence
of sunk-cost effects.


Nava Ashraf                                         Jesse M. Shapiro
Harvard Business School                             University of Chicago
Baker Library 443                                   5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Soldiers Field                                      Chicago, IL 60637
Boston, MA 02163                                    and NBER
and NBER                                            jmshapir@uchicago.edu
nashraf@hbs.edu

James Berry
Room 391
Department of Economics
Massachussets Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
jimberry@MIT.EDU
1    Introduction

Non-pro…t approaches to the distribution of health products in developing countries are often

grouped into “social marketing”and “public health”categories, with the former emphasizing retail

sales and the latter emphasizing free distribution through health clinics. Advocates of the public

health approach often object to the use of prices to mediate distribution. Critics of pricing argue

that “charging people for basic health care...[is] unfair” (Benn, 2006), and that fees ensure that

goods only reach “the richest of the poor”(McNeil, 2005). Advocates of pricing counter that “when

products are given away free, the recipient often does not value them or even use them”(PSI, 2006).

    The latter argument is commonly interpreted to mean that higher prices cause greater product

use through a sunk-cost e¤ ect (Thaler, 1980; Eyster, 2002). An equally plausible interpretation,

however, is a screening e¤ ect: that higher prices skew the composition of buyers towards households

with a greater propensity to use the product (Roy, 1951; Oster, 1995).

    Each of these e¤ects is of broader economic interest— the former as a central prediction of

psychology and economics, and the latter as an implication of the allocative role of prices. Isolating

them may also help to clarify the terms of the ongoing policy debate over product pricing. However,

the two e¤ects are intrinsically unidenti…ed in standard observational data: both imply that as

prices rise, buyers use more. Evidence on the sunk-cost hypothesis has therefore been con…ned

largely to hypothetical choices and a single, small-scale …eld experiment (Arkes and Blumer, 1985).

Clean evidence that higher product prices select households with a greater likelihood of using the

product is similarly limited.

    In this paper, we present evidence on the e¤ect of prices on product use from a large-scale

…eld experiment in Zambia involving Clorin, an inexpensive, socially marketed disinfectant. Our

experimental design allows us to separately identify screening and sunk-cost e¤ects, and our setting

allows us to measure product use objectively, without relying solely on household self-reports. We

…nd strong evidence for screening e¤ects: households with a greater willingness to pay for Clorin

are also those most likely to use Clorin in their drinking water. By contrast, we …nd no evidence

for sunk-cost e¤ects, and only weak evidence for a modi…ed version of the sunk-cost hypothesis

suggested by practitioners.

    Clorin is well-suited to the goals of our study. It is a chlorine bleach solution used to kill

                                                  2
pathogens in household drinking water, and thus reduce the incidence of water-borne illnesses

(Quick et al, 2002). Its chemical composition makes it detectable by test strips similar to those used

in backyard pools, which permits us to avoid the pitfalls of relying solely on household self-reports

of use. Moreover, in Zambia, Clorin is a well-known, widely used product with an established retail

market, which serves to limit the informational role of prices, a potential confound to the e¤ects of

interest. Finally, it is inexpensive, so that income e¤ects (another potential confound) are relatively

unlikely.

   Our main experimental intervention was a door-to-door sale of Clorin to about 1,000 households

in Lusaka. Each participating household was o¤ered a single bottle of Clorin for a one-time only,

randomly chosen o¤ er price, which was at or below the prevailing retail price. Households that

agreed to purchase at the o¤er price received an unanticipated, randomly chosen discount, thus

allowing us to vary the transaction price separately from the o¤er price. About two weeks after

the marketing intervention, we conducted a follow-up survey in which we asked about Clorin use

and measured the chemical presence of Clorin in the household’s stored water.

   In the paper, we lay out a simple model of Clorin use. Households di¤er in the costs and

bene…ts of using Clorin in their drinking water, about which they are partially informed at the

time of purchase. Households base their purchase decisions on the expected value (bene…ts net of

costs) of using Clorin and on the o¤er price, and agree to buy when the expected value of using

Clorin in drinking water is high. The model therefore predicts a screening e¤ect: the higher is the

o¤er price, the more the set of buyers is selected on their expected value from using Clorin, and

hence the more likely are buyers to use Clorin in their drinking water.

   We allow for psychological e¤ects of prices by adopting Eyster’s (2002) framework, which as-

sumes a desire for consistency. In this framework, households pay a psychological cost if they

purchase Clorin and do not use it in their drinking water. The magnitude of the psychological cost

depends on how much better o¤ the household would have been had it not bought Clorin; i.e., on

the amount paid for Clorin. Households can avoid that cost by using Clorin in their drinking water,

thus validating their decision to purchase Clorin in the …rst place. The model therefore predicts

a sunk-cost e¤ect: for a given o¤er price, greater transaction prices result in a stronger desire to

rationalize one’s purchase decision, and hence greater use in drinking water.


                                                  3
   Under the assumptions of the model, then, our two-stage pricing design solves the core identi…-

cation problem, allowing us to test separately for screening and sunk-cost e¤ects. Varying the o¤er

price for a given transaction price allows us to test for a screening e¤ect of prices on the mix of

buyers, holding constant the psychic cost of a failure to use Clorin in drinking water. Varying the

transaction price for a given o¤er price then tests for a sunk-cost e¤ect of prices on drinking-water

use, holding constant the selection of buyers.

   We …nd strong evidence for screening e¤ects: holding constant the transaction price, the house-

holds who agree to a higher o¤er price are (statistically and economically) more likely to use Clorin

in their drinking water at follow-up. That is, higher willingness-to-pay for Clorin is associated

with a greater propensity to use. This holds true even when we condition on a range of house-

hold characteristics, suggesting that the component of willingness-to-pay that is uncorrelated with

observables is nevertheless highly predictive of Clorin use. In addition, some simple calculations

suggest that willingness-to-pay is more predictive of use than an optimal linear combination of

household characteristics observable as of the baseline survey. These …ndings indicate that house-

holds have substantial information about their use propensities that is not available directly to the

econometrician, and that this information plays an important role in their purchase decisions.

   Turning to sunk-cost e¤ects, we …nd no evidence that households paying a higher transaction

price are more likely to use Clorin in their drinking water, and some of our point estimates even

suggest the opposite. This is true even among households displaying the sunk-cost e¤ect in hypo-

thetical choice scenarios. Our con…dence intervals are tight enough to rule out e¤ects of roughly

the same order of magnitude as the point estimates of the screening e¤ect that we estimate. More-

over, although Clorin is a relatively inexpensive product, the variation in prices we induce in our

experiment is su¢ cient to generate a substantial e¤ect on purchase probabilities, suggesting that

our failure to …nd sunk-cost e¤ects may not be due to small stakes. Hence, our …ndings do not

support the model’s prediction of a sunk-cost e¤ect. In response to practitioner suggestions, we

also test the hypothesis that paying something results in more use than paying nothing. Again, we

cannot rule out the null of no e¤ect, although in this case the sign, magnitude, and cross-household

variation in point estimates are at least consistent with the hypothesized relationship.

   On the whole, then, our results imply, at best, a limited role for sunk-cost e¤ects in the domain


                                                 4
of health product use, while providing strong support for the hypothesis that households have

private information about their use propensities that is re‡ected in willingness-to-pay.

       Our theoretical discussion suggests two caveats regarding the interpretation of these results.

First, we test for sunk-cost e¤ects operating through the mechanism proposed in Eyster (2002).

Though Eyster’s model is the most fully articulated single-agent theory of sunk-cost e¤ects of which

we are aware, reasonable alternatives exist with possibly di¤erent empirical implications. We discuss

the robustness of our conclusions to alternative theories of sunk costs when we present the model.

Second, the interpretation of our results depends on assumptions about what happens to Clorin

that is purchased but not used in drinking water. The weight of the evidence indicates that Clorin

not used in drinking water is used for household cleaning (in place of bleach or detergent), but

our data are not de…nitive. The model clari…es how our results would be a¤ected given alternative

assumptions about how Clorin is used when it is not used in drinking water.

       Our paper makes several contributions to the existing literature. Methodologically, we imple-

ment the …rst …eld experiment to identify both screening and sunk-cost e¤ects.1 Our two-stage

pricing design is a close cousin both to Arkes and Blumer’s (1985) study of the sunk-cost e¤ect in

the use of theater tickets, and to Karlan and Zinman’s (2006) study of adverse selection and moral

hazard in the South African loan market. However, Arkes and Blumer’s (1985) design does not

attempt to identify the screening e¤ect, and Karlan and Zinman’s (2006) design does not attempt

to identify sunk-cost e¤ects.2

       Substantively, we show that households base a health product purchase decision on private

information about their propensity to use the product. In addition to its more direct relevance to

the pricing of health products in developing countries, this …nding contributes to ongoing e¤orts to

study the role of private information in health care (e.g., Finkelstein and McGarry, 2006) and other

domains (Karlan and Zinman, 2006). We also fail to …nd consistent evidence for sunk-cost e¤ects

in only the second, and by far the largest, …eld experiment on sunk-cost e¤ects to date.3 Ours is
   1
     See Harrison and List (2004) for a review of …eld experiments in economics more generally.
   2
     In Karlan and Zinman’s (2006) design, the discounted interest rate (analogous to our transaction price) directly
a¤ects households’marginal incentives to default (through moral hazard or repayment burden), whereas in our context
the transaction price is purely sunk.
   3
     Eyster’s (2002) review identi…es Arkes and Blumer’s (1985) as the only …eld study of sunk-cost e¤ects to date.
While evidence from hypothetical choices supports the sunk-cost premise (Thaler, 1980; Arkes and Blumer, 1985),
evidence from incentivized laboratory behaviors is more mixed (Friedman et al, 2007).




                                                         5
the …rst …eld study of sunk costs to include a treatment in which participants paid nothing for the

product,4 and the …rst to explicitly connect hypothetical choice responses and other measures of

psychological propensity to objectively measured …eld behaviors.5

       Beyond its implications for social science, our study informs an important set of public policy

issues, from the pricing of health products in developing countries in particular (Kremer and Miguel,

2007)6 to non-pro…t pricing strategy more generally.7 Clorin and related “point-of-use” water

puri…cation systems hold promise as tools for addressing the lack of clean water facing over one

billion people (USAID, 2006; Thevos et al, 2002-2003; Kremer et al, 2006). As with many health

inputs, these tools rely on household behavior to produce desirable health outcomes (Grossman,

1972), implying that models of product use are likely to play an important role in the design and

implementation of policies relating to water puri…cation.8

       Several hurdles remain, however, in deriving …rm policy conclusions from our …ndings. First,

our data have the power to test the e¤ects of pricing on drinking-water use of Clorin, not on the

incidence of water-borne illness, the ultimate outcome of interest. However, strong extant evidence

shows that home water puri…cation solutions like Clorin can reduce the incidence of water-borne

illnesses (Quick et al, 2002), even in populations in which the use of alternative methods (such

as boiling) is reasonably common (Quick et al, 1999). Second, Clorin is a relatively inexpensive

health product, whereas much of the controversy surrounding social marketing has centered on more

expensive products such as insecticide-treated mosquito nets. Using an inexpensive product serves

to minimize income e¤ects and hence to permit cleaner tests of the e¤ects of interest. However,
   4
     A number of existing papers explore the special role of zero prices, but none focuses on the e¤ects on post-
purchase use. See, for example, Shampanier, Mazar and Ariely (2007), Thornton (forthcoming), and Karlan and List
(2007). More generally, our evidence contributes to existing research on the psychology of product pricing (see, e.g.,
Gourville and Soman, 2002; Shiv, Carmon and Ariely, 2005).
   5
     In this sense, our study also contributes to a growing literature connecting laboratory and survey responses to
incentivized choices in markets (Fehr and Goette, 2007; Karlan, 2005; Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin, 2006).
   6
     Though there have been some studies of the e¤ectiveness of prices in encouraging product use in social marketing
contexts, existing research typically takes a non-experimental approach (Meekers, 1997; Maxwell et al, 2006). An
exception is Litvack and Bodart (1993), who study a natural experiment in which public health facilities in Cameroon
adopted both user fees and improved quality of care. Because of the simultaneous adoption of these two policies,
Litvack and Bodart’s (1993) research design does not permit separate identi…cation of the e¤ect of fees on utilization.
   7
     In this sense, our paper relates to the economics of pricing in non-pro…t industries in general (Newhouse, 1970;
Casper, 1979; Oster, 1995; Steinberg and Weisbrod, 1998; Oster, Gray, and Weinberg, 2003), and in social marketing
organizations in particular (Kotler and Roberto, 1989; Behrman, 1989).
   8
     The determinants of product use also play an important role in many industrial organization contexts. For exam-
ple, utilization is of intrinsic public policy interest in the market for energy-intensive consumer durables (Hausman,
1979) and advertiser-supported media (Kalita and Duco¤e, 1995; Petrin, 2003). Our methods may be useful in
identifying the relationship between pricing and utilization in such markets.



                                                          6
we must leave to future work the question of how our conclusions generalize to more expensive

products. Indeed, since our original writing, Cohen and Dupas (2007) have applied a version of

our experimental design in the context of insecticide-treated mosquito nets, with some substantive

di¤erences in conclusions. Finally, and most broadly, we focus here on two e¤ects of pricing on use,

but others, such as quality signalling (Milgrom and Roberts, 1986) and access to retail distribution

networks, may also play a role in determining optimal pricing policy.

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information

on our experimental setting. Section 3 lays out a formal model of Clorin use and discusses the

conditions needed for identi…cation. Section 4 describes the design of our surveys and door-to-door

marketing experiment. Sections 5 and 6 present our …ndings on the e¤ect of price changes on

product purchase and use. Section 7 describes a series of robustness checks on our key conditions.

Section 8 concludes.



2         Experimental Setting: Zambia, Safe Water, and Clorin

Clorin is a water puri…cation solution that is marketed in Zambia by the Society for Family Health

(SFH), a local a¢ liate of Population Services International (PSI), an international non-pro…t or-

ganization.9 Chemically, Clorin is sodium hypochlorite bleach, which can be mixed with water

stored in the household in order to kill water-borne pathogens, and thus prevent the contraction

of water-borne illnesses that are especially dangerous to young children. Because many households

in Zambia obtain their water from sources that are not properly chlorinated, and because Clorin is

less expensive than boiling water or other alternative methods of disinfection, it has been a popular

product since its launch in 1998 (Olembo et al, 2004).

         Clorin is marketed by the bottle (see …gure 1), and a single bottle is su¢ cient to disinfect up

to 1,000 liters of water (about one month’s water supply for a family of six). Clorin is sold widely

in both retail outlets (for about 800-1,000 Kw) and health clinics (for about 500 Kw). These prices

are modest by Zambian standards; for comparison, in Lusaka, a week’s supply of cooking oil for a

family of six costs about 4,800 Kw.10 The fact that Clorin is a relatively inexpensive product limits
     9
   See <http://www.psi.org/resources/pubs/clorin.html> for additional information.
    10
   As of June 1, 2006, 800 Kw was equivalent to about $0.25 US. Average monthly urban household income in
Zambia in 2002-2003 was 790,652 Kw (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2006).


                                                      7
the possibility that wealth e¤ects contaminate our estimates (see also section 7).

    In addition to the inherent importance of clean water for health in the developing world, we

chose to use Clorin in our study for two practical reasons. First, Clorin use can be measured not only

by household self-reports, but also by chemical tests for the presence of chlorine in stored drinking

water. These tests are themselves imperfect, because households’ source water (i.e., water from

taps) sometimes contain chlorine, and the levels of chlorination in source water vary considerably

across space and over time. Despite these drawbacks, the objectivity of chemical tests creates the

possibility of cross-validating households’subjective reports.

    Second, because Clorin has been widely marketed for several years, most households are familiar

with the product and with its prevailing retail price. In our baseline survey (described below), nearly

80 percent of respondents report having used Clorin at some point, and over 99 percent mention

Clorin when asked which water puri…cation solutions they have heard of. Informal interviews and

focus groups further suggest high levels of awareness of Clorin prices. These facts, combined with

additional precautions described below, serve to minimize the information participants could have

gleaned from the prices we charged in our experiment. (We provide additional tests for informational

e¤ects in section 7).



3     Conceptual Framework

In this section, we present a simple model of Clorin purchase and use, allowing for sunk-cost

e¤ects using Eyster’s (2002) framework, in which households have a taste for rationalizing their

past actions. The model clari…es the interpretation of our results and its dependence on our key

assumptions. At the end of the section, we discuss how our results would generalize to alternative

models of sunk-cost psychology.


3.1   Material Payo¤s

We will consider household behavior in some number of periods indexed by t. In each period t,

each household i must decide whether to purchase Clorin and, if so, whether to use it in their

drinking water. In period t, each household i can decide to purchase Clorin for an exogenous,

possibly household-speci…c o¤er price pit 2 (0; R] , where R > 0 is the retail price of Clorin. If the

                                                  8
household decides to buy Clorin, it may receive an exogenous discount, so that it will only have to

pay the transaction price p~it 2 [0; pit ]. We assume that households do not anticipate the possibility

of a discount, or, equivalently, that they consider the probability of a discount after purchase to be

negligible.

       We experimentally manipulate the prices faced by households in a particular period t0 . For

simplicity, we will assume that in all previous and subsequent periods, Clorin retails at R, and

there are no discounts. That is, we assume that, in any period t 6= t0 , pit = p~it = R. In period

t0 , however, prices pit0 and p~it0 are randomly assigned across households in a manner speci…ed in

section 4 below. We will also assume for simplicity that the utility from using Clorin in a given

period is independent of its use in previous or future periods.11

       We will think of a period as approximately one month, about the time it takes to use up a

bottle of Clorin in drinking water for a family of six. We assume that Clorin cannot be stored

across periods. Chemically, Clorin is storable, but in practice the vast majority of households in

our sample appear to have exhausted the Clorin we sold them within the six weeks of our follow-

up period. This suggests that it is reasonable to focus on within-period use. Implicitly, we are

thereby assuming that if a household buys Clorin in some period and does not use it in drinking

water, it is exhausted in some other way. Field interviews we conducted after our study suggest

a plausible account is that households use Clorin to undertake household chores such as bleaching

sheets, washing vegetables, and cleaning toilets (see section 4.5).12

       In each period, each household makes two decisions. First, the household must decide whether

to buy Clorin. Then, if the household has purchased Clorin, it must decide whether to use Clorin

in its drinking water. We let bit 2 f0; 1g be an indicator for whether household i buys Clorin

in period t. We let dit 2 f0; 1g denote whether household i puts Clorin in its drinking water in
  11
      Together, these assumptions mean that when we consider the e¤ect of an increase in the o¤er price pit0 , we ignore
cross-channel substitution (households buying from our door-to-door marketers who would otherwise have bought
in a store) and intertemporal substitution (households buying from us who would otherwise have bought at a later
time). The demand elasticities we estimate in our experiment are therefore unlikely to generalize (quantitatively) to
a permanent, market-wide change in the retail price R.
   12
      If our data are misleading, and in fact many households store and defer use of Clorin in drinking water, this force
would reduce the power of our experimental tests to detect sunk-cost e¤ects. In the model below, sunk-cost e¤ects
arise because households view it as a mistake to have purchased Clorin when they do not use it in their drinking
water. In a model with storability, sunk-cost e¤ects of the sort we test for would instead require that households view
it as a mistake to have purchased Clorin when they do not use it in their drinking water in the period immediately
following purchase.




                                                           9
period t, with dit = 0 whenever bit = 0. We assume these decisions are made sequentially, so that

the decision to purchase is …xed when the household chooses whether to use Clorin in its drinking

water. Consistent with the discussion above, we can think of dit = 0 as performing household

chores (other than purifying drinking water), which, as seems reasonable, we assume is possible

with or without Clorin.

       To apply Eyster’s (2002) framework, we need to specify both material payo¤s and utility, the

latter incorporating the psychological desire to rationalize past choices. We begin by specifying the

material payo¤ function, which we normalize so that the payo¤ from not buying Clorin is 0:

       Households di¤er in the bene…ts and costs of using Clorin in their drinking water. We will write

the net material payo¤ (in Kwacha) to household i from buying Clorin and using it in its drinking

water in period t as vi + "it      p~it : Here, vi captures factors that are constant over time for a given

household and are known at the time of purchase, and "it captures time-varying shocks unknown

at the time of purchase.

       Formally, we assume that vi is distributed i.i.d. across households, that "it is distributed i.i.d

across households and time periods, and that vi and "it are independent of one another and of

o¤er and transaction prices pit and p~it (the last condition being maintained by experimental ran-

domization). Consistent with the interpretation of "it as an unanticipated shock, we will normalize

E ("it ) = 0. To simplify exposition, we assume that both vi and "it are distributed according to

(possibly di¤erent) di¤erentiable CDFs with full support on the real line, and that vi has …nite

mean.

       The terms vi and "it are general enough to accommodate a range of factors. For example, Clorin

is used when the household obtains water from its local source, and hence its use requires attention

from the female head of household at that time. In some households, the female head may have

many other chores to complete when obtaining water, making it hard to put Clorin in at the right

time (low vi ), whereas in others the female head may have few other responsibilities coincident

with obtaining water (high vi ). In addition, for a given household, variation in the household’s

day-to-day needs may lead to higher (low "it ) or lower (high "it ) demands on the female head’s

attention when she obtains water, a¤ecting the incentive to use Clorin.13
  13
   Many other interpretations are possible. For example, households may di¤er in their general level of concern
about water-borne illness, inducing variation in vi . After purchase, some households may hear about an especially


                                                       10
    To complete the speci…cation of payo¤s we must specify the payo¤ to buying Clorin and then

not using it in drinking water, using it instead for household cleaning. In that case, the bene…t

of Clorin is the market value of the standard household cleaners whose use is o¤set by Clorin.

That interpretation suggests a small return from using Clorin for non-drinking-water purposes. For

example, data from a 2006 survey of retail prices show that the sodium hypochlorite in a bottle

of Clorin can be obtained from Jik, a more concentrated household bleach, for about 300 Kw.14

Moreover, our …eld experience suggests that households …nd products like Jik to be more e¤ective

cleaners, suggesting that 300 Kw of Jik may deliver even more than one Clorin bottle’s worth

of cleaning power. Given the small bene…t to Clorin not used in drinking water, we assume for

simplicity that the material payo¤ to buying Clorin and not using it in drinking water is                         p~it ,

implying that no household would buy Clorin if it were not possible to use it in drinking water.

Although that assumption is extreme and unlikely to hold exactly for all households, it seems likely

to be a reasonable approximation on average, based both on the calculations above and on our

conversations with female heads of household.15

    To summarize, we can specify an (ex-post) material payo¤ function u (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it ) that

relates choices to payo¤s as a function of household characteristics and the transaction price:


                                     u (0; 0; p~it ; vi ; "it ) = 0

                                     u (1; 0; p~it ; vi ; "it ) =     p~it

                                     u (1; 1; p~it ; vi ; "it ) = vi + "it   p~it :


(Recall that dit = 0 whenever bit = 0, so u (0; 1; p~it ; vi ; "it ) is unde…ned.)
bad local incident of child diarrhea, leading to a high "it . Or they may hear that diarrhea episodes have been rare
recently, leading to a low "it .
  14
     As of the 2006 retailer survey, a 750ml container of Jik, consisting of 3.5% sodium hypochlorite, retailed for a
median of 7,000 Kw. A 250ml bottle of Clorin, consisting of 0.5% sodium hypochlorite, retailed for a median of 800
Kw. The amount of sodium hypochlorite in a container of Jik is therefore equivalent to the amount found in about
21 bottles of Clorin, so 333 Kw of Jik buys as much sodium hypochlorite as one bottle (800 Kw) of Clorin. Note
that this calculation ignores the convenience of Clorin’s smaller size (and hence lower price per sales unit). Recall,
however, that a week’s supply of cooking oil for a household costs about 4,800 Kw, suggesting that 7,000 Kw is not
a prohibitive outlay.
  15
     If the assumption were to fail, then the sunk-cost e¤ects we derive below would operate only over the range of
transaction prices p~it above the cost savings from using Clorin as a household cleaner.




                                                           11
3.2     Utility and Regret

To allow for psychological e¤ects of prices, we will suppose that households have a taste for con-

sistency, i.e. for taking actions in the present that rationalize their past choices. Following Eyster

(2002), we implement this assumption by positing that realized household utility U (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )

depends both on ex-post material payo¤ and on a regret function:


                      U (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )      u (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )     r (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )             (1)


where r () denotes regret and                          0 indexes the importance of regret in the household’s utility

function.

    We refer the reader to Eyster (2002) for a more careful exposition of the regret function. For-

mally, it is de…ned as follows


            r (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )    u ~b (dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it ) ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it      u (bit ; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )   (2)


where
                                    ~b (dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )    arg max fu (b; dit ; p~it ; vi ; "it )g :
                                                                            b


Informally, given an action pair, regret is how much better the household’s material payo¤ would

be if it could re-choose its …rst stage action taking its second stage action, and the realization of

"it , as given.16 Households prefer to avoid regret, i.e. to choose actions that limit the harm done

by their past choices given their current ones.

    The de…nition in (2) implies that


                                                         r (0; 0; p~it ; vi ; "it ) = 0                                                       (3)

                                                         r (1; 0; p~it ; vi ; "it ) = p~it

                                                         r (1; 1; p~it ; vi ; "it ) = 0:
  16
     Note that, as we have de…ned it, regret depends on the realized transaction price p~it , which is technically not
observed by non-purchasing households. However, because non-purchasing households do not make a use decision,
and because households are unaware of the possibility of a discount at the time of purchase, this is purely a notational
simpli…cation, with no implications for behavior.




                                                                          12
That is, regret is experienced only when the household buys Clorin but does not use it in its

drinking water, and is felt in proportion to the amount spent on Clorin.

    In the model, then, if a household knew for sure that it would not use Clorin to purify its drinking

water, it would not buy Clorin. Households buy Clorin because they may use it in drinking water,

but if circumstances are such that Clorin is not used in drinking water, the household regrets its

purchase, and the regret experienced is greater the more the household paid for Clorin. Households

may therefore be willing to use Clorin in drinking water to avoid regret, i.e. to rationalize the past

decision to buy.


3.3    Choice and Identi…cation

We can now specify how the household chooses whether to purchase Clorin and, if so, whether to

use it in drinking water. Beginning with the use decision, if the household has purchased Clorin,

the use decision is given by dit (~
                                  pit ; vi ; "it ), where


                                 dit (~
                                      pit ; vi ; "it )     arg max U (1; d; p~it ; vi ; "it ) :
                                                                    d



This, in turn, implies that


                                            dit (~
                                                 pit ; vi ; "it )       =    1

                                                                        ()

                                                      vi + "it                   p~it :


That is, the household will use Clorin in its drinking water if the net bene…t of doing so exceeds

the regret associated with not doing so. (Note that we have assumed for simplicity that ties are

broken in favor of use.)

    When households are deciding whether to purchase Clorin in the …rst place, they do not an-

ticipate the discount, and do not know the realization of the time-varying shock "it . Therefore we

write the expected-utility-maximizing purchase decision as bit (pit ; vi ), with


                          bit (pit ; vi )    arg max EU (b; dit (pit ; vi ; "it ) ; pit ; vi ; "it )
                                                      b


                                                                 13
where the expectation is taken over the distribution of the shocks "it . It follows that


                                                             bit (pit ; vi )       =         1

                                                                                  ()

                                   E [max (vi + "it ;      pit ) j vi ; pit ]                pit


where we adopt the arbitrary rule that ties are broken in favor of purchasing.

       Note that the household conditions its decision on the (known) household-speci…c bene…t para-

meter vi and on the o¤er price pit . In particular, there exists a real-valued cuto¤ v (pit ), strictly

increasing in pit , such that the household purchases if and only if vi                            v (pit ). The proof of this

result is straightforward; economically, it follows from the fact that a higher vi increases the antic-

ipated bene…t from buying Clorin and a higher pi increases the anticipated cost (both …nancially

and psychologically).

       Empirically, we do not observe the choice functions bit (pit ; vi ) and dit (~
                                                                                    pit ; vi ; "it ), but rather

the empirical frequencies of di¤erent choices as a function of the prices pit and p~it . To develop the

model’s empirical predictions, then, it will be helpful to write out these probabilities:


                      Pr (bit (pit ; vi ) = 1 j pit ; p~it ) = Pr (vi           v (pit ))

                  Pr (dit (~
                           pit ; vi ; "it ) = 1 j pit ; p~it ) = Pr (vi + "it               p~it j vi   v (pit ))


where the second probability conditions on the decision to purchase Clorin.

       In a non-experimental period t 6= t0 , pit = p~it = R, so there is no price variation and hence no

comparative statics to test. (The model does imply restrictions on the relationship between prices

in the experimental period and use in non-experimental period, which we explore in appendix A.)

       In the experimental period t0 , by contrast, the above equations have two important empirical

implications about the relationship between prices and use.17


         The …rst, which we call the screening e¤ ect, is that, conditional on purchase, the probability
  17
    A third, more obvious, implication is that the greater is the price of Clorin, the fewer households will purchase
it. Note that this result comes both from the traditional substitution e¤ect, and from the fact that a higher price
implies greater anticipated regret in the case in which Clorin is not used in drinking water.



                                                            14
         of use is higher the greater is pit0 . This is because a higher pit0 imposes a stricter (higher)

         cuto¤ v (pit0 ) on anticipated bene…ts for buyers.

         The second, which we call the sunk-cost e¤ ect, is that, conditional on purchase, the probability

         of use is increasing in the transaction price p~it0 whenever            > 0. This is because a greater

         transaction price implies a greater desire to rationalize the purchase decision (or, equivalently,

         greater regret from not using Clorin in drinking water).


Observe that these two e¤ects cannot be distinguished if transaction prices cannot vary indepen-

dently of o¤er prices. If pit0 = p~it0 for all i in some period t, then a …nding that higher prices causes

more drinking water use conditional on purchase would be consistent with the presence of either

the sunk-cost e¤ect ( > 0) or the screening e¤ect (heterogeneity in vi ), or both.18 Hence, the

two-stage pricing design solves an identi…cation problem that would be present in data with only

a single price, even if that price were suitably exogenous.

       It is worth noting that, although Eyster’s model is the most fully articulated single-agent theory

of sunk-cost e¤ects of which we are aware, reasonable alternatives exist with possibly di¤erent

empirical implications. For example, if sunk-cost e¤ects were driven by a desire to justify the ex

ante wisdom of one’s decision, rather than ex post wisdom of one’s decision as in Eyster’s framework,

it is possible that the o¤er price, rather than the transaction price, would in‡uence use behavior.19

Such e¤ects would confound our tests.20 On the other hand, Thaler’s (1980) prospect-theoretic

justi…cation for sunk-cost e¤ects hinges on a desire to avoid a feeling of loss experienced when one
  18
      Note that the psychology of regret is also relevant for the magnitude of the screening e¤ect, as the parameter
partially determines the degree of price sensitivity in the purchase decision.
   19
      Sunk-cost e¤ects could also operate through a desire to justify the purchase to another member of the household,
rather than to oneself (Prendergast and Stole, 1996). In that case, whether the o¤er or transaction price would in‡u-
ence use behavior through the sunk-cost mechanism would depend on the informational conditions in the household.
Because only the o¤er price is known to the buyer at the time of the purchase decision, a fully informed household
member would judge the intelligence of the decision based on the o¤er price. However, because only the transaction
price is actually implemented, it may be more observable to other members of the household than the o¤er price. In
that case, higher transaction prices would lead to greater use due to a desire to justify the purchase decision to other
household members, so our tests for sunk-cost e¤ects would be valid.
   20
      Another possible confound arises if use depends not on the transaction price itself but on the discount, i.e. the
di¤erence between the o¤er and transaction prices. We …nd no evidence in our data of a relationship between use
and the relative size of the discount— that is, the di¤erence between o¤er and transaction prices, divided by the o¤er
price. If instead psychological e¤ects operate through the absolute (as opposed to relative) size of the discount (o¤er
price minus transaction price), the resulting model is collinear with those we estimate, and is therefore not identi…ed.
If the e¤ect of a greater discount is to increase use, then our estimates will tend to overstate the screening e¤ect
and to understate the sunk-cost e¤ect. If greater discounts tend to decrease use, our estimates will understate the
screening e¤ect and overstate the sunk-cost e¤ect.



                                                          15
does not realize consumption gains from a past purchase. In such a model transaction prices likely

would mediate the e¤ect, suggesting that our tests may be valid under mechanisms other than the

one we model explicitly.



4         Experimental and Survey Design

Our main study consisted of a baseline survey, a randomized door-to-door marketing intervention

approximately two weeks later, and a follow-up survey approximately two weeks after the interven-

tion. We also conducted a second, longer-term follow-up survey, and a small-scale interview study

(on a di¤erent sample) to assess non-drinking-water uses of Clorin.21


4.1        Baseline Survey Procedures and Sample Selection

We …elded our baseline survey to 1; 260 households in Lusaka, Zambia in May, 2006. To select house-

holds, we …rst selected …ve low-income peri-urban areas (“compounds”).22 Because we wanted to

sample a population whose water source had limited chlorination (to maximize the health bene…ts

of Clorin), we avoided compounds close to the main water line in Lusaka. We also avoided com-

pounds where we knew that NGOs were (or had recently been) distributing Clorin for free from

door to door. Our interviews focused on female heads of household, because prior experience (later

con…rmed by our baseline data) suggested that they play a central role in decision-making about

purchases of Clorin, and are typically the household members responsible for putting Clorin in

the water.23 To minimize our in‡uence on participants’behavior, our baseline survey instrument

informed participants that we might return for a follow-up interview, but it did not specify the

time or nature of that interview, nor did it state that such an interview was certain to occur.

         The survey interview was divided into several sections. First, we asked for a variety of basic

demographic information, such as age, marital status, schooling levels, fertility history, household

composition, and ownership of various durable goods (as a proxy for wealth or income). We then
    21
     Our three survey instruments, and our marketing script, are available as a supplemental appendix to this paper.
    22
     Within the …ve compounds we chose, we sampled 10 randomly chosen standard enumeration areas (SEAs) for
surveying. Within each SEA, we sampled one out of every …ve households until the target of 252 households was
reached for the compound.
  23
     At each household, the surveyor asked to speak with the female head of household, and if there was no one home
or the female head was unavailable, the surveyor returned later that day to complete the survey. If the female head
of household could not be reached on that day, the house was skipped.


                                                        16
asked a range of questions about media exposure, malaria knowledge, and behaviors related to

malaria prevention. These questions served to make the purpose of our study less transparent to

the interviewee. Finally, we asked several sets of questions related to water use practices, diarrhea,

soap use, attitudes toward and use of water puri…cation techniques, access to water sources, and

detailed questions on the use of Clorin.

       Appendix table 1 compares average demographic characteristics of the households in our base-

line sample to Lusaka residents sampled in the 2001 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) of

Zambia.24 The characteristics are broadly comparable between the two samples. Because we in-

terviewed the female head of household, our respondents tend to be slightly older and more likely

to be married than the DHS respondents. The households in our baseline sample also have slightly

lower levels of durables ownership than those in the DHS data, probably because of our insistence

on sampling low-income compounds without access to the main Lusaka water line.


4.2      Measuring Clorin Use and Water Chlorination

Our primary survey measure of Clorin use is the household’s (yes or no) response to whether its

stored drinking water is currently treated with Clorin. We complement this subjective measure

with an objective estimate of the chemical concentration of chlorine in the household’s drinking

water. In the last part of the interview, the surveyor put a small amount of household drinking

water (usually stored in a large plastic jug) into a Styrofoam cup, and inserted a chemical test

strip into the cup. After exposure to water, areas of the test strip change color based on chlorine

concentrations in the water. We used the Sensafe Waterworks 2 test strip,25 which tests for both

free chlorine radicals (chlorine available to kill pathogens) and total chlorine (free chlorine plus

chloramines, a by-product of chlorine combining with organic compounds).26 We focus on free

chlorine, because our own experimentation, as well as conversations with the manufacturer, suggest

that the free chlorine measurement is more reliable and less sensitive to variation in test conditions
  24
     We are grateful to Emily Oster for providing tabulations of demographic characteristics from the DHS. See
<http://www.measuredhs.com/> for further details on the survey.
  25
     The Sensafe Waterworks 2 test strip is Industrial Test Systems part number 480655.                       See
<http://www.sensafe.com/> for corporate information and <http://www.sensafe.com/480655.php> for additional
information about the test strip.
  26
     See chapters 13 and 14 of Hauser (2002) for more information on chlorine chemistry and chlorine testing.




                                                       17
(such as light and heat) than measurement of total chlorine.27 The test strip identi…es seven possible

concentrations of free chlorine: 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2.5, and 5 parts per million.28

       It is worth noting that chlorination and Clorin use in drinking water are not identical concepts,

even though they are closely related. A household could have chlorine in its water without using

Clorin: water from some taps is (often inconsistently) chlorinated. And, if a household’s drinking

water is highly contaminated to start out, then it is possible to use a low dose of Clorin without

leaving any detectable free chlorine residual in the water. Nevertheless, as expected, measured

chlorination is highly related to self-reported use of Clorin, and a Pearson                      2   test de…nitively

rejects the independence of the two distributions (p                value < 0:001). Among the 21 percent of

households that report that their water is currently treated with Clorin, more than 60 percent

have at least some free chlorine, whereas this …gure is below 40 percent for the households that

report that their water is not currently treated with Clorin. Indeed, levels of free chlorine of 2:5

and 5 parts per million are only found in households that report that their water is treated with

Clorin. In order to limit sensitivity to these rare outliers, we follow Parker et al. (2006) in using in

our analysis a binary measure of the presence of free chlorine (free chlorine levels of 0:1 parts per

million or greater).29 In the baseline survey, 41 percent of the households have at least 0:1 parts

per million of free chlorine in their water.


4.3      Door-to-Door Marketing Experiment

For our marketing experiment, we sent a team of six marketers out in May and June of 2006 to

the 1; 260 households from the baseline survey.30 The marketing was designed to occur about two

weeks after the household was surveyed for the baseline, but actual lag times varied due to variation

in logistical factors such as the di¢ culty of contacting the original survey respondents.31
  27
     Using total chlorine in place of free chlorine in our analysis results in stronger evidence of a screening e¤ect and
no evidence of a sunk-cost e¤ect.
  28
     For reference, U.S. drinking water guidelines typically call for a minimum free chlorine residual
of 0:2 parts per million and a maximum total chlorine concentration of 4 parts per million.                          (See
<http://www.epa.gov/safewater/mcl.html>, <http://www.nps.gov/public_health/inter/faqs/faq_dw.htm#3>.)
Note, however, that smaller amounts of free chlorine residual still a¤ord some protection against contamination.
  29
     Our substantive conclusions are unchanged (estimates are identical in direction and statistical signi…cance) when
we instead estimate ordered probit models using the level of free chlorine as the dependent variable. See appendix B
for details.
  30
     Marketers were paid on a …xed rate per day worked.
  31
     If the marketers found a house but there was no one home, they returned at least three times on two di¤erent
days to try to contact the original respondent. If someone was home but it was not the female head of household


                                                           18
    After making contact with the female head of household, the marketers followed a written

script.32 The marketer o¤ered to sell a single bottle of Clorin for a one-time-only price. This

initial o¤er price was chosen randomly, with 10 percent of households receiving an o¤er price of

800 Zambian Kwacha (Kw), and the remaining 90 percent split as evenly as possible among o¤er

prices of 300, 400, 500, 600, and 700 Kw. (See table 1 for exact proportions.) The marketing

script for each household speci…ed the initial o¤er price to be charged, allowing us to control the

randomization directly, and ensuring that the marketers had no discretion in setting this price.

    If the respondent agreed to buy at the initial o¤er price, the marketer informed her that she

might be eligible for an additional discount.33 The respondent was given a sealed envelope, which

contained a coupon o¤ering a one-time discounted price on the bottle of Clorin.34 Using a sealed

envelope allowed us to control the amount of the discount, and to prevent the marketer from

signaling the discount using body language or other cues.35 After the respondent opened the

envelope, the respondent paid for the bottle of Clorin, wrote the amount of the transaction price

on a receipt, and signed it.36 After that, the marketing session ended.

    To make the transaction price as psychologically salient as possible, marketers were trained to

o¤er the discount before the respondents went to retrieve the cash payment, so that the respondents

would count out only the amount of money needed to pay the transaction price. Showing the amount

of the transaction price on the face of the coupon (see appendix …gure 1) and requiring participants

to write the transaction price on a receipt also served this purpose. We expected these measures
named in the baseline survey, they made an appointment to return when the female head would be home.
  32
     In principle, marketers’tone or body language could have di¤ered with the o¤er price, confounding our estimates
of treatment e¤ects. During training exercises, and during a small number of supervised transactions, we observed
no indications of variation in body language or tone related to o¤er prices. Marketers commonly did not look at the
o¤er price before beginning the script. All our key results are robust to marketer …xed e¤ects, and our data show no
evidence of di¤erential treatment e¤ects by marketer (see appendix B).
  33
     If the respondent agreed to buy at the initial o¤er price, but did not have the necessary cash on hand, the
marketer o¤ered to reschedule, and returned to complete the script at the arranged date and time. Our …ndings are
robust to excluding households that requested a return visit due to a lack of cash on hand.
  34
     None of the participants who were prepared to pay the initial o¤er price subsequently refused to buy at the
discounted transaction price.
  35
     As we report in section 7, conditional on the o¤er price we …nd no evidence that household purchase decisions
were related to the transaction price, consistent with the intent of our design.
  36
     Use of a receipt allowed us to check that the marketers had complied with the instructions, and provided an
additional incentive for them to do so. Hand-checking of these receipts con…rmed that di¤erent receipts from the
same marketer were in di¤erent handwriting, providing further evidence of the integrity of the marketing process. In
four cases, the marketer transacted at a price other than the one we speci…ed due to human error, and in one case the
o¤er price was incorrect. In these cases, we will use the intended prices rather than the actual prices for the purposes
of our analysis, to ensure that these errors do not contaminate our …ndings. We note, however, that this choice does
not meaningfully a¤ect our results.



                                                          19
to maximize the power of our tests for sunk-cost e¤ects.37

    To minimize inference about the market price of Clorin based the o¤er and transaction prices,

the marketing script explicitly told respondents that Clorin was available in retail outlets for around

800 Kw.38 To minimize inference about the quality of the Clorin bottles on o¤er, marketers intro-

duced themselves as o¢ cial representatives of SFH, the highly credible organization that produces,

distributes, and markets Clorin throughout Zambia.39

    We also took steps to make the two-price structure seem as natural as possible. When asked

why they were o¤ering Clorin at lower-than-normal prices, marketers explained that the price was

part of a special promotion. They used the same explanation to account for the additional discount

after the asking price was agreed upon. Door-to-door sales (and giveaways) are not unheard of

for products like Clorin, and participants seemed to accept this explanation. After we explained

that the initial o¤er price was a promotional price, participants rarely questioned the reason for

the discounted transaction price.

    The size of the discount was chosen randomly, but every household received a discount of at

least 100 Kw. We o¤ered a discount to every household to avoid disappointing the respondents,

and to ensure that every household was exposed to the coupon (in case of any advertising e¤ects

of the coupon itself).40 Because we hypothesized that paying even a small amount might be very

di¤erent psychologically than paying nothing, we randomized the discounts so that, regardless of

the o¤er price, 40 percent of households received a 100% discount, and thus had a transaction price

of zero. For each o¤er price, we split the remaining 60 percent of households evenly among the set

of transaction prices that were above zero but at least 100 Kw below the o¤er price. (See table 1

for details.) So, for example, among households that were o¤ered Clorin for 700 Kw, 40 percent
  37
     Some evidence indicates that we succeeded in making the transaction price salient. In the follow-up survey,
respondents were asked whether anyone had o¤ered them Clorin for free in the last month. Among households that,
according to our records, received a free bottle (zero transaction price), some 60 percent report having received a
bottle for free, as against only 16 percent among those who did not receive a free bottle (transaction price above 0).
The di¤erence between these two groups is highly statistically signi…cant, and the presence of some positive responses
among those paying for Clorin seems plausibly attributable to recall error. We did not ask respondents to recall the
amount of the transaction price if they paid a positive price.
  38
     Early pilot interviews suggested that most people in Lusaka are well aware of these prices.
  39
     Because surveyors introduced themselves as carrying out a health survey for a researcher at Harvard University,
having marketers identify themselves as representatives of SFH also provides greater con…dence that behavior in
response to the marketing intervention is not driven by the belief that the experimental participants are “being
watched” (Levitt and List, 2007).
  40
     This design choice represents a potentially important departure from Arkes and Blumer’s (1985) design, in which
identi…cation of sunk-cost e¤ects relies in part on comparing those who received a discount to those who did not.


                                                         20
were assigned a transaction price of 0 (a discount of 700 Kw), and 10 percent were assigned to a

transaction price of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 Kw (discounts of 600, 500, 400, 300, 200, and

100 Kw, respectively).

       We assigned the o¤er and transaction prices randomly prior to the marketing outings, so that

every household was assigned an o¤er price and a transaction price, even if we were unable to

reach the household during marketing. The randomization was fully strati…ed by compound, with

every compound receiving (up to integer constraints) the exact same mix of o¤er and transaction

prices.41 At the time of randomization we used an F -test to verify that observable characteristics

were balanced across treatments, and, in a few cases, re-randomized when this was not the case.42

       Appendix table 2 presents regressions of treatment conditions on a range of household char-

acteristics measured in the baseline survey, with speci…cations that parallel our analysis of price

e¤ects. In all cases, an F -test of the restriction that all covariates enter with a coe¢ cient of zero

fails to reject at any conventional signi…cance level, and the coe¢ cients are generally individu-

ally statistically insigni…cant. Two exceptions are worth noting. First, among households reached

during marketing, baseline self-reported Clorin use is almost marginally statistically signi…cantly

related to the o¤er price (p = 0:103). Second, among those who purchased Clorin in the marketing

phase, there is a statistically signi…cant relationship between the transaction price and the chemical

presence of free chlorine in the baseline (p = 0:020), although the relationship with self-reported use

is insigni…cant and has the opposite sign.43 (A dummy for whether the household paid a positive

transaction price is positively but not statistically signi…cantly related to either self-reported Clorin

use or measured chlorination.) Our key results are fully robust to controls for baseline use.
  41
     We made an e¤ort to reach all sampled households in a given compound within a short period, so as to minimize
communication between households about the price randomization. Debrie…ng interviews after a pilot experiment
suggest that communication about the discounts was rare. As a further check on possible social e¤ects of our price
manipulations, we have veri…ed that a household’s purchase and use decisions are uncorrelated with the o¤er and
transaction prices assigned to the closest neighboring household (results not shown).
  42
     We conducted these balancing tests, separately by compound, on the sample of households surveyed in the
baseline. We could not conduct analogous tests for the balance of transaction prices on the sample of households
buying Clorin from us in the marketing phase, because we could not predict which households would be reached for
our marketing intervention, or which households would purchase Clorin.
  43
     In the full sample, using soap after using the toilet (self-reported) is marginally statistically signi…cantly negatively
related to the o¤er price (p = 0:054). Among buyers, an indicator for the female head of household having attended
school is marginally statistically signi…cantly positively related to the positive price condition (p = 0:083), though our
measure of years of schooling is marginally signi…cantly negatively related to the positive price condition (p = 0:087),
suggesting no consistently signed relationship with schooling levels.




                                                             21
4.4      Follow-up Survey

For our follow-up survey, we sent the original survey teams to …nd and re-interview the households

that we successfully reached for the marketing intervention.44 We re-interviewed households ap-

proximately two weeks after the marketing intervention, but actual lags varied due to logistical

factors.45 We chose the timing of this survey to fall in the middle of the period during which

households would be using the bottle of Clorin we sold them.

       The follow-up interview consisted of several sections. First, we repeated a handful of demo-

graphic questions from the baseline survey, as a check on the identity of the respondents.46 Next,

we asked a variety of questions about health knowledge and attitudes, and hygiene practices. We

then asked a detailed set of questions about the household’s use of Clorin, followed by questions

about whether the household had been visited by marketers at any point in the past. This question

served as an additional check on whether we had reached the correct household. After concluding

the questions on Clorin use, we tested the household’s water, following the same procedure as in

the baseline survey. Finally, once we had concluded measurement of Clorin use and chlorination,

we asked several questions relating to sunk-cost psychology. We asked these questions at the end of

the survey because we did not want households’answers to these questions to a¤ect their responses

about Clorin use.

       We reached 890 households in the follow-up survey (out of the 1; 004 households that were

successfully reached during the marketing phase). Appendix table 3 presents some evidence on the

determinants of attrition. In the marketing phase, we were more successful in reaching households

that owned a larger share of the set of durables goods (car, radio, television) that we asked about,
  44
      Because they were not exposed to our marketing experiment, we did not attempt to interview the households
that we did not reach during the door-to-door marketing. Note, however, that we interviewed households reached in
our marketing intervention whether or not they purchased Clorin from our marketing team.
   45
      If the surveyors found a house but there was no one home, they returned at least three times to contact the
original respondent. If someone was home but it was not the female head of household named in the baseline survey,
they made an appointment to return when the female head would be home. In cases where it proved exceedingly
di¢ cult to reach the female head of household, the surveyor accepted another female adult household member as
an interviewee, and noted this adjustment in the questionnaire. This occurred in 58 cases, and our …ndings are not
substantively di¤erent when we restrict attention to the cases in which we successfully reinterviewed the original
respondent.
   46
      Among the cases in which our records indicate that we successfully reinterviewed the original respondent, these
demographic characteristics are strongly correlated between the baseline and follow-up surveys, with (highly statis-
tically signi…cant) correlation coe¢ cients of 0:94 - 0:97. (The demographic characteristics are inconsistent between
the baseline and follow-up surveys in 8 percent of cases.)




                                                         22
most likely because wealthier households tended to be in more developed sections of the compounds

and were therefore easier to locate.47 In the follow-up survey, attrition was still related to observ-

ables, though less so than in the marketing phase. Most importantly, at neither stage is the o¤er

or transaction price related to the likelihood of attrition. This provides some reason to believe

that our experimental results are not confounded by di¤erential sample selection across treatment

conditions.


4.5    Additional Survey Data

We will test for screening and sunk-cost e¤ects by relating use measured at follow-up to o¤er and

transaction prices. In order for this to constitute a valid test of the model, the follow-up period must

correspond to the experimental period t0 . This means that the Clorin we sold during the marketing

intervention was in use at the time of the follow-up. To check this, we asked our surveyors at

follow-up to identify the bottles of Clorin we had sold, which we had marked on the bottom with

an “X.”In nearly 80 percent of the cases in which our records indicate that the household purchased

Clorin, the surveyors were able to identify the marked bottle among the household’s inventory of

Clorin bottles. Among households in which the surveyors identi…ed the bottle we sold, in the vast

majority of cases (nearly 80 percent) the bottle was partly, but not completely, full. In addition

to con…rming our expectations regarding the rate of exhaustion of Clorin, this evidence serves to

mitigate concerns about inter-household transfer or resale of bottles.48

    The model also assumes that Clorin not used in drinking water is used in some other way, rather

than being stored for later use. We can bring some evidence to bear on this issue. We …elded a

second follow-up survey so that, if we did …nd evidence of sunk-cost e¤ects, we would be able to

study whether they persisted after households had exhausted the bottle we sold them. Interviews

occurred approximately six weeks after the marketing intervention, although actual lags varied due

to logistical factors.49 Consistent with the model’s assumptions, surveyor inventories conducted at
  47
     Wealthier households were also more likely to have address plates on their homes (rather than having their
address written on the door or outside walls), which helped the survey team to locate the address. Households in the
…fth locality we surveyed were also signi…cantly more likely to be reached, probably because that compound had a
more organized system of household addresses than the other compounds.
  48
     In the short survey we describe below, only 6 percent of households report ever giving Clorin away.
  49
     We used a survey instrument similar to that from the …rst follow-up. We successfully contacted approximately
80 percent of households for the second follow-up, signi…cantly lower than the 89 percent recontact rate from the
…rst follow-up. (As in the …rst follow-up, we attempted to contact only those households that had been successfully


                                                        23
second follow-up showed that in over 80 percent of households the bottle we sold was either absent

(76 percent of households) or empty (6 percent).

    In our discussion of the model, we interpret a household that buys Clorin and does not use

Clorin in its drinking water as having used Clorin for household chores. For additional evidence

on the plausibility of this assumption, we turn to evidence from a series of in-depth interviews

we conducted on a convenience sample of 49 Clorin-using female heads of household from four

compounds in Lusaka, over six days in January and February 2008.50 From pilot interviews we

identi…ed a set of chores in which Clorin was sometimes used. For each chore, an interviewer

discussed with the respondent how she did the chore and whether she used Clorin at any point.

If the respondent indicated that she used Clorin in doing the chore, the interviewer asked her to

demonstrate how much Clorin she used (with a Clorin bottle …lled with water). The interviewer then

measured the amount with a measuring cup. Interviewees report substantial non-drinking water use

of Clorin. Some 61 percent of households report using Clorin for purposes other than drinking water

puri…cation (96 percent report using it in drinking water). The most common reported alternative

use was washing clothes, followed by cleaning toilets. According to our measurement exercise, these

uses often involve substantial amounts of Clorin. Accounting for the relative frequency of di¤erent

types of uses, we estimate that, among the respondents we interviewed, the average household

devotes 38 percent of Clorin by volume to non-drinking-water uses.51 This …nding suggests that

our interpretation of non-drinking-water use as use in household chores is at least quantitatively

plausible.



5     Evidence on Screening E¤ects

In this section, we test for a screening e¤ect: namely, that the higher is the o¤er price, the greater

is the propensity to use Clorin in drinking water among those who buy. The model predicts such
contacted during the marketing intervention.)
  50
     Interviewers collected data on age and years of schooling to test comparability with ever-users of Clorin in our
baseline survey. Means of the two variables are broadly comparable between the two samples, with the interview
survey sample somewhat more educated than the baseline sample. We are grateful to Michael Kremer for suggesting
that we conduct these interviews to learn more about alternative uses of Clorin.
  51
     In our original follow-up survey, about one-…fth of households report using Clorin for non-drinking-water purposes,
substantially below the …gure we found in our interviews. A plausible account of the discrepancy is that we took
greater care in the in-depth interviews to list comprehensively the chores in which Clorin might be used.



                                                          24
e¤ects because households have information about their likelihood of using Clorin in drinking water,

and they use this information in making their purchase decisions. Hence, households that are less

likely to use Clorin in drinking water are willing to pay less to buy it, and are therefore less common

in the pool of buyers the greater is the o¤er price.

       A prerequisite for such an e¤ect is that o¤er prices a¤ect purchasing behavior. Figure 2 shows

the e¤ect of o¤er price on the propensity to buy Clorin during our door-to-door intervention. The

…gure shows a downward-sloping relationship between o¤er price and the share purchasing Clorin,

with nearly 80 percent of respondents buying Clorin at 300 Kw and only about 50 percent buying

at 800 Kw. Column (1) of table 2 presents an estimate of a linear probability model of demand

as a function of the o¤er price.52 The model implies that an increase of 100 Kw in the o¤er price

would result in a (highly statistically signi…cant) 7 percentage point reduction in the probability

of purchase, corresponding to an economically nontrivial price elasticity (evaluated at the mean

o¤er price and purchase probability) of about               0:6.53 Columns (2) and (3) of table 2 show that

the results in column (1) are robust to adding baseline controls, and to restricting to households

reached in the follow-up survey, respectively.

       As a …rst test for the screening e¤ect, …gure 3 shows coe¢ cients from a regression of self-

reported use among buyers on dummies for o¤er price, controlling for transaction price …xed e¤ects

to hold constant any psychological e¤ects. Consistent with a screening e¤ect, the …gure shows an

upward-sloping relationship between o¤er price and the likelihood of use among buyers.

       Table 3 presents more parametric estimates of the e¤ect of raising the o¤er prices on the

propensity to use Clorin in drinking water among buyers. We estimate linear probability models

relating the probability of use (both self-reported and measured) to o¤er prices, with transaction

price …xed e¤ects in all speci…cations to control for any sunk-cost e¤ects.54 The regressions in

panel A of the table show that, conditional on transaction price, an increase of 100 Kw in the o¤er

price leads to a statistically signi…cant 3 to 4 percentage point increase in Clorin use among buyers,
  52
     Adding a quadratic term in o¤er price does not improve the model’s …t, suggesting that, within the range of
experimental variation, there are no detectable nonlinearities in demand. Estimated marginal e¤ects from probit
models are virtually identical to those reported in table 2 (see appendix B).
  53
     The regression has a constant of about 0:96, indicating that the model predicts that 96 percent of households
would accept a free Clorin giveaway delivered to their door. This estimate is statistically indistinguishable from unity,
which is consistent with our a priori intuition that few households would turn down a free bottle of Clorin.
  54
     Probit models of use yield nearly identical estimates. Our results are also robust to allowing for interactions
between o¤er and transaction prices in a¤ecting Clorin use. See appendix B for details.


                                                           25
corresponding to an economically nontrivial usage elasticity (at the mean price and usage) of 0:3

to 0:4.

    In principle, there are two possible reasons for our …nding that higher o¤er prices lead to

greater use among buyers. The …rst is that higher o¤er prices select buyers whose observable

characteristics— education, wealth, etc.— are predictive of Clorin use. The second is that higher

prices select buyers with a greater unobservable (to the econometrician) propensity to use. In

addition to its intrinsic relevance to the economics of private information, separating these two

mechanisms is potentially important for policy, because if the screening e¤ect is driven largely by

selection on observables, the targeting e¤ects of pricing may be largely achievable through programs

that target distribution of Clorin based on observable demographics.

    In panel B of table 3, we test between these explanations, by re-estimating the speci…cations of

panel B, but including as covariates a vector of household demographic characteristics measured as

of our baseline survey.55 These demographics are of the sort that might be available in a detailed

household census. The coe¢ cients on o¤er price in panel B are only about 10 percent smaller than

those in panel A, indicating that the vast majority of the screening e¤ect we estimate is driven by

higher prices selecting buyers with a relatively high unobservable propensity to use Clorin.

    Note that, in contrast to a typical randomization-based regression, asking how including observ-

ables a¤ects the coe¢ cient of interest in table 3 is not a test of the validity of our randomization.

This is because the regressions in table 3 are run conditional on purchase, rather than uncondi-

tionally, so that we are asking how correlated are observables with o¤er prices conditional on the

decision to buy. Recall, however, that a nearly marginally signi…cant relationship between o¤er

price and baseline use is visible in the balancing tests in appendix table 2. We have therefore

con…rmed (results not shown) that screening e¤ects are comparable in magnitude and statistical

signi…cance to those in panel A of table 3 when we include the entire range of baseline character-

istics in the model, including baseline use. We use the more restricted set of characteristics in the

table to more accurately represent the types of household data that might plausibly be available

to marketers of Clorin. (We have also re-estimated our screening model dropping households that
  55
     Note that 9 respondents refused to answer one or more demographic survey questions. To verify that the slight
di¤erence in sample composition between panels A and B does not explain the di¤erence in coe¢ cients, we have
re-estimated the speci…cations in panel A of table 3, excluding the 9 observations with missing values of one or more
demographic characteristics, and …nd virtually identical results, as expected.


                                                         26
had Clorin at home as of the baseline, and …nd, if anything, stronger evidence of screening e¤ects

on the restricted sample. See appendix A for details.)

   The …ndings in table 3 imply that a household’s willingness-to-pay is informative about its

propensity to use Clorin, over and above what is available in a vector of household demographics.

A related (but di¤erent) question is whether demographics are more or less predictive of use than

willingness-to-pay. This is similar to asking whether a model relating use to demographics has a

higher or lower R2 than a model relating use to willingness-to-pay. In practice, however, because

we do not observe willingness-to-pay directly, comparing the …t of these two models using R2 is not

possible. An alternative approach, which we adopt, is to ask whether a hypothetical distribution of

Clorin in which it is given to the households with the highest predicted use (based on demographics)

achieves more or less use among recipients than an equivalently selective pricing scheme (i.e., a

pricing scheme that distributes Clorin to an equal number of households).

   To implement this comparison, we …rst estimate a linear probability model relating use among

                                                                                        d
buyers to our set of household demographics. From this model, we obtain a predicted use u sei

for each household i. Let x ( ) be the percent of households buying at o¤er price       predicted by

                                                                                     d
the demand model in column (1) of table 2. After ranking households by predicted use u sei , we

calculate, for each o¤er price , the share of buyers reporting use at follow-up among the house-

holds in the top x ( ) percent by predicted use. This allows us to compare the top households by

willingness-to-pay and the top households by predicted use at the same percentiles of the respective

distributions. For example, at an o¤er price of 300 Kw, our demand model predicts that 76 percent

of households will buy. We therefore compute reported Clorin use among the top 76 percent of

buyers, ranked according to predicted use. Appendix …gure 2 shows the resulting usage rates by

o¤er price, normalized relative to the rate at 300 Kw. As the …gure shows, the data exhibit signi…-

cantly more slope with respect to willingness-to-pay than with respect to household demographics.

The di¤erence in observed use between buyers at 800 Kw and buyers at 300 Kw is more than four

times larger than the analogous di¤erence between households categorized by predicted use.

   Our data also allow us to study directly how the observable characteristics of buyers change with

the o¤er price (results not shown). In contrast to concerns that pricing leads to distribution to the

“richest of the poor,” we do not …nd that buyers at higher prices are wealthier or more educated.


                                                 27
This result may of course be sensitive to our choice of a relatively inexpensive product. Using two

crude proxies for a household’s potential for health gains from drinking water use— the number of

children below age 5 and a dummy for whether the female head of household is pregnant— we …nd

no evidence that those with greater potential for health gains have a greater willingness-to-pay for

Clorin. Again, this result must be taken with caution, as our survey was not designed optimally to

measure the propensity for health gains from drinking water use.



6         Evidence on Sunk-Cost E¤ects

In this section, we use variation in the transaction price to test for a sunk-cost e¤ect. Sunk-

cost e¤ects arise in our model because using Clorin in drinking water rationalizes the household’s

decision to buy Clorin. Because the psychic cost of failing to rationalize the purchase decision is

greater the more costly was the purchase, the model predicts that the likelihood of use (conditional

on purchase) is rising in the transaction price, holding the o¤er price constant.

         Figure 4 graphs the relationship between transaction prices and use at follow-up, holding con-

stant the o¤er price using …xed e¤ects. The …gure shows no consistent evidence that paying more

for Clorin increases use.

         To test these hypotheses more formally, in table 4 we estimate regression models relating the

probability of Clorin use at follow-up to the transaction price, including o¤er price …xed e¤ects

to control for di¤erences in the composition of buyers at di¤erent prices. Because our analysis of

balance (in section 4) suggests the possibility that transaction prices are statistically related to

baseline use, we include a full set of baseline controls in all models.

         In addition to testing for an e¤ect of transaction prices on use, our data also allow us to relate

any e¤ects we …nd to a crude measure of the household’s psychological propensities. At the end of

our follow-up survey, we included a series of hypothetical choices designed to mirror the types of

questions frequently used to elicit sunk-cost e¤ects in the existing literature:56


           Suppose you bought a bottle of juice for 1,000 Kw. When you start to drink it, you
    56
    We placed these questions at the end of the survey in case these questions revealed anything about the study’s
hypotheses. Note that, in contrast to the most typical hypothetical-choice studies of sunk-cost e¤ects, we employ
a within-subject, rather than between-subject design. We chose this approach because it allows us to more cleanly
classify households into “sunk-cost” and “non-sunk-cost” groups.


                                                       28
         realize you don’t really like the taste. Would you …nish drinking it?


Participants were able to answer yes or no, and could provide additional comments if they liked.

After this question, we asked two similar follow-up questions of all participants, one for the case

of a 5,000 Kw bottle of juice, and one for the case of a 500 Kw bottle.57 Consistent with existing

evidence, we …nd that households in our sample do display sunk-cost e¤ects in their responses to

these questions, with over 20 percent of respondents reporting that they would …nish the juice at

5,000 Kw but not at 1,000 Kw, or that they would …nish it at 1,000 Kw but not 500 Kw.58

       Panel A of table 4 follows the model in testing for an e¤ect of the transaction price on the

likelihood of Clorin use at follow-up (both self-reported and measured), holding the o¤er price

constant. Consistent with …gure 4, there is no evidence of such an e¤ect. Our point estimates (in

speci…cations 1A and 4A) indicate an e¤ect of transaction price on use that is small in magnitude

and inconsistently signed. Our con…dence intervals allow us to rule out positive e¤ects on the

probability of use greater than 3:6 percentage points (self-reported use) or 1:9 percentage points

(measured use) per 100 Kw. These intervals rule out sunk-cost e¤ects equal in size to the point

estimates of the screening e¤ect that we report in table 3.59

       In speci…cations (2A) and (5A) of table 4, we focus speci…cally on households that display

the sunk-cost e¤ect in our hypothetical choice scenario, and again …nd statistically insigni…cant

point estimates with no consistent sign. The di¤erences in coe¢ cients between sunk-cost and non-

sunk-cost households are statistically insigni…cant and inconsistently signed, suggesting no clear

relationship between hypothetical choice behavior and the observed response to transaction prices.

       Overall, then, our data do not provide evidence of sunk-cost e¤ects as predicted by the model.

We also designed our randomization to test a secondary hypothesis, suggested to us by NGO

personnel, namely that paying something results in more drinking-water use than paying nothing.
  57
     To isolate sunk-cost e¤ects from informational e¤ects of prices, the follow-up questions emphasized that the
juice in question was the same bottle of juice regardless of the price we speci…ed. For example, the second question
asked “Now suppose you actually had paid 5,000 Kw for that bottle of juice...Would you …nish drinking the bottle?”
Surveyors were instructed to emphasize the word that, thus stressing the fact that this question refers to the same
bottle as in the question about 1,000 Kw.
  58
     Twelve percent of respondents reported that they would …nish drinking the juice if it cost 500 Kw, as against 14
percent who said they would …nish it had it cost 1,000 Kw, and 32 percent who said they would …nish drinking it at
5,000 Kw. The di¤erences among these groups are all highly statistically signi…cant in paired t-tests.
  59
     A formal test of the equality of the causal and screening e¤ects, incorporating the statistical uncertainty in both
estimates, yields p-values of 0:233 (self-reported use) and 0:072 (measured use).



                                                          29
In panel B of table 4, we estimate models paralleling those in panel A, using a dummy for whether

the household paid a positive transaction price as our key independent variable. As in panel A,

we cannot rule out the null of no e¤ect of the act of paying on drinking-water use. However, in

contrast to panel A, the point estimates in panel B are large and positive, and in general larger

among sunk-cost than non-sunk-cost households. Therefore, while our data show no evidence of an

e¤ect of an act of paying, they are at least consistent with such an e¤ect, suggesting the need for

further research.60



7         Robustness and Interpretation

Below, we use several pieces of evidence from our study to test the validity of the maintained

assumptions of our model.

         E¤ ect of transaction price on purchase decisions. It is crucial to the interpretation of our results

that households were not aware of their …nal transaction price when deciding whether to purchase

Clorin from us. We can test for such a lapse by asking whether transaction prices a¤ected demand,

after controlling for the o¤er price. Estimates of a linear probability model of demand indicate

that, after controlling for o¤er price, a household’s …nal transaction price had no statistical e¤ect

on its propensity to purchase Clorin (results not shown).61

         Income e¤ ects of transaction prices. If paying more for Clorin reduced household wealth sig-

ni…cantly, this could in principle attenuate the sunk-cost e¤ect (though not the screening e¤ect).

As a simple test for this possibility, we have tested for sunk-cost e¤ects among those in our sample

with above-median wealth (as proxied by durables ownership). Even among this group, there is no
    60
      As a more direct test of the practitioner hypothesis that “when products are given away free, the recipient often
does not value them or even use them” (PSI, 2006), we have also split the sample according to respondents’ self-
reported agreement with the statement that “I value something more if I paid for it.” We …nd that the estimated
e¤ect of paying a positive transaction price on Clorin use is far larger among those who report strong agreement with
the statement than those who do not, with the e¤ect on self-reported use becoming statistically signi…cant (p = 0:046)
in the sample of those reporting strong agreement (results not shown). In our second follow-up survey, we also …nd
some evidence of an e¤ect of the act of paying on Clorin use, using a somewhat more precise measure of chlorination
(results not shown).
   61
      This lack of statistical signi…cance is not due to a lack of power: an F -test de…nitively rejects the null hypothesis
of equal e¤ects of o¤er and transaction prices (p < 0:001). We have also conducted this test separately for each of the
six marketers involved in our experiment. In no case is there a statistically signi…cant negative e¤ect of transaction
price on purchase probability. In one case, there is a marginally statistically signi…cant positive e¤ect (p = 0:095) of
transaction price on purchase probability. Such a …nding is not surprising given that we execute six separate tests,
and the direction of the e¤ect is not consistent with the idea that household demand responded to the transaction
price.


                                                            30
evidence of a sunk-cost e¤ect, providing further evidence that attenuation due to income e¤ects is

unlikely to be a major confound. Relatedly, interaction regressions show no evidence that the e¤ect

of the transaction price di¤ers with our proxy for household wealth. In addition to its relevance

for the issue of income e¤ects, this test also provides some (admittedly crude) evidence against

the view that sunk-cost e¤ects are present only when the amount at stake is large relative to the

household’s income.

       Informational e¤ ects of o¤ er and transaction prices. If, despite our design precautions, higher

o¤er or transaction prices were taken to be evidence that Clorin is a better product, and favorable

beliefs induce more product use, then our estimates could be confounded. To test for such an e¤ect,

we can take advantage of the presence in our follow-up survey of several measures of respondent

attitudes toward Clorin. In particular, the survey asks the respondent (on an agree/disagree scale)

whether water puri…cation solution is easily available, whether it makes the water taste bad, and

whether it is an e¤ective way to prevent diarrhea. None of these scales is statistically signi…cantly

a¤ected by either the o¤er or transaction price, and an index that averages all three is also una¤ected

by our treatments.62 Moreover, controlling for this index in our main speci…cations leaves our key

conclusions unchanged (see appendix B).

       A related possibility is that households’ beliefs about Clorin prices were impacted by our ex-

perimental treatment. To test for this confound, we asked Clorin buyers in the follow-up how much

they usually pay for a bottle of Clorin, and we asked those who reported not buying Clorin how

much they would expect to pay for a bottle. We …nd no e¤ect of o¤er or transaction prices on

participants’responses to these questions.63

       Marginal cost fallacy. For the households in our survey, the marginal cost of using Clorin is

determined by the market replacement price, not by the transaction price. However, it may be that

households psychologically perceived the cost of using Clorin to be higher when their transaction

price was higher, which could attenuate sunk-cost e¤ects and explain our failure to …nd an e¤ect of
  62
     Among households that report never having used Clorin as of our baseline survey, who might be expected to
know the least about the product, there is no evidence of an e¤ect of o¤er price on our aggregate quality index. We
do …nd some evidence that higher transaction prices (somewhat counterintuitively) worsen attitudes towards Clorin
on the sample of never-users, but this result is only marginally statistically signi…cant (p = 0:089).
  63
     In the second follow-up survey, we asked all respondents how much they would expect to pay for a bottle of
Clorin in the future. We again …nd no statistically signi…cant relationship between responses to this question and
the transaction price at which the household purchased Clorin.




                                                        31
the amount paid. To assess this possibility, we included in our follow-up survey a question designed

to get at a household’s propensity to behave in this way. In particular, we asked respondents to

evaluate the statement “When I buy something that is expensive, I try to use it sparingly,” on an

agree/disagree scale. Comparing households that did and did not agree strongly with this statement

reveals no evidence that the e¤ect of transaction price on use is higher for households that do not

agree with the statement (results not shown).



8    Conclusions

In this paper, we report evidence from a …eld experiment in Lusaka, Zambia, designed to test

the e¤ect of prices on the use of Clorin, a socially marketed drinking water disinfectant. Our

experimental design permits us to separately test for two e¤ects of prices: a screening e¤ect (higher

prices change the mix of buyers), and a sunk-cost e¤ect (higher prices induce greater use among

those who buy). We …nd strong evidence of screening e¤ects: raising the price of Clorin attracts

buyers with a signi…cantly greater propensity to use Clorin in their drinking water, indicating a

positive correlation between willingness-to-pay and the propensity to use Clorin in drinking water.

By contrast, we do not …nd evidence for sunk-cost e¤ects: holding constant the distribution of

willingness-to-pay, raising the price at which a household transacts does not a¤ect its propensity to

use Clorin in drinking water. Our results thus imply, at best, a limited role for sunk-cost e¤ects in

the domain of health product use, while providing strong support for the hypothesis that households

have private information about their use propensities that is re‡ected in willingness-to-pay.

    Our …ndings therefore cast doubt on justi…cations for health product pricing based on sunk-

cost e¤ects, while suggesting a possible role for prices as an allocative tool. As we have stressed,

however, these implications must be taken with caution. They depend, in part, on the health (and

other) consequences of non-drinking-water uses of Clorin, which to our knowledge have not been

adequately explored in the medical literature. Moreover, while our study focuses on two important

channels through which pricing policy may in‡uence the use of health products in developing

countries, we abstract from several others, most notably the informational role of prices in the

introduction of new goods, and the role of prices in permitting NGOs to access retail distribution



                                                 32
networks. Carefully evaluating the role of these channels remains an important area for future

research.




                                             33
References
 [1] Hal R. Arkes and Catherine Blumer. The psychology of sunk cost. Organizational Behavior
     and Human Decision Processes, 35:124–140, 1985.

 [2] Nava Ashraf, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evidence from a
     commitment savings product in the Philippines. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2):635–
     672, May 2006.

 [3] Jere R. Behrman. The simple analytics of contraceptive social marketing. World Development,
     17(10):1499–1521, 1989.

 [4] Hilary Benn. Meeting our promises in poor countries. Speech to the London School of Hygiene
     and Tropical Medicine, June 15 2006.

 [5] Cheryl A. Casper. Pricing policy for library services. Journal of the American Society for
     Information Science, 30(5):304–309, September 1979.

 [6] Jessica Cohen and Pascaline Dupas. Free distribution or cost sharing? evidence from a ran-
     domized malaria prevention experiment. Dartmouth College Working Paper, December 2007.

 [7] Erik Eyster. Rationalizing the past: A taste for consistency. Nu¢ eld College Mimeograph,
     November 2002.

 [8] Ernst Fehr and Lorenz Goette. Do workers work more if wages are high? evidence from a
     randomized …eld experiment. American Economic Review, 97(1):298–317, March 2007.

 [9] Amy Finkelstein and Kathleen McGarry. Multiple dimensions of private information: evidence
     from the long-term care insurance market. American Economic Review, 96(4):938–958, 2006.

[10] Daniel Friedman, Kai Pommerenke, Rajan Lukose, Garrett Milam, and Bernardo A. Huber-
     man. Searching for the sunk cost fallacy. Experimental Economics, 10(1):79–104, March 2007.

[11] John Gourville and Dilip Soman. Pricing and the psychology of consumption. Harvard Business
     Review, pages 90–96, September 2002.

[12] Michael Grossman. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
     Political Economy, 80(2):223–255, 1972.

[13] Glenn W. Harrison and John A. List. Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature,
     42:1009–1055, December 2004.

[14] Barbara A. Hauser. Drinking Water Chemistry: A Laboratory Manual. Lewis Publishers, Boca
     Raton, FL, 2002.

[15] Jerry A. Hausman. Individual discount rates and the purchase and utilization of energy-using
     durables. Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1):33–54, Spring 1979.

[16] Jukti Kumar Kalita and Robert H. Duco¤e. A simultaneous-equation analysis of price, circu-
     lation, and advertising revenue for leading consumer magazines. Journal of Media Economics,
     8(4):1–16, 1995.

[17] Dean Karlan. Using experimental economics to measure social capital and predict …nancial
     decisions. American Economic Review, 95(5):1688–1699, December 2005.

                                               34
[18] Dean Karlan and John A. List. Does price matter in charitable giving? Evidence from a
     large-scale natural …eld experiment. American Economic Review, 97(5):1774–1793, 2007.

[19] Dean Karlan and Jonathan Zinman. Observing unobservables: Identifying information asym-
     metries with a consumer credit …eld experiment. Yale University Working Paper, June 2006.

[20] Philip Kotler and Eduardo L. Roberto. Social marketing: Strategies for changing public be-
     havior. The Free Press, New York, 1989.

[21] Michael Kremer, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Peterson Zwane. Spring cleaning:
     Results from a randomized evaluation of source water quality improvement. Harvard University
     Mimeograph, 2006.

[22] Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel. The illusion of sustainability. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 122(3):1007–1065, August 2007.

[23] Steven D. Levitt and John A. List. What do laboratory experiments measuring social prefer-
     ences reveal about the real world? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2):153–174, Spring
     2007.

[24] Jennie I. Litvack and Claude Bodart. User fee plus quality equals improved access to health
     care: Results of a …eld experiment in Cameroon. Social Science and Medicine, 37(3):369–383,
     1993.

[25] C. A. Maxwell, R. T. Rwegoshora, S. M. Magesa, and C. F. Curtis. Comparison of coverage
     with insecticide-treated nets in a Tanzanian town and villages where nets and insecticide are
     either marketed or provided free of charge. Malaria Journal, 5(44), 2006.

[26] Donald G. McNeil Jr. A program to …ght malaria in Africa draws questions. New York Times,
     June 11 2005.

[27] Dominique Meekers. The implications of free and commercial distribution for condom use:
     Evidence from Cameroon. PSI Research Division Working Paper No. 9, 1997.

[28] Paul Milgrom and John Roberts. Price and advertising signals of product quality. Journal of
     Political Economy, 94(4):796–821, August 1986.

[29] Joseph P. Newhouse. Toward a theory of nonpro…t institutions: An economic model of a
     hospital. American Economic Review, 60(1):64–74, 1970.

[30] Lynnette Olembo, F. A. D. Kaona, Mary Tuba, and Gilbert Burnham. Safe water systems: An
     evaluation of the Zambia Clorin program. Johns Hopkins University Mimeograph, September
     2004.

[31] Sharon M. Oster. Strategic management for nonpro…t organizations: Theory and cases. Oxford
     University Press, Oxford, 1995.

[32] Sharon M. Oster, Charles M. Gray, and Charles Weinberg. Pricing in the nonpro…t sector.
     In Dennis R. Young, editor, E¤ ective economic decision-making for nonpro…t organizations,
     chapter 2, pages 27–46. Foundation Center, New York, December 2003.




                                               35
[33] A. A. Parker, R. Stephenson, P. L. Riley, S. Ombeki, C. Komolleh, L. Sibley, and R. Quick. Sus-
     tained high levels of stored drinking water treatment and retention of hand-washing knowledge
     in rural Kenyan households following a clinic-based intervention. Epidemiology and Infection,
     January 2006.
[34] Amil Petrin. Consistent policy analysis when some heterogeneity is unobserved. University of
     Chicago Mimeograph, December 2003.
[35] Canice Prendergast and Lars Stole. Impetuous youngsters and jaded old-timers: Acquiring a
     reputation for learning. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6):1105–1134, December 1996.
[36] PSI. What is social marketing? http://www.psi.org/resources/pubs/what_is_SM.html, 2006.
[37] R. Quick, L. Vencze, E. Mintz, L. Soleto, J. Aparicio, M. Gironaz, L. Hutwagner, K. Greene,
     C. Bopp, K. Maloney, D. Chavez, M. Sobsey, and R. Tauxe. Diarrhea prevention in Bolivia
     through point-of-use disinfection and safe storage: A promising new strategy. Epidemiology
     and Infection, 122:83–90, 1999.
[38] Robert E. Quick, Akiko Kimura, Angelica Thevos, Mathias Tembo, Isidore Shamputa, Lori
     Hutwagner, and Eric Mintz. Diarrhea prevention through household-level water disinfection
     and safe storage in Zambia. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 66(5):584–
     589, 2002.
[39] A. D. Roy. Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic Papers, 3(2):135–
     146, June 1951.
[40] Kristina Shampanier, Nina Mazar, and Dan Ariely. Zero as a special price: The true value of
     free products. Marketing Science, 26(6):742–757, November-December 2007.
[41] Baba Shiv, Ziv Carmon, and Dan Ariely. Consumers may get what they pay for: Placebo
     e¤ects of marketing actions. Journal of Marketing Research, 62:383–393, November 2005.
[42] Richard Steinberg and Burton A. Weisbrod. Pricing and rationing by nonpro…t organizations
     with distributional objectives. In Burton A. Weisbrod, editor, To Pro…t or Not to Pro…t:
     The commercial transformation of the nonpro…t sector, chapter 4, pages 64–82. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge, UK, September 1998.
[43] Richard Thaler. Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior
     and Organization, 1(1):39–60, March 1980.
[44] Angelica K. Thevos, Sonja J. Olsen, Josefa M. Rangel, Fred A. D. Kaona, Mathias Tembo, and
     Robert E. Quick. Social marketing and motivational interviewing as community interventions
     for safe water behaviors: Follow-up surveys in Zambia. International Quarterly of Community
     Health Education, 21(1):51–65, 2002-2003.
[45] Rebecca Thornton. The demand for and impact of learning HIV status: Evidence from a …eld
     experiment. American Economic Review, 2008. Forthcoming.
[46] United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.              The statistical estima-
     tion of poverty duration and transitions in Zambia.                Mimeograph, 2006.
     http://www.uneca.org/eca_programmes/srdc/sa/publications/Statistical-Estimation.pdf.
[47] USAID. Lack of access to clean drinking water and proper sanitation is a growing challenge.
     http://www.usaid.gov/locations/sub-saharan_africa/features/worldwaterday06.html, 2006.


                                                36
A      Appendix: Intertemporal Implications of the Model
In the model, realized transaction prices p~it0 in period t0 will not a¤ect purchase or use behavior in
any period t 6= t0 : sunk-cost e¤ects are localized to the period in which the transaction occurs. The
model does, however, have implications for the relationship between o¤er prices pit0 conditional
on purchase in period t0 and purchase and use behavior in periods t 6= t0 . In this appendix we
brie‡y summarize those implications. We also provide some empirical tests using data from our
baseline survey, reported in appendix table 4. The baseline period can be thought of as a reasonable
approximation to period t0 1, in that any household owning Clorin as of the baseline survey would
have purchased it from a retailer (or health clinic).64 It is worth noting, however, that we did not
design our study to test these intertemporal implications, so the evidence reported below should
be thought of as preliminary.
    Begin by considering the relationship between purchase behavior in the experiment and purchase
behavior in non-experimental periods. The model predicts that households purchasing in period
t0 are more likely to buy at other periods t 6= t0 , the greater is the o¤er price pit0 in period t0 . To
see this, observe that, for households that purchase in the experimental period t0 , we can write the
following for any non-experimental period t 6= t0 :

              Pr (bit (R; vi ) = 1 j bit0 (pit0 ; vi ) = 1; R; pit0 ) = Pr (vi   v (R) j vi     v (pit0 ))

with v (R)       v (pit0 ). Because v () is increasing in pit0 , it follows directly that, conditional on
purchase in period t0 , the probability of purchase in a period t 6= t0 is greater the greater is pit0 .
Intuitively, the higher is a household’s demonstrated willingness to pay in period t0 , the greater is
its likelihood of purchasing at the retail price in other periods. We present a test of this implication
in column (1) of appendix table 4. We measure purchase at baseline with an indicator for whether
our surveyor inventory indicates that the household had a non-empty Clorin bottle at the time of
the baseline survey. We …nd a marginally statistically signi…cant positive relationship between o¤er
price and baseline purchase (conditional on purchase at the marketing stage), consistent with the
model.
     Consider next the relationship between purchase behavior in the experiment and use behavior in
non-experimental periods. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, the model predicts that, conditional on
purchase in the experiment and in a non-experimental period, the experimental o¤er price will be
unrelated to use in non-experimental periods. Formally, consider the expression for use conditional
on purchase in both the experimental period t0 and some non-experimental period t 6= t0 :

 Pr (dit (R; vi ; "it ) = 1 j bit0 (pit0 ; vi ) = 1; R; pit0 ) = Pr (vi + "it     R j vi      v (R) ^ vi     v (pit0 ))

That is, the set of households purchasing at both time t and time t0 are those for whom both
vi   v (R) and vi      v (pit0 ). However, because R   pit0 , v (R)  v (pit0 ), so that the two
  64
     It is also possible, in principle, to use data from our second follow-up survey to approximate purchase and use
behavior in period t0 + 1. In practice, however, some households still had the Clorin they purchased from us as of the
second follow-up. (Removing those households from the data is problematic, because the fact that they did not exhaust
all their Clorin is endogenous to their use behavior.) Moreover, an analysis of survey attrition shows a marginally
statistically signi…cant negative relationship between o¤er prices and the likelihood of contact in the second follow-up
survey (results not shown), suggesting further need for caution in interpreting experimental treatment e¤ects from
the second follow-up survey. Nevertheless, we have conducted tests parallel to those in appendix table 4 using data
from our second follow-up. With the exception of the …rst implication (that o¤er price will be related to purchase
behavior at the second follow-up conditional on purchase at the marketing stage), the conclusions are identical.




                                                            37
conditions collapse to a single one:

         Pr (dit (R; vi ; "it ) = 1 j bit0 (pit0 ; vi ) = 1; R; pit0 ) = Pr (vi + "it           R j vi      v (R))
                                                                        = Pr (dit (R; vi ; "it ) = 1 j R)

Therefore we predict no relationship between o¤er price at time t0 and use behavior at time t 6= t0 .
Intuitively, this result comes about because anyone willing to pay R should also be willing to pay
pit0 R, so that o¤er prices in the experiment convey no new information about the composition
of households purchasing in non-experimental periods.65 Columns (2) and (3) of appendix table 4
present tests of this implication. Among those who had Clorin in their households as of the baseline
(our proxy for purchase at time t0 1) and who purchased Clorin in the marketing stage (time t0 ),
there is no relationship between o¤er price and self-reported or measured use at baseline, consistent
with the model. The coe¢ cients are small, negative, and statistically insigni…cant.
    Finally, consider the reverse question of how purchase behavior in non-experimental periods
a¤ects our predictions for use in the experimental period. Following a logic parallel to the preceding
argument, it is straightforward to show that, conditional on purchase in a non-experimental period,
there should be no relationship between o¤er price in the experimental period and use in the
experimental period, holding constant the transaction price. That is, the screening e¤ect should
be absent for households that purchase in non-experimental periods. In equations, this is because:

Pr (dit0 (~
          pit0 ; vi ; "it ) = 1 j pit0 ; p~it0 ; bit (R; vi ) = 1) = Pr (vi + "it       p~it0 j vi   v (R) ^ vi      v (pit0 ))
                                                                 = Pr (vi + "it         p~it0 j vi   v (R)) :

By contrast, households that did not purchase in non-experimental periods will still display the
screening e¤ect, although with a di¤erent magnitude than the overall population:

  Pr (dit0 (~
            pit0 ; vi ; "it ) = 1 j pit0 ; p~it0 ; bit (R; vi ) = 0) = Pr (vi + "it    p~it0 j v (pit0 ) < vi   v (R)) :

We test these implications in speci…cations reported in columns (4) through (7) of appendix table
4. Consistent with the model, among those who purchased at the marketing stage and had Clorin
at baseline, there is a statistically insigni…cant relationship between o¤er price and use at follow-up.
(We note, however, that due to small sample size our con…dence intervals cannot rule out nontrivial
e¤ects.) By contrast, among those who purchased at the marketing stage but did not have Clorin
in the home as of the baseline, there is a positive and statistically signi…cant relationship between
o¤er price and use.


B      Appendix: Additional Robustness Checks
Appendix table 5 checks the robustness of our key results to a number of alternative speci…cations.
For each alternative model, we show the e¤ect of o¤er prices on purchase probabilities, the e¤ect
of o¤er price on use among buyers, and the e¤ect of transaction price (or a dummy for a positive
transaction price) on use among buyers. In speci…cation (1), we reproduce the coe¢ cients from our
main tables for comparison.
    Speci…cation (2) of appendix table 5 checks the robustness of our results to using a probit
  65
     Our model assumes a constant willingness-to-pay over time. A model with time-varying shocks to ci that are
known in advance of purchase to the household could yield a positive relationship between use in non-experimental
periods and experimental o¤er price. However, given that the non-experimental periods we study are close in time
to the experimental period, constant willingness-to-pay over time may be a reasonable approximation.



                                                                38
model of purchase and use, rather than a linear probability model. The table reports the estimated
marginal e¤ects evaluated at the sample mean of the covariates. In all cases these estimates are
very similar to those we obtain in our main speci…cation.
    Speci…cation (3) of appendix table 5 includes dummy variables for the six marketers we employed
to control for any marketer-speci…c e¤ects on purchase or use. Because the assignment of marketers
is statistically unrelated to the price treatments, including these controls does not meaningfully
a¤ect our results. As a further check on this issue, we have estimated models of demand and use
in which we interact our price treatments with marketer …xed e¤ects (results not shown). In every
case, F -tests indicate that the marketer-price interactions are jointly statistically insigni…cant. Our
key results also survive (though with greater standard errors due to reduced sample size) when we
eliminate the data associated with each marketer, one marketer at a time (results not shown).
Finally, our results are robust to controlling for the date at which the household was reached by
our marketer (results not shown).
    In speci…cation (4) of appendix table 5, we check the robustness of our results to relaxing
the assumption that the e¤ects of o¤er and transaction prices do not interact in determining the
probability of Clorin use. Speci…cally, we have re-estimated our key models of use, allowing the
e¤ect of o¤er price to di¤er freely by transaction price, and allowing the e¤ect of transaction price
to di¤er freely by o¤er price. By averaging the coe¢ cients across these separate speci…cations, we
can obtain an estimate of the average e¤ect of o¤er and transaction prices that does not restrict
the e¤ect of one price to be independent of the other. The results are similar to those in the main
speci…cation.
    In speci…cation (5) of appendix table 5, we control explicitly for an index of the respondent’s
self-reported attitudes toward Clorin at follow-up (see section 7). Though this index could be
endogenous to our treatment conditions, including the index allows us to check whether any infor-
mational e¤ects of prices might be confounding our estimates of the screening and sunk-cost e¤ects.
Including this control does not meaningfully change any of our key coe¢ cients.
    Speci…cation (6) of appendix table 5 presents a set of ordered probit models, using as a de-
pendent measure the amount of free chlorine in the household’s drinking water as of the follow-up
survey. The direction and statistical signi…cance of the ordered probit parameters are comparable
to those of the main speci…cation. To permit a comparison of magnitudes, in square brackets we
report the implied marginal e¤ect of a change in the key independent variable on the likelihood of
having at least some free chlorine. The implied marginal e¤ects are quantitatively similar to those
in the main speci…cation.
    Speci…cation (7) of appendix table 5 presents a set of ordered probit models, using as a depen-
dent measure an index of how recently the respondent reports putting Clorin in her household’s
drinking water.66 The estimates are similar to those of the main model in direction and statistical
signi…cance. (A direct comparison of magnitudes is not possible because the dependent variable is
not in the same units as the coe¢ cients in our main speci…cation.)
  66
     In order of recency, the categories are: one week ago or more, between 48 hours and one week, between 24 and
48 hours, between 12 and 24 hours, between 6 and 12 hours, and within the last 6 hours.




                                                       39
Figure 1 A bottle of Clorin




                              40
Figure 2 The e¤ ect of o¤ er price on purchase of Clorin


                               0.8



                               0.7
     Share purchasing Clorin




                               0.6



                               0.5



                               0.4



                               0.3



                               0.2
                                     300   400   500          600            700           800
                                                 Offer price (Kw)


Notes: Figure shows share of households purchasing Clorin in door-to-door marketing intervention, at dif-
ferent o¤er prices (in Zambian Kwacha). Error bars re‡ect 1 standard error.




                                                       41
Figure 3 Usage rates of Clorin by o¤ er price


                                                 0.8
     Share of buyers using Clorin at follow-up




                                                 0.7



                                                 0.6



                                                 0.5



                                                 0.4



                                                 0.3



                                                 0.2
                                                       300   400   500          600   700    800
                                                                   Offer price (Kw)


Notes: Figure shows coe¢ cients from a regression of self-reported Clorin use at follow-up on dummies for
o¤er price, with …xed e¤ects for transaction price, for those households that purchased Clorin in our door-
to-door marketing exercise. Coe¢ cient on omitted category (o¤er price = 300 Kw) is normalized so that
predicted share at sample mean of o¤er price dummies is equal to the observed share using Clorin. Error
bars re‡ect 1 standard error.




                                                                         42
Figure 4 Usage rates of Clorin by transaction price


                                                 0.8
     Share of buyers using Clorin at follow-up




                                                 0.7



                                                 0.6



                                                 0.5



                                                 0.4



                                                 0.3



                                                 0.2
                                                       0   100      200         300       400   500-700
                                                                 Transaction Price (Kw)


Notes: Figure shows coe¢ cients from a regression of self-reported Clorin use at follow-up on dummies for
transaction price, with …xed e¤ects for o¤er price, for those households that purchased Clorin in our door-to-
door marketing exercise. Coe¢ cient on omitted category (transaction price = 0 Kw) is normalized so that
predicted share at sample mean of transaction price dummies is equal to the observed share using Clorin.
Cells with transaction price of 500, 600, and 700 Kw have been aggregated to improve precision. Error bars
re‡ect 1 standard error.




                                                                          43
Table 1 Distribution of o¤ er and transaction prices

                                                                O¤er Price (Kw)
                                     300        400           500     600     700           800      Total
 Number of participants              226        227            227       227       227       126     1260
 (percent of all participants)     (17.94)    (18.02)        (18.02)   (18.02)   (18.02)   (10.00)   (100)
 Transaction Price (Kw):
 0                                   90         90             90        90        90        50        500
                                   (39.82)    (39.65)        (39.65)   (39.65)   (39.65)   (39.68)   (39.68)
 100                                 67         45             34        27        22        10        205
                                   (29.65)    (19.82)        (14.98)   (11.89)   (9.69)    (7.94)    (16.27)
 200                                 69         46             34        27        23        11        210
                                   (30.53)    (20.26)        (14.98)   (11.89)   (10.13)   (8.73)    (16.67)
 300                                  —         46             34        28        23        11        142
                                              (20.26)        (14.98)   (12.33)   (10.13)   (8.73)    (11.27)
 400                                  —         —              35        27        23        11        96
                                                             (15.42)   (11.89)   (10.13)   (8.73)    (7.62)
 500                                  —         —              —         28        23        11        62
                                                                       (12.33)   (10.13)   (8.73)    (4.92)
 600                                  —         —              —         —         23        11        34
                                                                                 (10.13)   (8.73)     (2.7)
 700                                  —         —              —         —         —         11        11
                                                                                           (8.73)    (0.87)
Notes: The …rst section of the table shows the distribution of participants across o¤er prices, with percent of
total in parentheses. The remaining rows show the distribution of transaction prices conditional on a given
o¤er price, with conditional percentages in parentheses. For example, the cell listed under an o¤er price of
300 Kw and a transaction price of 200 Kw should be read to say that 69 households received an o¤er price
of 300 Kw and a transaction price of 200 Kw, and that these 69 households represent 30.53 percent of the
226 households receiving an o¤er price of 300 Kw.




                                                        44
Table 2 Estimates of the demand for Clorin

Dependent variable: Household purchased Clorin (dummy)
                                       (1)        (2)      (3)
 Sample                                All        All  Follow-up
 O¤er price                                -0.0664     -0.0653      -0.0708
 (100 Kw)                                 (0.0093)    (0.0094)     (0.0099)
 Constant                                  0.9640      0.9578       0.9892
                                          (0.0516)    (0.0520)     (0.0547)
 Baseline controls?                          NO           YES        NO
 Sample mean of dependent variable         0.6116         0.6111   0.6135
 Number of observations                     1004            990      890
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates are from linear probability models. “Baseline controls”
includes baseline Clorin usage and water chlorination, general health behaviors and attitudes, household
demographics, and locality …xed e¤ects, as in appendix table 2, standardized to have a sample mean of 0.
Fourteen households are missing data on one or more baseline controls due to questionnaire refusals. Column
(3) restricts the sample to respondents reached for the follow-up survey.




                                                     45
Table 3 Evidence on screening e¤ ects

Panel A: Screening on subsequent use of Clorin
                                                      (1A)                           (2A)
 Dependent variable                         Water currently treated       Drinking water contains
                                                  with Clorin?                  free chlorine?
                                           (follow-up; self-reported)      (follow-up; measured)
 O¤er price                                          0.0373                        0.0321
 (100 Kw)                                           (0.0149)                      (0.0150)
 Transaction price …xed e¤ects?                       YES                           YES
 Sample mean of dependent variable                   0.5147                        0.5332
 Number of observations                                546                           542


Panel B: Screening conditional on baseline demographics
                                                  (1B)                               (2B)
 Dependent variable                     Water currently treated           Drinking water contains
                                              with Clorin?                      free chlorine?
                                       (follow-up; self-reported)          (follow-up; measured)
 O¤er price                                          0.0327                        0.0293
 (100 Kw)                                           (0.0150)                      (0.0149)
 Transaction price …xed e¤ects?                       YES                           YES
 Baseline demographics?                               YES                           YES
 Sample mean of dependent variable                   0.5140                        0.5366
 Number of observations                                537                           533


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates are from linear probability models with …xed e¤ects for
transaction price, estimated on the sample of households that purchased Clorin in the door-to-door marketing
intervention and were reached for the follow-up survey. “Baseline demographics” includes measures of age,
schooling, marital status, pregnancy, household composition, wealth, and locality …xed e¤ects, as in appendix
table 2. Nine households are missing data on one or more baseline demographics due to questionnaire refusals.
We lack data on measured chlorination for 4 households due to a lack of stored drinking water for testing.




                                                     46
Table 4 Evidence on sunk-cost e¤ ects

Panel A: Tests for sunk-cost e¤ ect
                                       (1A)       (2A)         (3A)          (4A)       (5A)        (6A)
 Dependent variable                       Water currently treated              Drinking water contains
                                                with Clorin?                         free chlorine?
                                         (follow-up; self-reported)             (follow-up; measured)
 Sample                                All      Sunk-cost household?          All      Sunk-cost household?
                                                  Yes         No                         Yes         No
 Transaction price                    0.0097     0.0348        0.0042       -0.0071     -0.0106       -0.0079
 (100 Kw)                            (0.0133)   (0.0334)      (0.0149)     (0.0133)    (0.0330)      (0.0147)
 Di¤ erence                                               0.0306                               -0.0027
 (sunk-cost vs. non-sunk-cost)                           (0.0366)                              (0.0361)
 O¤er price …xed e¤ects?               YES         YES          YES          YES         YES           YES
 Baseline controls?                    YES         YES          YES          YES         YES           YES
 Sample mean of dep. var.             0.5140     0.4336        0.5354       0.5366      0.4732        0.5534
 No. of obs.                            537       113           424           533         112           421

Panel B: Tests for e¤ ect of act of paying
                                    (1B)       (2B)         (3B)             (4B)       (5B)        (6B)
 Dependent variable                    Water currently treated                 Drinking water contains
                                             with Clorin?                            free chlorine?
                                      (follow-up; self-reported)                (follow-up; measured)
 Sample                                All      Sunk-cost household?          All      Sunk-cost household?
                                                  Yes         No                         Yes         No
 Transaction price > 0                0.0565     0.1840        0.0372       0.0318      0.0816        0.0240
                                     (0.0442)   (0.1030)      (0.0496)     (0.0440)    (0.1020)      (0.0493)
 Di¤ erence                                               0.1468                                0.0576
 (sunk-cost vs. non-sunk-cost)                           (0.1144)                              (0.1133)
 O¤er price …xed e¤ects?               YES         YES          YES          YES         YES           YES
 Baseline controls?                    YES         YES          YES          YES         YES           YES
 Sample mean of dep. var.             0.5140     0.4336        0.5354       0.5366      0.4732        0.5534
 No. of obs.                            537       113           424           533         112           421

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates are from linear probability models with …xed e¤ects for
o¤er price, estimated on the sample of households that purchased Clorin in the door-to-door marketing
intervention and were reached for the follow-up survey. “Baseline controls” includes baseline Clorin usage
and water chlorination, general health behaviors and attitudes, household demographics, and locality …xed
e¤ects, as in appendix table 2. We lack data on measured chlorination for 4 households due to a lack of stored
drinking water for testing. Estimates for sunk-cost and non-sunk-cost households are from fully interacted
models; estimates of the di¤erences between the coe¢ cients for these samples are from interactions between
the relevant independent variable and a dummy for whether the household displays the sunk-cost e¤ect in
hypothetical choices.

                                                     47
Appendix Figure 1 Sample coupon from door-to-door marketing




                                           600


Notes: Figure shows a sample discount coupon from door-to-door marketing experiment. Coupon shows the
…nal price at which the bottle transacted.




                                                 48
Appendix Figure 2 Predicting use: willingness-to-pay vs. demographics

                                                                         Greatest Willingness-to-pay       Greatest Predicted Use

                                                 0.20
                                                                                                                                           800 Kw
     Share of Buyers Using Clorin (Normalized)




                                                                                                             600 Kw


                                                 0.15
                                                                                                500 Kw                     700 Kw




                                                 0.10

                                                                                400 Kw


                                                 0.05




                                                 0.00         300 Kw
                                                        0.2   0.25        0.3            0.35        0.4     0.45       0.5         0.55       0.6
                                                                       Percentile of Willingness-to-pay / Predicted Use


Notes: Top (blue) line shows share reporting Clorin use among buyers at or above each percentile of
willingness-to-pay, with willingness-to-pay distribution based on estimated demand model from column (1)
of table 2. Bottom (pink) line shows share reporting Clorin use among buyers at or above each percentile of
predicted Clorin use, with predicted use determined through an OLS regression of self-reported use on base-
line demographic characteristics (age, schooling, marital status, pregnancy, household composition, wealth,
and locality …xed e¤ects, as in appendix table 2). Share of use at lowest percentile is normalized to 0.




                                                                                                49
Appendix Table 1 Demographic characteristics of the baseline sample

                                                         (1)                (2)              (3)
 Source                                            Baseline survey    Baseline survey       DHS
 Sample                                                  All            Ages 15-49       Ages 15-49
 Age                                                  32.8257            30.1593          27.1425
                                                      (0.3130)           (0.2254)         (0.2948)
 Years of completed schooling                           6.6418             7.0285           7.2379
                                                       (0.1013)           (0.1013)         (0.1209)
 Married?                                               0.8000             0.8327           0.5642
                                                       (0.0113)           (0.0111)         (0.0170)
 Currently pregnant?                                    0.1143             0.1254           0.0754
                                                       (0.0090)           (0.0099)         (0.0091)
 Total number of living children                        3.1867             2.9484           2.1932
                                                       (0.0630)           (0.0614)         (0.0791)
 Number of children in household under age 5            0.9619             0.9875           1.1767
                                                       (0.0245)           (0.0253)         (0.0365)
 Household owns a radio?                                0.5540             0.5721           0.6266
                                                       (0.0140)           (0.0148)         (0.0166)
 Household owns a television?                           0.4992             0.5151           0.5501
                                                       (0.0141)           (0.0149)         (0.0171)
 Household owns a refrigerator?                         0.1905             0.1940           0.2686
                                                       (0.0111)           (0.0118)         (0.0152)
 Household owns a bicycle?                              0.1000             0.1077           0.1213
                                                       (0.0085)           (0.0092)         (0.0112)
 Household owns a motorcycle?                           0.0008             0.0009           0.0012
                                                       (0.0008)           (0.0009)         (0.0012)
 Household owns a car?                                  0.0230             0.0258           0.0836
                                                       (0.0042)           (0.0047)         (0.0095)
 Number of observations                                  1260               1124             849
Notes: Table shows means of variables, with standard errors in parentheses. Columns (1) and (2) use data
from our baseline survey. Column (3) uses data on Lusaka residents from the 2001 Demographic and Health
Survey (DHS) of Zambia. Actual number of observations in columns (1) and (2) varies slightly across
variables due to questionnaire refusals.




                                                  50
Appendix Table 2 Testing the balance of observables across treatment conditions

                                                   (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)
 Sample                                            All      Marketing          Purchased Clorin
 Dependent variable                               O¤ er        O¤ er      Transaction     Transaction
                                                  Price        Price         Price         Price > 0
 Water currently treated with Clorin?              0.1474      0.2040        -0.1171         0.0668
 (baseline; self-reported)                       (0.1114)    (0.1250)       (0.1747)        (0.0525)
 Drinking water contains free chlorine?            0.0764      0.0150         0.3300         0.0643
 (baseline; measured)                            (0.0892)    (0.1003)       (0.1412)        (0.0425)
 Use of soap before handling food                  0.0032     -0.0881         0.2281         0.0860
 (index)                                         (0.1546)    (0.1735)       (0.2519)        (0.0757)
 Use of soap after using toilet                   -0.3067     -0.1992         0.0863         -0.0192
 (index)                                         (0.1593)    (0.1782)       (0.2564)        (0.0771)
 Attitude toward water puri…cation                -0.0828     -0.3628         0.5490         0.0645
 (index)                                         (0.2258)    (0.2531)       (0.3564)        (0.1071)
 Age in years                                      0.0032      0.0023        -0.0002         -0.0010
                                                 (0.0046)    (0.0052)       (0.0076)        (0.0023)
 Ever attended school?                            -0.0986     -0.1235         0.2510         0.1501
                                                 (0.1830)    (0.2050)       (0.2874)        (0.0864)
 Years of completed schooling                      0.0097      0.0187        -0.0352         -0.0157
                                                 (0.0189)    (0.0215)       (0.0305)        (0.0092)
 Currently married?                                0.0870      0.0381        -0.1274         0.0416
                                                 (0.1160)    (0.1327)       (0.1881)        (0.0565)
 Currently pregnant?                              -0.0118      0.0768        -0.0400         -0.0037
                                                 (0.1355)    (0.1550)       (0.2222)        (0.0668)
 Ever given birth to any children?                -0.1571     -0.1471         0.2126         -0.0410
                                                 (0.1806)    (0.2065)       (0.2913)        (0.0876)
 No. of children in household under age 5          0.0474      0.0596         0.0904         0.0381
                                                 (0.0536)    (0.0609)       (0.0918)        (0.0276)
 No. of people in household                       -0.0196     -0.0106        -0.0377         -0.0042
                                                 (0.0193)    (0.0214)       (0.0298)        (0.0090)
 Share of durables owned                           0.1286      0.0603         0.2612         0.0100
                                                 (0.2885)    (0.3265)       (0.4499)        (0.1352)
 Locality …xed e¤ects?                              YES         YES            YES            YES
 Fixed e¤ects for o¤er price?                      NO           NO            YES             YES
 Fixed e¤ects for transaction price?               YES         YES             NO              NO
 F -test that all coe¢ cients are 0                0.64        0.64           0.90            0.93
 p-value of F -test                               0.8719      0.8686         0.5802          0.5395
 Number of observations                            1244         990            605            605
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. “Marketing”refers to households reached for door-to-door marketing.
All variables measured as of baseline survey. Transaction price …xed e¤ects excluded from F -test in columns
(1) and (2). O¤er price …xed e¤ects excluded from F -test in columns (3) and (4). Prices in units of 100 Kw.




                                                    51
Appendix Table 3 Determinants of sample attrition

                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
 Sample                                        All      Marketing     Purchased Clorin


 Dependent variable                         Marketing   Follow-up   Follow-up   Follow-up
 O¤er price (100 Kw)                         0.0021      0.0022
                                            (0.0073)    (0.0069)
 Transaction price (100 Kw)                  -0.0031                 0.0063
                                            (0.0068)                (0.0080)
 Transaction price > 0                                                           0.0325
                                                                                (0.0267)
 Water currently treated with Clorin?        0.0074      -0.0122     -0.0092     -0.0121
 (baseline; self-reported)                  (0.0302)    (0.0267)    (0.0338)    (0.0338)
 Drinking water contains free chlorine?      0.0269      0.0152      -0.0057     -0.0057
 (baseline; measured)                       (0.0242)    (0.0214)    (0.0274)    (0.0273)
 Use of soap before handling food            0.0355      -0.0131     0.0004      -0.0010
 (index)                                    (0.0420)    (0.0371)    (0.0487)    (0.0487)
 Use of soap after using toilet              -0.0268     -0.0069     -0.0231     -0.0220
 (index)                                    (0.0434)    (0.0381)    (0.0496)    (0.0495)
 Attitude toward water puri…cation           0.0508      0.0965      0.0838      0.0852
 (index)                                    (0.0613)    (0.0541)    (0.0690)    (0.0689)
 Age in years                                0.0016      0.0022      0.0034      0.0035
                                            (0.0013)    (0.0011)    (0.0015)    (0.0015)
 Ever attended school?                       -0.0063     -0.0224     -0.0035     -0.0068
                                            (0.0498)    (0.0438)    (0.0556)    (0.0557)
 Years of completed schooling                -0.0052     0.0028      0.0078      0.0081
                                            (0.0051)    (0.0046)    (0.0059)    (0.0059)
 Currently married?                          0.0317      0.0214      0.0811      0.0789
                                            (0.0314)    (0.0283)    (0.0364)    (0.0364)
 Currently pregnant?                         -0.0085     0.0215      -0.0410     -0.0412
                                            (0.0369)    (0.0331)    (0.0430)    (0.0429)
 Ever given birth to any children?           -0.0447     -0.0033     -0.0242     -0.0215
                                            (0.0490)    (0.0441)    (0.0563)    (0.0563)
 No. of children in household under age 5    0.0133      0.0044      -0.0105     -0.0112
                                            (0.0145)    (0.0130)    (0.0178)    (0.0178)
 No. of people in household                  0.0074      0.0109      0.0121      0.0120
                                            (0.0053)    (0.0046)    (0.0058)    (0.0058)
 Share of durables owned                     0.1763      0.0638      0.0020      0.0033
                                            (0.0784)    (0.0697)    (0.0870)    (0.0869)
 Locality …xed e¤ects?                        YES         YES         YES         YES
 Fixed e¤ects for o¤er price?                 NO          NO          YES         YES
 Fixed e¤ects for transaction price?          NO          YES         NO          NO
 F -test that control coe¢   cients are 0     2.05        1.61        1.50        1.50
 p-value of F -test                          0.0060      0.0512      0.0837      0.0833
 Number of observations                       1244         990        605         605
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. “Marketing”refers to households reached for door-to-door marketing.
“Purchased Clorin”refers to households that purchased Clorin during door-to-door marketing. All variables
measured as of baseline survey. O¤er price and transaction price variables excluded from F -tests.



                                                          52
     Appendix Table 4 Intertemporal implications of the model

                                    (1)                       (2)                         (3)               (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)
      Dependent variable       Have Clorin         Water currently treated     Drinking water contains    Water currently treated     Drinking water contains
                              in household?             with Clorin?                free chlorine?              with Clorin?                free chlorine?
                           (baseline; inventory)   (baseline; self-reported)    (baseline; measured)     (follow-up; self-reported)    (follow-up; measured)
      Sample: Clorin in             All                      Yes                        Yes                Yes            No            Yes          No
      home at baseline?
      O¤er price                  0.0182                    -0.0067                    -0.0093            -0.0289       0.0512         -0.0046     0.0386
      (100 Kw)                   (0.0104)                  (0.0245)                   (0.0265)           (0.0288)      (0.0169)       (0.0294)    (0.0171)

      No. of obs.                   614                      133                        133                117           429            117          425

     Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. See appendix A for details. Sample consists of households who purchased Clorin at marketing stage.




53
Appendix Table 5 Additional robustness checks

                              E¤ect on                                  E¤ect on use:
                              purchase:
       Speci…cation           O¤er price     Use measure      O¤er price     Transaction price
                              (100 Kw)                        (100 Kw)          (100 Kw)
 (1)   Main tables              -0.0664      Self-reported      0.0373             0.0097
                               (0.0093)                        (0.0149)          (0.0133)
                                             Measured           0.0321            -0.0071
                                                               (0.0150)          (0.0133)
 (2)   Probit                    -0.0678     Self-reported      0.0377             0.0111
                                (0.0097)                       (0.0151)          (0.0142)
                                             Measured           0.0325            -0.0077
                                                               (0.0152)          (0.0143)
 (3)   Marketer                  -0.0633     Self-reported      0.0351             0.0103
       …xed                     (0.0092)                       (0.0151)          (0.0135)
       e¤ects                                Measured           0.0301            -0.0099
                                                               (0.0150)          (0.0132)
 (4)   Average                     —         Self-reported      0.0381             0.0129
       treatment                                               (0.0148)          (0.0143)
       e¤ects                                Measured           0.0324            -0.0108
                                                               (0.0150)          (0.0148)
 (5)   Controlling for           -0.0706     Self-reported      0.0341             0.0144
       quality                  (0.0098)                       (0.0144)          (0.0130)
       assessments                           Measured           0.0311            -0.0057
                                                               (0.0149)          (0.0133)
 (6)   Ordered probit            Underlying parameter           0.0701            -0.0171
       on free chlorine            (Standard error)            (0.0336)          (0.0314)
                               [Implied marginal e¤ect]        [0.0273]          [-0.0064]
 (7)   Ordered probit            Underlying parameter           0.0695            -0.0121
       on recency                  (Standard error)            (0.0319)          (0.0294)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. See appendix B for details. E¤ect of o¤er price on purchase estimated
on sample of households reached during marketing. E¤ect of o¤er price on use estimated on sample of
households that purchased Clorin during door-to-door marketing intervention, in a speci…cation that includes
transaction price …xed e¤ects. E¤ect of transaction price (and positive transaction price) on use estimated on
sample of households that purchased Clorin during door-to-door marketing intervention, in a speci…cation
that includes o¤er price …xed e¤ects and baseline controls (baseline Clorin usage and water chlorination,
general health behaviors and attitudes, household demographics, and locality …xed e¤ects, as in appendix
table 2).




                                                     54
