                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 LABOR MARKET INSTITUTIONS AROUND THE WORLD

                                         Richard B. Freeman

                                        Working Paper 13242
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13242


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Labor Market Institutions Around the World
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 13242
July 2007
JEL No. J01

                                                ABSTRACT

The paper documents the large cross-country differences in labor institutions that make them a candidate
explanatory factor for the divergent economic performance of countries and reviews what economists
have learned about the effects of these institutions on economic outcomes. It identifies three ways
in which institutions affect economic performance: by altering incentives, by facilitating efficient bargaining,
and by increasing information, communication, and trust. The evidence shows that labor institutions
reduce the dispersion of earnings and income inequality, which alters incentives, but finds equivocal
effects on other aggregate outcomes, such as employment and unemployment. Given weaknesses
in the cross-country data on which most studies focus, the paper argues for increased use of micro-data,
simulations, and experiments to illuminate how labor institutions operate and affect outcomes.

Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org
It was six men of Hindustan                                                                                  3
To learning much inclined,
Who went to see the Elephant
(Though all of them were blind)
That each by observation
Might satisfy the mind. (Saxe)


       Mandated works councils. Employment protection laws. Minimum wages. Extension of

collective bargaining coverage. Lifetime employment. Peak level collective bargaining. Wage

flexibility. Teams. Job rotation. Temporary employment contracts. Social dialogue.

       At the turn of the 21st century, questions regarding labor market institutions replaced macro-

economic policy at the center of much policy debate in advanced economies. By ascribing the high

unemployment in European Union countries to labor institutions that reduced wage and employment

flexibility, the OECD’s 1994 Jobs Study (OECD 1994a, 1994b) directed the attention of policy-makers

and economists to institutions that mainstream economics had previously viewed as peripheral to

aggregate economic performance. The Jobs Study recommended that countries deregulate labor markets

to increase flexibility in working time; make wages and labor costs more responsive to market pressures;

weaken employment security provisions and unemployment benefit systems; and introduce active labor

market policies – training programs, job-finding assistance to workers, subsidies to employers to hire the

long-term unemployed, and special programs for youths leaving school.

       This perspective marked a giant shift in the attitude of mainstream economics toward labor

institutions. From the 1970s through the mid 1980s or so, most economists favored macro-economic

explanations and cures for economic problems (recall the battles between monetarist and Keynesian

policies). They viewed labor institutions as peripheral to economic performance. In the 1990s, however,

the higher employment rate and more rapid productivity growth of the US than of major European

countries despite similar “responsible” macro-economic policies directed attention to the possible role of

labor market institutions in explaining differences in aggregate economic performance.

       How much of the varying economic performance of capitalist economies can reasonably be
    attributed to labor institutions? Which outcomes do those institutions influence – the distribution of        4

    income, allocation of labor across sectors, productivity, inflation, economic growth? Through what

    channels do institutions affect outcomes?

            This essay reviews what economists know about these questions. Section I documents the large

    cross-country differences in labor institutions that make them a candidate explanatory factor for the

    divergent economic performance of countries. Section II examines the ways institutions can affect

    behavior and outcomes by altering incentives, enabling groups to engage in efficient bargaining per the

    Coase Theorem1, and by improving information, communication, and trust. Turning from what labor

    institutions might do to evidence on what they actually do, Section III shows that labor institutions reduce

    income inequality but has equivocal effects on other aggregate outcomes, such as employment and

    unemployment in the advanced countries on which most research has focused. Section IV considers three

    possible interpretations of the empirical findings and ways to improve our knowledge of how the

    institutional “Elephant” affects economic performance.

    I. Variation in labor institutions and economic performance among countries

            The starting fact for analyzing labor market institutions across countries is that countries evince

    widely varying institutional arrangements. The list at the outset of the paper can be easily extended:

    apprenticeship programs, occupational health and safety rules, defined benefit and defined contribution

    pension plans; mandated works councils; equal employment legislation; and so on. While economists do

    not have a single tight definition of an institution, per Justice Potter’s famous statement about

    pornography, they know institutions when they see them, and they see them everywhere.2

            Exhibit 1 documents the variety of labor institutions among OECD countries and in the Asian

    “Tiger” economies. It records quantitative rankings of country labor markets by their market vs

1
    The Coase Theorem holds that absent transaction costs, decision-makers will bargain to efficient outcomes
  regardless of the initial distribution of property rights. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coase_Theorem
2
   The Justice wrote, “I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced
within that shorthand description; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it,.” http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?court=US&vol=378&invol=184
    institutional orientation, measures of specific institutional arrangements, and the share of social           5

    expenditures in GDP. Column 1 gives the ranking of countries by the market orientation of their labor

    market from the Fraser Institute’s “economic freedom” index. Since the 1980s the Institute has produced

    an index of economic freedom based on metrics for “personal choice, voluntary exchange, freedom to

    compete, and protection of person and property” (Fraser Institute, 2003, p 5). Beginning in 2001 the

    Institute included six indicators of labor institutions in its economic freedom index for 58 countries. The

    Fraser rankings give high rank (low numbers) to countries that rely more on markets, so that the rank1

    implies that a country is the leading country in using market forces to set employment, wages, working

    conditions while a country with rank of, say 57, implies that that country relies greatly on institutions.

           The conservative orientation of the Fraser Institute leads it to define economic freedom in a way

    that privileges the rights of capital compared to the rights of labor. The Institute regards protection of

    property as contributing to economic freedom but protection of labor as reducing that freedom (on the

    grounds that protective institutions limit the ability of businesses to make purely market-based decisions).

    As a result in 2003 countries with little or no labor protection, such as Uganda, the United Arab Emirates,

    Zambia, and Haiti, ranked at the top of its index of labor market freedom while countries with well

    developed legal systems to protect workers, such as Germany and Sweden, ranked near the bottom.3 But,

    nomenclature aside, the Institute’s index measures the market vs institutional orientation of economies in a

    way that fits with general observation for advanced countries, in that its index places the US higher in

    reliance on markets than European economies.

           Column 2 gives the rankings of countries in the market orientation of their labor market from a

    very different survey -- the Harvard Labor and Work Life Program’s Global Labor Survey (GLS). This

    Internet-based survey asked union leaders, labor law professors, and other experts around the world to

    report on the actual situation of labor in their country. Because respondents were generally favorable to



3
 This scoring creates a negative relation between “economic freedom” in the labor market and GDP per capita for
all countries, while the overall freedom index is positively correlated with GDP per capita (Freeman, 2002).
    labor institutions (Chor and Freeman, 2005), it provides a useful counterpart to the Fraser index. The      6

    rankings in column 2 correspond closely to those in column 1, demonstrating that persons with differing

    ideological persuasions see the institution/market orientation of economies in analogous ways.

           Columns 3-4 turn to measures of union density and collective bargaining coverage. Historically

    unions have been the major organization representing workers, and collective bargaining has been the

    main mechanism by which they raise wages. The density data show wide and increasing variation in the

    percentage of workers in unions among advanced countries. In 1980 the five countries with the highest

    union density averaged 67.8% while the five countries with the lowest density averaged 18.9%, for a ratio

    of 3.6 to 1.0. In 2000, the five most unionized countries had an average density of 66.2% while the five

    least unionized countries had a density of 12.5%, giving a ratio of 5.3 to 1.0 (data from Visser, 2006).

    The percentage of workers covered by collective bargaining in column 4 shows greater variation. In the

    US, UK, Canada, New Zealand and Japan, the rate of collective bargaining coverage approximates the rate

    of unionization, so that declining union density produces commensurate declines in collective bargaining

    coverage. By contrast, many EU countries extend collective bargaining contracts to all workers and firms

    in a sector, so that the majority of workers are covered by collective bargaining regardless of union

    density. This pattern is most striking for France, whose collective bargaining coverage is among the

    highest in the world despite France having a rate of unionization below that in the US! In 1980 the five

    countries with the highest level of collective bargaining coverage had 2.8 times the coverage of the five

    countries with the lowest level of collective bargaining coverage. In 2000, the ratio of coverage in the five

    most highly covered countries to coverage in the five least covered countries had risen to 4.6.4

           Column 5 records OECD measures of employment protection legislation (EPL) – legal rules

    protect workers against layoffs by requiring sizeable severance pay if the firm lays them off and in many

    cases require that the firm negotiate with a works council on a social plan for retraining. The exhibit


4
 The coverage for the top five was 87% in 1980 and 91% in 2000. The coverage for the bottom five was 31% in
1980 and 20% in 2000. OECD Employment Outlook 2004, table 3.3. I have excluded the transition economy new
entrants to the OECD from this analysis.
shows that the US and the other Anglo-American countries (UK, Canada, Ireland, Australia, New               7

Zealand) have weak employment protection legislation compared to other advanced economies. (Freeman,

Boxall, and Haynes, 2007). The Anglo-American economy with the strongest EPL regulations, Australia,

had weaker regulations than the European countries with the weakest protection, Denmark, and

Switzerland. The US, which operates in large part by employment-at-will has the lowest EPL score. In

the US firms own jobs and can replace workers for any business or other (non-discriminatory) reason.

       The last column of Exhibit 1 gives the ratio of government social expenditures to net national

income. High shares of national income going to social expenditures imply more extensive welfare states.

The US and Japan have low ratios. The Anglo-American country with the highest social expenditure ratio

is the UK, whose spending falls below all of the other countries save Japan and Spain. At the other end of

the spectrum the Scandinavian countries have relatively high social expenditure shares of national income.

       As a crude statistical test of the difference in labor institutions between the Anglo-American

economies and other advanced economies, Freeman, Boxall, and Haynes (2007) calculated t-statistics of

differences in the mean values of several measures of labor institutions between the Anglo-American and

other advanced countries. Exhibit 2 shows that most of the differences are large and statistically

significant. Executives in the Anglo-American countries, for example, report greater control over wages,

ability to link pay to productivity; and power over hiring and firing than do executives in the other

advanced countries. Similarly, labor practitioners in the Anglo-American countries report a greater tilt

toward business in labor market conditions and regulations, in government’s attitude in labor disputes

provision of employee benefits, and in forming unions than practitioners in the other advanced countries.

Classifying Wage-setting institutions

       From the 1970s through the mid 1980s, analyses of labor institutions viewed the aggregate

economic outcomes of countries with “neo-corporatist” labor arrangements -- centralized wage-setting

between peak level national union organizations and employer associations – as superior to outcomes in

countries where market forces or decentralized collective bargaining set wages and conditions of work.
       The studies explained the success of centralized bargaining in terms of the ability of national bargainers 8

       to adjust readily to aggregate economic shocks, notably the 1970s oil price increases. By contrast, from

       the late 1980s through the mid 2000s, most studies focused on the superior employment and productivity

       growth of the US compared to the EU, with due allowance for high employment in Scandinavia.

              To measure country wage-setting institutions researchers developed indices of centralization

       and/or coordination in wage setting. Although these indices relied on limited descriptive data on wage

       practices and varied among analysts, they gave a roughly similar picture of the role of institutions in wage

       setting (see OECD Employment Outlook 1997, table 3.4) -- one that resembles the pattern in Exhibit 1.

       All the indices rate the US as having one of the most decentralized systems of wage-setting and the

       Scandinavian countries as among the most institution-driven. Analysts have, however, disagreed about the

       placement of some countries along the institutional/market scale (Kenworthy, 2001). For instance, some

       view Japan as “corporatist” on the basis of its Shunto offensive and strong business-government relations;

       while others view Japan as decentralized on the basis of its enterprise level unionism, bonus pay system,

       and lack of a centralized bargaining structure or strong government wage-setting regulations. Given

       Japan’s success in overcoming wage and price inflation in the 1970s, whether analysts place Japan as

       corporatist or liberal colors how one assesses the relation between institutions and outcomes in that

       period.5 Another country that has created problems is Switzerland, which has also had good aggregate

       economic performance.

              In ensuing years, the OECD has developed new and improved measures of wage setting and other

       institutions in OECD countries over time. In 2004 it placed countries’ wage setting into five categories

       reflecting the centralization of bargaining; and into five categories reflecting co-ordination of bargaining.

       Both categorizations resemble those in Exhibit 1, albeit with changes over time. Looking at the Anglo-

       American economies, the OECD places the US, UK, Canada, and New Zealand in the most market

       determined wage group; Australia in the second most market determined group; and puts Ireland, which

5
    The range for Japan is from the 3rd or 4th most centralized or coordinated to among the most highly decentralized.
    sets pay through a national wage pact, into the second most centralized wage-setting group (OECD,             9

    2004, table 3.5).6 Still, there are problems with some classifications. The OECD categorized Italy in the

    1980s as have company-based wage setting although during that period Italy set wages through the

    centralized Scala Mobile, which reduced dispersion of pay to Scandinavian levels (Erickson and Ichino,

    1995). Taking a different approach, Botero, et al, (2004) coded laws regulating employment contracts,

    industrial relations, and the social security regulations of 85 countries to form indices of de jure regulation

    of labor procedures. This analysis extends the measures of institutions to many developing countries and

    links the institutions to the legal traditions of the country. But because countries differ in the way they

    implement legal statutes, the indices provide only a crude measure of the de facto institutions that can

    affect economic outcomes. Indices based on legal regulations are particularly suspect for developing

    countries, many of whom do not have strong rules of law. Consistent with this, the legal indices are more

    weakly correlated with other measures of the institutional orientation of countries than are the measures of

    actual practices correlated among themselves (Chor and Freeman, 2005). The legal indices show that the

    advanced Anglo-American countries rely less on labor regulation and have weaker protections for workers

    than other (non-Asian Tiger) advanced countries in industrial relations and employment laws but their

    measures of social security regulations miss the huge difference in social spending shown in Exhibit 1.

           Outside the advanced OECD countries, quantitative information on de facto differences in labor

    market practices is sparse. The Global Competitiveness Report, the Global Labor Survey, and the Fraser

    Institute include developing countries in their data sets. The ILO measured unionization and collective

    bargaining coverage for some developing countries in its World Labour Report 1997-98, (ILO, 1997) and

    records the ILO conventions that countries have signed (http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/english/convdisp1.htm).

    But counts of union membership or coverage and conventions signed have different meanings in different

    countries. In 2007 the national union federation with the largest reported membership in the world is the


Soskice 1990 finds that the categorization of countries changes some generalizations.
6
  The six Anglo-American economies averaged 1.8 on the wage-setting centralization scale while the other
advanced OECD countries averaged 2.8, where the scaling places lower value on more market-reliant systems.
      All Chinese Federation of Trade Unions, which is a branch of the government/party rather than an             10

      independent union organization, though it may be moving more toward protecting workers in China’s new

      labor market. Neither the ILO, World Bank, nor other organization concerned with economic

      development has studied labor institutions in developing countries with the depth that the OECD has done

      for advanced countries.7 The biggest lacuna is in data for workers in the informal sector, where most

      developing country employees work, and where the government regulations and traditional unions that

      underlie most taxonomies are largely irrelevant.

      Variation in economic performance among countries

              The dependent variables in cross-country analyses of labor market institutions are measures of

      aggregate economic performance, such as rates of growth of GDP per capita, income inequality,

      employment and unemployment, productivity growth, inflation, and growth of real earnings. These

      outcomes have varied greatly among advanced and developing countries over time. Among advanced

      countries, much attention has been on employment differences between the US and Western Europe and

      on productivity growth differences between the US and Japan. But, the US aside, there is wide variation in

      outcomes among other OECD countries. For instance, Ireland more than doubled its GDP per capita from

      1979 to 2005 while France increased its GDP per capita more slowly. Spain had 20 plus percent

      unemployment for two decades while unemployment was low in Japan. In the 1990s through mid-2000s

      small European Union countries had lower unemployment rates than Germany, France, and Italy, while in

      the 1990s through the mid-2000s Australia had lower unemployment and more rapid economic growth

      than New Zealand.

              Economic performance has varied even more widely among developing countries (Easterly, et al

      1993). In the 1960s and 1970s Africa had better growth experience than much of Asia, and higher GDP

      per capita than India or China. In the 1980s through the mid 2000s, China and then India had rapid

      growth, albeit with different labor institutions and economic and political structures. In the Maoist era,

7
    Rama and Artetcona (2002) developed a World Bank labor database for all countries by gathering labor indicators
    China had essentially no labor market (Walder, 1986). Labor bureaus assigned jobs to workers in state- 11

    owned enterprises. Managers of firms had little right to hire and fire or determine pay. A national grid

    determined wages. Mobility of labor was restricted to local areas as the need to have hukou residence

    permits kept potential migrants from moving to the large cities. This situation changed when China began

    its market reforms so that by the early 2000s, the labor market determined wages and employment. Over

    the same period, many Latin American economies stagnated, and the share of the work force in informal

    sector employment grew. Within Latin America, however, some countries did well and others poorly. In

    Africa, many economies stagnated or deteriorated, though again with considerable cross-country variation.

           Research on labor institutions in developing economies has largely focused on the danger that

    institutional interventions distort market outcomes and reduce growth. The Harris-Todaro model of

    unemployment and migration attributed high unemployment in African cities to high urban wages

    resulting from government policies and trade unions (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harris-Todaro_Model).

    In this analysis, institutions created excessively high wages in urban areas; which in turn drew rural

    migrants to cities where they would wait unemployed for jobs. In 1990, the World Bank warned countries

    that institutions designed to improve worker well being in fact harmed those workers:

           Labor market policies – minimum wages, job security regulations, and social security – are

           usually intended to raise welfare or reduce exploitation. But they actually work to raise the cost of

           labor in the formal sector and reduce labor demand ... increase the supply of labor to the rural

           and urban informal sectors, and thus depress labor incomes where most of the poor are found.

           (World Bank 1990, p. 63).

    In ensuing years, the accumulation of evidence on these policies led the World Bank to modify its views

    (World Bank, 1995) but its 1990 statement still represents a widely held perspective.

    II. Should Labor Institutions Matter?

           The hypothesis that labor institutions are a prime determinant of aggregate economic outcomes is a


from various sources into a single place, but the Bank did not pursue an on-going effort to improve the measures.
flattering one to specialists in comparative labor analysis. But, flattery aside, is it reasonable to expect 12

labor practices to have large effects on aggregate economies? There is an alternative perspective that

institutions are largely veneer in a world dominated by fundamental economic forces. When I was in

graduate school, John Dunlop – an institutionalist par excellence – used the fable of Cantillon’s cock

(which I believe he learned from John Hicks) to express this view. Every morning the cock awakens

moments before sunrise and does what nature has programmed it to do: let out a mighty “cock-a-doodle-

do”. Observing the time sequence of cause and effect, the cock concludes that crowing induces the sun to

rise. So too, warned Dunlop, might union leaders, business, and government officials believe that what

they say or do, the way institutions operate, determines economic success. When you hear a union leader

attribute trend growth of real wages to unionism, a politician credit prosperity to their stewardship, or a

business leader attribute lucrative stock options in a rising share market to their productivity, you know

there is truth to the fable.

        Economic theory does not provide clear guidance to the effect of labor institutions on economic

performance. Comparative static analyses based on optimizing behavior in competitive markets predict

that institutions affect outcomes, usually in ways that reduce economic efficiency compared to what a

perfect market would do. But analyses that posit efficient bargaining among economic decision-makers

predict that institutions may affect distribution but not efficiency. When competition gives firms little

discretion to set prices or quantities, institutions have little scope to affect allocation or distribution. By

contrast, analyses that stress the role of information, communication, and trust in economic behavior, and

that regard resolving prisoner’s dilemma problems as critical in economic success, suggest that institutions

can improve efficiency. I consider each of these perspectives in turn.

Institutions affect outcomes

         Standard models in which decision-makers respond to price/wage incentives in market settings

show that responses to institutionally determined incentives can substantially impact distribution and

efficiency. Consider the traditional analysis of union wage effects. The union bargains for wages above
the market level, but does not bargain over employment. Faced with higher costs of labor, firms in            13

unionized sectors reduce employment, which reallocates labor to lower paid less productive activities in

the nonunion sector. The result is lower economic efficiency and higher inequality since otherwise similar

workers now receive different pay depending on union status. Or consider labor supply analyses of

unemployment insurance (UI) which predict that job losers raise their reservation wages and reduce job

search, increasing unemployment. The extent to which collective bargaining and UI “distort” outcomes

from what would exist in an ideal competitive market rests on the degree of responsiveness of decision-

makers to the institutionally determined incentives. If firms have high elasticity of demand for labor, the

change in the allocation of labor can be considerable. If the unemployed have a high elasticity of response

to unemployment benefits, they may remain jobless for long periods, which will depreciate their skills and

reduce supply-side pressures on wages to clear the labor market.

       Institutions also affect market outcomes by changing the maximand of decision-makers. Since

optimizing conditions equate marginal benefits from an action to the marginal costs of the action, an

institution that changes the marginal benefit function will alter outcomes just as does an institution that

changes the marginal costs. Institutions that alter marginal benefits can affect behavior in subtle ways.

Compare for instance the predicted effects of employee ownership on labor demand relative to the

predicted effects of profit sharing on demand behavior. Since both of these institutions are designed to

increase the rewards to workers from capitalism, one might expect that they have similar effects on labor

demand and employment, but analysis shows the opposite. In a price theoretic model of employee

ownership, where the employee owned firm seeks to maximize net revenues per worker, comparative

statics predicts that the firm will admit fewer members to the enterprise than a competitive firm would

hire. Even more striking, the employee-owned firm will reduce employment when the price of output

rises. This is because lower employment raises net revenues per worker when prices rise. But this is not

the end of the story. The employee-owned firm can make more for its members by hiring additional

workers without giving them ownership in the firm. By doing this, the employee owned firm will employ
the same number of workers and respond similarly to prices as a competitive firm while creating a dual 14

class of workers, employee-owners and standard wage-employees.

       By contrast, consider labor demand by a profit-maximizing firm that shares profits with workers

by paying them a fixed proportion of profits rather than fixed wages. Weitzman (1984) has shown that

when a firm pays workers a fixed share of profits per worker, the firm seeks to hire more workers than

would a competitive firm. In fact, the firm always tries to hire more workers, giving it an infinite demand

for labor. Each additional worker adds to sales and profits, just as an additional commissioned

salesperson adds to the profits of a marketing firm even if it cannibalizes some sales from existing

salespersons. The firm’s employment is limited by workers’ alternative opportunities rather than by the

cost of labor to the firm. As a result profit sharing can maintain full employment in the face of adverse

economic shocks. To the extent that Japan’s bonus compensation system – which pays of 4-6 months of

earnings via winter and summer bonuses -- operates as profit-sharing (Freeman and Weitzman, 1986), this

can help explain Japan’s more rapid recovery from economic shocks than countries that pay fixed wages.

       Employee ownership and profit sharing also affect supply behavior. Most proponents of these

institutions favor them because they give greater incentives to workers to work hard than do fixed wages.

But to succeed, these modes of compensation must overcome the “free rider” problem – the incentive that

each worker has to shirk and live off the effort of other employees when all workers share the fruits of any

individual’s extra effort. In an N employee workplace this is often called the 1/N problem since the

worker gets only 1/Nth of the reward for their effort. Overcoming the free rider problem may require

institutions – work groups of different types, weekly team meetings and discussion of work problems –and

a “participative” corporate culture that complements the incentive system.

       The bottom line is that by influencing both demand and supply, institutions have the potential for

impacting the aggregate economy.

Institutions do not matter

       Models of efficient bargaining predict that when firms/workers engage in bargaining, they “leave
no money on the table” and thus make the same decisions as a profit-maximizing firm. This is the             15

Coase Theorem at work in the world of labor institutions (Freeman, 1993b). As long as transactions costs

are negligible and someone has clear property rights to decisions, the bargaining parties produce

efficiently and agree over some division of the rewards from their joint effort. The analysis suggests that

institutionally determined rules, such as employment protection legislation, which some blame for

European high unemployment by making firms leery of hiring workers they cannot readily lay off in the

future in fact have no effect on employment. In the efficient bargaining model, the firm makes the

efficient layoff regardless of whether the worker or the firm “owns” the job. What EPL does is alter the

division of the profits from the efficient choice. With EPL the firm pays some of the profit from a layoff

to the worker to induce the worker to leave. Absent EPL the firm gets all of the profit from the decision.

In this model, institutions alter the distribution of income but not the efficiency of production.

       When market forces are so constraining that firms must choose profit-maximizing outcomes or go

out of business, institutional arrangements affect neither distribution nor efficiency. If a firm has a U-

shaped average cost curve and operates in a competitive market with free entry and exit, it either produces

at the bottom of the U-shaped curve or loses money and goes out of business. The need to make nonzero

or positive profits dictates decisions. Models of “zero intelligent agents”(Gode and Sunder, 1993) –

computer code that randomly selects the amount produced or price charged subject to the profits constraint

-- show the power of the profits constraint to produce competitive equilibrium rapidly absent any

optimizing behavior. This argument has been applied to the adverse impact of employee ownership on

employment. If an employee-owned firm makes large profits and limit entry, the workers whom the firm

does not admit have an incentive to form a new firm and enter the market. As a result a market with

worker-owned firms ends up in the same long run equilibrium as a market with profit-seeking firms. The

logic also dictates that union wage effects do not persist over time, since the firm that pays a higher wage

cannot survive competition from lower cost competitors. When firms do not have “rents” to share with

workers, institutions cannot affect distribution.
Situations when institutions improve outcomes                                                               16

       Institutions can increase information and communication flows inside firms, which can in turn

improve decisions by management and labor (Freeman and Lazear, 1995). Unions or works councils, for

instance, can facilitate the flow of information from workers to management because they give workers

some control over how the firm uses the information that workers provide. These institutions can also

increase the flow of information from management to workers by bargaining for open books, which raises

the likelihood that workers will give wage concessions when the firm is truly in crisis and avoid being

fooled into doing so when the firm cries “wolf” while continuing to earn profits. In addition, workers with

grievances will use firm-level institutions of voice to resolve problems rather than quit their employer,

which should reduce turnover costs and lead to greater investments in firm-specific skills. In the

Freeman-Lazear model, increasing the power of works councils raises output up to a point, after which

increasing output falls. The reason is that in this analysis worker groups and management maximize their

own income rather than their joint output, so that the worker dominated firm would shortchange capital,

just as the management-dominated firm would shortchange labor.

       Institutions can also improve market outcomes if they enable real markets to come closer to the

competitive ideal than those markets otherwise would have done. The belief that labor markets fall short

of the competitive ideal is associated with evidence that the wages of workers in the same local labor

market and occupation vary widely rather than cluster tightly around a single market wage. This result,

found in diverse US data sets over the years greatly impressed US institutional economists (Slichter, 1950;

Dunlop, 1956). To the extent that the large dispersion in pay reflects a failure of the competitive labor

market to establish a single price of labor, institutionally determined reductions in dispersion could bring

the market closer to the competitive ideal. Institutions can also make the dynamics of wage-setting closer

to the competitive model. Looking at changes over time in pay across industries, analysts have noted that

changes in countries with centralized bargaining more closely resemble the predictions of the competitive

model than changes in the market-driven US. The competitive model predicts that exogenous changes in
industrial productivity change the price of output but do not affect wages in an industry; while             17

exogenous changes in output prices raise output and employment but also do not affect wages (Council of

Economic Advisors, 1962; Salter 1960). These predictions hold in the Nordic countries where centralized

or coordinated bargaining link wages to national economic conditions rather than to sectoral conditions

but do not hold in the US, where changes in wages depend substantively on changes in sectoral prices and

productivity (Holmlund and Zetterberg, 1991; Teulings and Hartog, 1998).

       At the macro-level, the case for institutions is that they deal better with macro-economic problems,

such as inflation and balance of payments difficulties, than decentralized labor markets. The Nordic

Model of the open macro-economy posits that peak level unions and employers’ associations negotiate

changes in wages equal to productivity growth in traded sectors and changes in world prices for those

goods, which maintains fixed exchange rates (Aukrust, 1977; Milner and Wadensjö, 2001). By contrast,

wage-setting in local labor markets risks inflationary spirals, with wage increases in non-traded sectors

inducing wage increases in the traded goods sector that exceed productivity growth and increases in global

prices for the traded goods. Mancur Olson (1990) argued that centralized collective bargaining in small

open economies works because all-encompassing union organizations internalize the negative externalities

from wage bargaining at the firm or industry level. The International Labor Organization goes further to

claim that economic systems based on labor-management dialogue improves aggregate efficiency:

“Successful social dialogue structures and processes have the potential to resolve important economic and

social issues, encourage good governance, advance social and industrial peace and stability and boost

economic progress.”(ILO, Social Dialogue, 2007) Finally, even if institutions reduce efficiency, they can

still improve societal well being if they redistribute income in ways consistent with the country’s social

welfare function.

       In sum, there are arguments that institutions raise efficiency, reduce efficiency, and have no effect

on outcomes beyond distribution. To determine which arguments are valid for which institutions under

which economic conditions requires evidence on the actual link between institutions and outcomes, to
which I turn next.                                                                                              18

III. Institutions and Outcomes in Practice

        ‘Give your evidence,’ said the King; ‘and don't be nervous, or I'll have you executed on the spot.’

(Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, Chapter 11, ‘Who Stole the Tarts?’)

        Since cross-country differences in performance motivate many studies of labor institutions, it is

natural that the first wave of empirical analysis examined the cross section relation between institutional

arrangements and economic outcomes. These studies reported that countries with neo-corporatist

arrangements did better in adjusting to the economic problems of the 1980s than countries with more

market oriented labor markets (Bruno and Sachs, 1985; Crouch, 1985; Tarantelli, 1986). But it is difficult

to make strong statements about the effects of wage-setting institutions from cross-country data.

Countries differ in many other dimensions and policies. Maybe income tax policy, or employment

protection legislation, or product market regulations, or unemployment benefits rather than wage-setting

mechanisms underlie differences in aggregate outcomes. Since the number of advanced countries is small

relative to the number of institutions or policies, it hard to estimate effects for particular institutions. This

is one reason why many analyses link the configurations of institutions/policies captured in the

taxonomies of the institutional/market orientation of countries to outcomes. But this still leaves open the

possibility that an omitted cross-country factor outside the labor market underlies the pattern.

        The second type of study looks at changes in institutions. A generic model would be:

        (1) Yct = a + b Xct + T + I + uct, where c refers to country and t refers to time; Y is the outcome

variable of interest (or a vector of such variables); X are measures of institutions, T is a vector of year

dummies; and I is a vector of country dummies.

        By holding fixed country and year, this analysis infers the effects of policy by comparing the

change in outcomes in the country that changed policy (the treatment) with the change in outcomes in

countries that maintained policies (the controls). But developments in other countries are not necessarily a

good measure of what might have happened for the country that changed policies. Abadie, Diamond,
Hainmueller (2007) have developed a more sophisticated counterfactual in which the analyst uses a            19

composite of countries that give the best predictor of outcomes for the country prior to its change in

policy. Evidence that the proposed counterfactual predicts what might have happened in the country

before it changed policy increases the likelihood that the counterfactual is valid. Even if a given

institutional change produced a particular outcome in one country, moreover, it is uncertain that it will

produce the same outcome elsewhere. Institutions that work one way in one country may work differently

in another country where it interacts with other institutions. Enact a law on temporary contracts in Spain

and new entrants are hired under those contracts. Enact a similar law in Germany, and firms continue to

hire apprentices for permanent jobs. To the extent that labor institutions form a unified consistent system,

one cannot simply extrapolate the effects of changing a single institution in one labor system to another.

       A third type of study compares outcomes between workers covered by different labor institutions

within countries in which such intra-country differences exist. The virtue of this approach is that it holds

fixed the factors that affect an economy in its entirety. Making within-country comparisons of union and

non-union workers is how economists study the effects of unions in countries where union and non-union

arrangements coexist—such as in the Anglo–American countries (Freeman and Medoff, 1984; Lewis,

1963). Such comparisons measure differences between institutionally determined and market determined

outcomes but do not necessarily identify the structural impact of the institutions. They miss the potential

spillover of institutionally determined outcomes on other workers, who can be helped or harmed

depending on the nature of the interaction between the sectors.

        In sum, determining how institutions affect outcomes across countries is difficult. Findings must

be put through several sieves – cross section analysis, before/after analyses, within country analyses, and

over different time periods – before one can hazard a generalization.

One strong finding and some problematic results

       For all of the difficulties in pinning down the impact of institutions on aggregate economic

performance across countries, analyses have found that institutions have a major impact on one important
outcome: the distribution of income. As Exhibit 3 shows, countries that rely on institutions to set          20

wages and working conditions have lower rates of inequality or dispersion of earnings – here measured by

the ratio of the pay of persons in the 90th percentile of wages and salaries relative to the pay of persons in

the 10th percentile – and lower levels of overall income inequality – here measured by the Gini coefficient

for total income. The US, which ranks as the most market-driven labor market, has the highest dispersion

of wages and the highest Gini. Other economies with relatively market-driven labor markets also have

high levels of inequality. By contrast, Norway, where institutions set wages, has the lowest dispersion.

       Studies that look at dispersion of pay when institutions change, ranging from declines in collective

bargaining coverage as in the US or UK to the breakdown of centralized negotiations between the major

union federation and major employer association in Sweden or the end of the Scala Mobile mode of

centralized wage setting in Italy (Manacorda, 2005), show a comparable pattern. Movement toward

market-determined pay widens earnings distributions. Movement toward more institutional wage

determination narrows earnings inequality. Within country data on the level of dispersion in union and

nonunion workplaces, also shows that inequalities are smaller in union settings and decline among

workers who shift from nonunion jobs to union jobs; and increase among workers who move in the other

direction (Card, Lemieux, Riddell, 2004; Freeman, 1984). What is true of collective bargaining also holds

for government-mandated wage payments and taxation. Minimum-wage laws raise pay at the bottom of

the distribution and are generally associated with lower dispersion of earnings.

       By contrast, despite considerable effort, researchers have not pinned down the effects, if any, of

institutions on other aggregate economic outcomes, such as unemployment and employment. This

statement may seem surprising in light of the numerous policy pronouncements in the 1990s and 2000s

that particular market-oriented changes would raise employment. The OECD Jobs Study was

accompanied by two volumes of supporting research and followed by studies and reviews of studies,

many given in the OECD’s annual Employment Outlook (Layard, Nickell, and Jackman, 1994). Nickell

(1997) with various co-authors and diverse other economists estimated the effect of institutions on
outcomes and asserted that they had nailed it down: In the January 2005 Economic Journal Nickell,             21

Nunziata, and Ochel (2005) summarized this work with the claim that “the broad movements in

unemployment in the OECD can be explained by shifts in labor market institutions” (p 1).

       But as economists have examined the evidence more critically, they have rejected these strong

claims in favor of a more cautious stance about what the evidence shows about the impact of institutions

on aggregate economic outcomes. Baker et al. (2005) documented that the time series models on which

the OECD and independent researchers have relied to support their diagnosis that institutions adversely

affect aggregate outcomes are not robust. The estimated coefficients on labor institutions become

statistically insignificant with modest changes in the measures of institutions, countries covered, and time

period. Models that cover more years, countries, and measures than the early studies did “provide little

support for those who advocate comprehensive deregulation of OECD labor markets” (p 106). Baker et al

conclude that there is a “yawning gap between the confidence with which the case for labor market

deregulation has been asserted and the evidence that the regulating institutions are the culprits” (p 198).

Earlier Blanchflower (2001) told a similar story, noting “only a weak positive relation in the OECD

between unemployment and benefits (p 390) and “no support (from a 1999 OECD report) ... for the belief

that unions, benefits, the tax wedge, ALMP (Active labor market programs) spending or earnings

dispersion influence unemployment ... contrary to the claims made in Layard et al. (1994), which appear

to be based on mis-specified cross-country unemployment regressions (p 392)”. Assessing results in the

mid 2000s, Howell et al. (2006) and Baccaro and Rei (2005) come to a similar conclusion.

       Given these studies and its own work, the OECD has backed away from the strong claims of the

early 1990s. The 2004 OECD Employment Outlook argued for “the plausibility (my italics) of the Jobs

Strategy diagnosis that excessively high aggregate wages and/or wage compression have been

impediments” to jobs, while admitting that “this evidence is somewhat fragile”, and that the effect of

collective bargaining “appears to be contingent upon other institutional and policy factors that need to be

clarified to provide robust policy advice” (p. 165). The 2006 Outlook stressed that the institutions of low
unemployment European countries differ greatly from those in the US and UK (table 6.3).        This          22

implies that there is no single way to attain full employment and thus no single “peak” form of capitalism

to which each country should strive (Freeman, 2000). But the debate continues. In a study that takes

account of many of the criticisms of earlier cross-country time series data, Bassanini and Duval (2006)

estimated that changes in tax and labor policies explain about half of 1982-2003 changes in

unemployment among countries, with tax policies playing a particularly important role.

       The potential effect of employment protection legislation on employment and unemployment has

attracted particular attention. Countries pass these laws to reduce layoffs and raise job security for

existing workers. But by making layoffs more expensive to the firm, the laws also makes it more

expensive to hire workers since the firm must factor in the greater expense of layoffs if it has to reduce

output. The net effect of employment protection laws on aggregate employment thus depends on the

degree to which they reduce layoffs compared to the degree to which they reduce hires. After over two

decades of analysis, the consensus from studies of aggregate country data is that the regulations have little

effect on the overall rate of unemployment. Rather, EPL shifts unemployment from older workers to

younger jobseekers (OECD Employment Outlook, 2004). Micro-economic studies of the effect of EPL for

Chile show little evidence of a negative impact on labor demand but find that EPL increases the within-

firm gap between the marginal revenue product of labor and the wage, which it should since it creates a

wedge between marginal product and the wage cost of employment (Petrin et al., 2006).

The disappearing inverse U

       In the 1980s the pattern of unemployment among OECD countries changed. Whereas in the 1960s

and 1970s, unemployment was lower in countries with highly centralized bargaining systems than in

countries with decentralized wage-setting systems, in the 1980s unemployment was lower in both of those

groups than in countries with collective bargaining institutions between the extremes, at least according to

some measures of wage-setting institutions (Calmfors and Driffill, 1988). There is, moreover, logic to this

pattern. Market wage setting presumably attains low unemployment through competitive pressures on
firms and workers while centralized wage setting attains low unemployment by forcing bargainers to             23

consider the impacts of wages on national unemployment, among other aggregate outcomes. The “villain”

in the story is industry or other intermediate level collective bargaining, which allow unions and firms to

ignore the effects of their decisions on the aggregate economy (someone else pays the bulk of the

unemployment compensation for workers whose jobs are lost due to high wages) and thus can produce

high wages and unemployment.

       But in ensuing years the inverse U relation disappeared. In the early 1990s Sweden’s economic

crisis reduced employment considerably. Two market-oriented economies, Canada and New Zealand,

also experienced high unemployment. By contrast, the Netherlands, the archetype of a country with

intermediate institutions, had modest wage settlements and altered some of its benefits to increase

employment (Teulings and Hartog, 1998). Some other European countries, including those with industry

bargaining, improved their economic performance. In its 2004 review, the OECD reported no indication of

an inverse U in cross-country comparisons of wage institutions and unemployment in the 1990s. Rather,

the data showed wide variation in aggregate outcomes among countries classified as highly centralized,

decentralized, and intermediate that belies any simple generalization even in the earlier periods (OECD,

2004, table 3.6). Soskice (1990) pointed out that analyses that adjust measures of wage setting for

coordination of bargaining in countries with industry wide bargaining produced no inverse-U even in the

1980s. The inverse-U appears to be more of a historical description of patterns at one period of time,

rather than any general rule about the link between institutions and outcomes.

       In short, the evidence is that institutions reduce inequality but have uncertain or time varying

impacts on other aggregate outcomes, including those likely to be affected by wages.

IV. Interpretation

       There are three possible interpretations of this evidence. First, it could be that labor institutions

impact other outcomes substantially which extant measures of institutions and aggregate cross section

time series data are too weak to identify. From this perspective, the OECD’s continual improvement of
measures of institutions and the passage of time will eventually pin down the true relations. Doing           24

more of the same with better and longer time series will surely add to our knowledge, but I am dubious

that it will definitively uncover institutional effects beyond those on the dispersion of pay. Analyses of

micro data sets that focus on measuring labor practices – such as the UK’s Workplace Employment

Relations Survey (WERS) – offer a better chance for illuminating how institutions operate on the ground

and their impact on outcomes. Adding measures of labor policies and practices to matched employee-

employer panel data sets would create even greater potential for increasing knowledge. It would allow

researchers to compare the behavior of the same worker under different practices, the effect of practices

on selectivity of workers, and the effects of practices on productivity. Studies of firms that change labor

practices (ideally under experimental conditions) or operate differently across countries due to country-

specific rules and norms could also illuminate how institutions or policies work at workplaces.

       The second possible interpretation of empirical results is that the effects of institutions on

outcomes changes over time due to changes in the economic environment or to changes in institutional

responses to particular economic stimuli. The rough stability between US and advanced European

institutions from the 1950s through the early 2000s when unemployment rose in the EU relative to the US

rules out any simple causal link between institutions and outcomes. If essentially unchanged institutions

caused this change in unemployment and other outcomes, the impact of institutions must have changed

over time (Blanchard and Wolfers, 2004; Lundquist and Sargent, 1998, 2004; OECD, 2006). In the case

of unemployment, perhaps EU institutions were well suited to produce low unemployment in the 1960s-

1980s while US institutions were better suited for low unemployment for the globalized digital economy

of the 1990s and 2000s. Alternatively, perhaps the behavior of institutions changed over time as decision-

makers learnt from experience what does or does not work. This would produce different responses to the

same circumstances over time, shades of the Lucas critique of macro-economic models. While appealing,

the “changing economy/behavior interpretation” of the link between institutions and outcomes is difficult

to test. It makes great demands on data and risks creating the social science equivalence of epicycles to
account for observed patterns. A model that says EU style institutions helped attain full employment in 25

the 1960s-1980s and reduced employment in the 1990s-2000s, or that posits that institutional decision-

makers behaved differently in the latter period than in the former because they learned from their

mistakes, can fit the observed experiences, but leaves little data to test the proposed explanations8. With

enough interactions, one can readily over-fit any model.

       A third reading of the evidence is that in fact labor institutions have a well-defined impact on

income distribution but only modest effects on other outcomes. One reason their effects may be modest is

that the political economy of institutional interventions rules out collective bargaining settlements and

regulations that are truly expensive to an economy. No country would impose a minimum wage that

disemployed a large fraction of the work force; and no union or employer would sign a collective

bargaining agreement that forced the firm to close. If countries adopt only interventions with the most

favorable benefit-cost ratios, one would observe reductions in dispersion only if they raise efficiency or

produce minimal losses. In the same vein, it is possible that institutions have both the negative and

positive effects hypothesized earlier, but that the two factors balance out, producing inconclusive results

beyond those on distribution, again for political economy reasons via some form of bargaining among

parties. Taking this line of thinking to its logical conclusion the economies that rely on institutions may

have reduced the transactions costs of bargaining and developed long run relations among parties such that

they produce efficient outcomes per the Coase Theorem more often than not.

       To help assess these interpretations and increase our knowledge of institutions requires inputs from

areas of research that have played little role in the debate over the link between labor institutions on

aggregate outcomes. One such area is experimental economics. Evidence from laboratory experiments

that people care about fair processes and outcomes and cooperate more than rational optimizing models of

human behaviour opens the door for studies of the conditions when institutions can improve market

8
 To illustrate, consider a model in which economies determine wages by collective bargaining or market
forces and experience a price shock or competition from low wage countries or both. An experimental
design to assess the link between shocks and institutions would require 16 (= 23) treatments If institutions
outcomes. Experiments that reflected real world institutions, such as group decisions, would at the          26

minimum provide researchers with realistic priors about what to expect from those institutions outside the

laboratory. Another area is game theory and the related field of implementation theory (Jackson, 2001).

Theories of behavior under different bargaining rules could help illuminate the conditions under which

European social dialogue institution can yield efficient bargains and direct attention at institutional

reforms that would increase the potential for Coase-theorem bargains (Freeman, 2006). Finally, because

labor institutions interact in ways that go beyond theory and experiments, artificial agent simulations

could illuminate hypothesized interactions among institutions and between institutions and economic

shocks and behavior, building on matching models of firms and workers (Neugart, 2004; Pingle and

Tesfatsion, 2003). Roth and co-workers (1999, 2000) have shown the value of combining such modelling

in analyzing the market for medical residents, which seemingly works better through a centralized

allocative matching algorithm than through standard competitive behavior. In the spirit of artificial agent

modelling, analysts would ideally “grow” artificial economies with specified institutional arrangements

(Epstein, 2005) and then simulate the effects of institutional changes on economic outcomes.

        In short, because the problem of determining whether labor institutions do more than reduce

income inequality; and if so, whether they improve or worsen economic outcomes is such a hard one – on

par with the six blind men trying to understand the elephant -- we need all of the tools at our disposal. It is

only by combining insights and observations from different perspectives that we will be able to capture

the institutional reality and not

        Rail on in utter ignorance
        Of what each other mean,
        And prate about an Elephant
        Not one of them has seen!
        (Saxe)




reacted depending on which shock they faced first, the number of treatments would increase.
Exhibit 1: Measures of the Variation of Labor Institutions Across Advanced Countries                                       27

     Country group             Fraser, 2003   GLS,     Percent    Percent Coll      Employment      Govt Social
                               Labor index    2005     Union      Bargaining        Protection      Spending/
                                                                  2000              Legislation     NNI, 2003
     Anglo-American                                    2003

     US                        10             6        12         14                0.7             18.7
     UK                        19             13        29        30                1.1             23.3
     NZ                        38             16        22        25                1.3             22
     Ireland                   47             17        35        --                1.3             22.2
     Australia                 32             17       25         80                1.5             25.4
     Canada                    25             15       26         32                1.1             20.9
     Other Advanced
     Switzerland               34             19       18         40                1.6             31.6
     Netherlands               52             29       23         80                2.3             25.5
     Finland                   90             26       74         90                2.1             31.8
     Denmark                   71             26       70         90                1.8             34.3
     Austria                   83             25       35         95                2.2             32.3
     Belgium                   63             29       55         90                2.5             31.4
     Germany                   101            23       23         68                2.5             34.6
     Portugal                  77             --       24*        80                3.5             29
     Sweden                    96             29       78         90                2.6             36.3
     Japan                     28             17       20         15                1.8             22.9
     Norway                    89             27       53         70                2.6             31.3
     Spain                     54             --       16         80                3.1             24.3
     Italy                     95             24       34         80                2.4             30.8
     France                    58             26       6          90                2.9             33.7
     Greece                    94             --       27*        --                2.9             23.2
     Four Asian Tigers
     Hong Kong                 5              --                                                    --
     Singapore                 42             9                                                     --
     Taiwan                    61             7                                                     --
      Korea                    81               10      11           11                              9.2
Source: Column 1, Fraser Institute (2005) Economic Freedom of the World: 2005Annual Report.
http://www.freetheworld.com/download.html; Column 2, Global Labor Survey (2005), Freeman and Chor (2005); Column 3
from Visser, J., ‘‘Union membership statistics in 24 countries’’, in Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 129, No. 1, January 2006, with
* for 2000 from OECD 2004;table 3.3; Column 4, OECD, 2004, table 3.3 Column 5, OECD, 2004, table 2. A2.4, version 2;
Column 6, Society at a Glance: OECD Social Indicators 2006 Edition 2007 - Data GE1.2 Share of non-health and total social
spending in national income, 2003. Note: the numbers in the ranking in columns 1 and 2 exceed the number of countries in the
exhibit because the rankings include developing economies that I do not report in the table.
Exhibit 2 Mean Values of Ranks of Anglo-American and other Advanced Economies Labor                 28
Institutions (low value=market oriented) and t-tests of their statistical significance


Panel A: Reports by Executives on World Economic Forum 2003

                                                                                 Cooperative
                 Wage          Pay link to       Hiring and      Delegation      labor-mgt
Mean, t-test     Flexibility   productivity      firing          of authority    relations
Mean, Anglo-
American         26            11                27              11              25
Mean, Other
Advanced         60            39                53              18              25
t-test           2.6           5.09              2.72            1.4             0.08
                 Anglo-        Anglo-            Anglo-          Anglo-
                 American      American          American        American        No
                 have more     firms link pay    firms have      delegate        difference
                 control       to productivity   greater         slightly        perceived in
                 over          more than         power to        more            labor-mgt
Implications     wages         others            hire and fire   authority       cooperation


Panel B: Reports by Labor Practitioners, Global Labor Survey 2004

                             Freedom of
                             association/                              Regulations
                Labor market collective               Labor            and working Employee
Mean, t-test    conditions   bargaining               disputes         conditions  benefits
Mean,
ANGLO-
AMERICAN        16              15                    12               13             13
Mean, Other     26              26                    22               25             26
t-test          4.13            5.03                  3.34             3.29           5.67
                                Freedom of
                Labor market    association and       Anglo-           Labor
                is more         collective            American         regulations
                business-       bargaining            have more        are more       Fewer
                friendly in     more difficult        pro-business     pro-business   benefits in
                Anglo-          in Anglo-             stance in        in Anglo-      Anglo-
Implications    American        American              disputes         American       American

Source: Freeman, Boxall, Haynes, 2007, chapter 1
Exhibit 3: 90/10 Wage Differentials and Gini Coefficients for Advanced Countries, circa 2000                  29

                  Dispersion     Gini
 US                 4.59        40.8
 UK                 3.45        36.0
 NZ                 3.28        36.2
 Ireland            3.97        35.9
 Australia          2.94        35.2
 Canada             3.65        33.1
 Switzerland        2.69        33.1
 Netherlands        2.85        30.9
 Finland            2.36        26.9
 Denmark            2.16        24.7
 Austria            3.56        30.0
 Belgium            2.28        25.0
 Germany            2.87        28.3
 Portugal           3.76        38.5
 Sweden             2.23        25.0
 Japan              2.99        24.9
 Norway             1.96        25.8
 Spain              3.94*       32.5
 Italy              2.40        36.0
 France             3.07        32.7
 Greece             3.62*       35.4


Source: Ratio of Wages, from OECD, 2004, table 3.2, where the data are from 1995-99 with figures from Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Portugal are for 1990-94; Data for Spain and Greece from Pereira and Martins (2004), table 1.
Gini coefficients from United Nations 2005, table 15
                                                 References                                            30

Abadie, Alberto, Diamond, Alexis, and Hainmueller, Jens (2007) ‘Synthetic control methods for
      comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of California's Tobacco Control Program’, January.
      http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~jhainm/Paper/ADH2007.pdf

Aukrust, Odd (1977). ‘Inflation in the open economy: A Norwegian model’, in L.B. Krause and W.S.
      Salant (eds.), Worldwide Inflation; Theory and Recent Experience. Washington DC: Brookings
      Institution.

Baccaro, Lucio and Diego Rei (2005) “Institutional determinants of unemployment in OECD countries: a
      time series cross-section analysis (1960-98),” International Institute for Labor Studies Discussion
      Paper DP/160/2005, International Institute for Labor Studies, Geneva

Baker, D., Glyn, A., Howell, D., and Schmitt, J. (2005) ‘Labor market institutions and unemployment : A
       critical assessment of the cross-country evidence’, in David R. Howell (ed.), Fighting
       Unemployment: The Limits of Free Market Orthodoxy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bassanini, Andrea and Duval, Romain (2006) ’Employment patterns in OECD countries: Reassessing the
       role of policies and institutions’, OECD Economic Department Working Paper 486, June.

Blanchard, Olivier and Wolfers, Justin (2000) ’Shocks and institutions and the rise of European
      Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence’, Economic Journal, 110(1): 1-33.

Blanchflower, David G. (2001) ’Unemployment, well-being, and wage curves in Eastern and Central
      Europe’, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 15: 364-402.

Botero, Juan, Djankov, Simeon, La Porta, Rafael, López de Silanes, Florencio, and Shleifer, Andrei
       (2004) ‘The Regulation of Labor’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119: 1339-1382.

Bruno, Michael and Sachs, Jeffrey (1985) Economics of worldwide stagflation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.

Calmfors, Lars and Driffill, John (1988) ’Bargaining structure, corporatism, and. macroeconomic
      performance’, Economic Policy, 6 (April): 14-61.

Card, David, Lemieux, Thomas, and Riddell, W. Craig (2004) ‘Unions and wage inequality’, Journal of
       Labor Research, 25(4) (October): 519-562.

Carroll, Lewis (2006) Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Harold Bloom (ed.) NY: Chelsea House
        Publishers.

Chor, Davin and Freeman, Richard (2005) ’The 2004 Global Labor Survey: Workplace institutions and
       practices around the world’, NBER Working Paper 11598.

Council of Economic Advisors (1962) Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC: Government
      Printing Office.

Crouch, Colin (1985) ‘Conditions for trade union wage restraint’, in Leon N. Lindberg and Charles S.
      Maier (eds.) The Politics of Inflation and Economic Stagflation. Brookings Institution, Washington
               D.C.                                                                                         31

Easterly, William, Kremer, Michael, Pritchett, Lant and Summers, Lawrence H. (1993) ’Good policy or
       good luck? Country growth performance and temporary shocks’, Journal of Monetary Economics,
       32 (3): 459-83.

Epstein, Joshua M. (2005) ‘Remarks on the Foundations of Agent-Based Generative Social Science’,
       Brookings, CSED, Working Paper 41 (July).

Erickson, Christopher L. and Ichino, Andrea (1995) ‘Wage differentials in Italy: Market Forces,
       Institutions and Inflation’, in Richard B. Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz (eds.), Differences and
       Changes in Wage Structures. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Fraser Institute (2001) Economic Freedom of the World: 2001 Annual Report. Vancouver, BC: The Fraser
        Institute.

Fraser Institute (2003) Economic Freedom of the World: 2003 Annual Report. Vancouver, BC: The Fraser
        Institute.

Freeman, Richard B. (1984) ‘Longitudinal analyses of the effects of trade unions
      . Journal of Labor Economics, 2(1)(January): 1-26.

-------- (1993a) ‘Labor market institutions and policies: Help or hindrance to economic development?’
         Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1992.
         Washington, DC: The World Bank.

-------- (1993b) ‘Labor markets and institutions in economic development’, American Economic Review,
83 (2) (May): 403-8. ...

-------- (2000) ‘Single peaked vs. diversified capitalism: The relation between economic institutions and
outcomes’, in Richard B. Freeman (ed.), Inequality around the World. London, UK: Palgrave.

-------- (2002) ‘Varieties of labor market institutions and economic performance’, presented at the IRRA
Session on Labor Market Institutions and Economic Outcomes, January 4.

-------- (2005) ‘Labour market institutions without blinders: The debate over flexibility and labour market
performance’, International Economic Journal RIEJ, 19(2)(June): 129-145.

-------- (2007) ‘Searching for the EU social dialogue model’, in Nicola Acocella and Riccardo Leoni
(eds,), Social Pacts, Employment and Growth: A Reappraisal of Ezio Tarantelli's Thought. Heidelberg:
Physica-Verlag.

Freeman, Richard B., Boxall, Peter and Haynes, Peter (eds.) (forthcoming, 2007) What Workers Say:
Employee Voice in the Anglo_American Workplace. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Freeman, Richard B. and Lazear, Edward P. (1995) ‘An economic analysis of works councils", in Joel
      Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck (eds.), Works Councils: Consultation, Representation, Cooperation.
      Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press for NBER. pp. 27-50.

Freeman, Richard B. and Medoff, James (1984) What do Unions Do? NY, NY: Basic Books.
Freeman, Richard B. and Weitzman, Martin L. (1987) ‘Bonuses and employment in Japan’, Journal of 32
      the Japanese and International Economies, 1:168-194.

Gode, Dhananjay K. and Sunder, Shyam (1993) ‘Allocative efficiency of markets with zero-intelligence
      traders: Marketas a partial substitute for individual rationality’, Journal of Political Economy,
      101(1): 119-137.

Holmlund, Bertil and Zetterberg, Johnny (1991) ‘Insider effects in wage determination: Evidence from
      five countries’, European Economic Review, July.

Howell, David, Baker, Dean, Glyn, Andrew and Schmitt, John (2006) ‘Are protective labor market
      institutions really at the root of unemployment? A critical perspective on the statistical evidence’,
      July 14. http://www.cepr.net/documents/2006_07_unemployment_institutions.pdf

International Labour Office (1997) World Labour Report 1997-98. Industrial Relations, Democracy and
        Social Stability. Geneva.

International Labour Office. Social Dialogue. http://www.ilo.org/public/english/dialogue/themes/sd.htm

Jackson, Matthew O. (2001) ‘A crash course in implementation theory’, Social Choice and Welfare,
       18(4), pages 655-708.

Kagel, John H. and Roth, Alvin E. (eds.) (1995) The Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton,
       NJ: Princeton University Press

Kenworthy, Lane (2001) ‘Wage-setting measures, a survey and assessment’, World Politics 55
     (October):57-98.

Layard, Richard, Nickell, Stephen, and Jackman, Richard (1994) The Unemployment Crisis. Oxford, UK:
       Oxford University Press.

Lewis, H. Gregg (1963) Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States. Chicago, IL: University of
       Chicago.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Sargent, Thomas J. (1998) ‘The European unemployment dilemma’, Journal of
      Political Economy, 106(3): 514-50.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Sargent, Thomas J. (2004) ‘European unemployment and turbulence revisited in a
matching model’, Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(2-3)( April/May): 456-468.

Manacorda, Marco (2004) ‘Can the Scala Mobile explain the fall and rise of earnings inequality in Italy?
      A semiparametric analysis, 1977-1993’, Journal of Labor Economics, 22(3): 585-613.

Manning, Alan (2005) Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press.

Martin, John Paul (1998) ‘What works among active labour market policies: Evidence from OECD
       Countries’ Experiences’. Available at:
       www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Conferences/1998/Martin.pdf

Milner, Henry and Wadensjö, Eskil (eds.) (2001) Gösta Rehn, the Swedish Model and Labour Market
        Policies: International and National Perspectives. Aldershot: Ashgate.                                   33

Neugart, Michael (2004) ‘Endogenous matching functions: an agent-based computational approach’,
      Advances in Complex Systems, 7(2): 187-202.

Nickell, Stephen J. and Brian Bell (1996) ‘Changes in the distribution of wages and unemployment in the
       OECD countries’,American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 86(5): 302-308.

Nickell, Stephen., Nunziata, Luca, and Ochel, Wolfgang (2005) ‘Unemployment in the OECD since the
       1960s: What Do We Know?’, The Economic Journal, 115 (January): 1-27, Royal Economic
       Society.

Nickell, Stephen (1997) ‘Unemployment and labor market rigidities: Europe versus North America’,
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(3) (Summer): 55-74.

Olson, Mancur (1990) How Bright Are the Northern Lights?: Some questions about Sweden (Crafoord
       lectures). Lund, Sweden: Institute of Economic Research, Lund University.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (1994a) OECD Jobs Study, Evidence
      and Explanations, Part I: Labor Market Trends and Underlying Forces of Change. Paris: OECD.

----------- (1994b) OECD Jobs Study, Evidence and Explanations, Part II: The Adjustment Potential of the
         Labor Market. Paris: OECD.

----------- (1995) OECD Jobs Study, Taxation, Employment, and Unemployment. Paris: OECD.

----------- (1996) OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

----------- (1997) ‘Economic performance and the structure of collective bargaining’, OECD Employment
         Outlook (July). Paris: OECD.

----------- (1997) Implementing the Jobs Study. Paris: OECD.

----------- (2002) OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

----------- (2004) OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

----------- (2006) OECD Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

Pereira, Pedro Telhado and Martins, Pedro Silva (2004) ‘Returns to education and wage equations’,
        Applied Economics, 36(6) (April): 525-31.

Petrin, Amil and Sivadasan, Jagadeesh (2006) ‘Job security does affect economic efficiency: Theory, a new statistic,
         and evidence’, NBER Working Paper 12757 (December).

Pingle, Mark and Tesfatsion, Leigh (2003) ‘Evolution of worker-employer networks and behaviors under
        alternative non-employment benefits: An agent-based computational study’, Computing in
        Economics and Finance, 7, Society for Computational Economics.
                                                                                                        34
Rama, Martin and Artecona, Raquel (2002) ‘A database of labor market indicators across countries’,
      Washington, DC: World Bank, Development Research Group.

Roth, Alvin E. and Peranson, Elliott (1999) ‘The redesign of the matching market for American
       physicians: Some engineering aspects of economic design’, American Economic Review, 89(4)
       (September): 748-780.

Roth, Alvin E. (2002) ‘The economist as engineer: Game theory, experimentation, and computation as
       tools for design economics’, Fisher-Schultz Lecture, Econometrica, 70(4) (July): 1341-1378.).

Salter, Wilfred E.G (1960) Productivity and Technical Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
        Press.

Saxe, John Godfrey, ‘Blind men and an Elephant’,
       http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Blindmen_and_the_Elephant

Slichter, Sumner H. (1950 ‘Notes on the structure of wages’, The Review of Economics and Statistics,
32(1) (February): 80-91.

Soskice, David (1990) ‘Wage determination: The changing role of institutions in advanced industrialized
       countries’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 6(4): 36-61.

Tarentelli, Ezio (1986) ‘The Regulation of Inflation and Unemployment’, Industrial
       Relations, 25(1): 1-15.

Teulings, Coen and Hartog, Joop (1998) Corporatism or Competition? Labour Contracts, Institutions and
       Wage Structures in International Competition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Traxler, Franz (2002) ‘Bargaining (de)centralization, macro-economic performance and control over the
       employment relationship’, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 1(March): 1-27.


Traxler, Franz and Kittel , Bernhard (2000) ‘The bargaining system and performance: A comparison of 18
       OECD countries’, Comparative Political Studies, 33: 1154-1190.


United Nations (2005) United Nations Human Development Report 2005. NY, NY: UNDP.


Visser, Jelle (2006) ‘Union membership statistics in 24 countries’, Monthly Labor Review,
        129(1)(January). Available at: http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2006/01/art3abs.htm

Walder, Andrew (1986) Communist Neotraditionalism: Work and Authority in Chinese Industry.
      Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Weitzman, Martin L. (1984) The Share Economy: Conquering Stagflation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
      University Press.

World Bank (1995) World Development Report. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

World Bank (1990) World Development Report 1990. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                 35
World Economic Forum (2003) Global Competitiveness Report. Geneva: Switzerland: World Economic
      Forum.
