NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK SHIFTING VERSUS RISK MANAGEMENT:
INVESTMENT POLICY IN CORPORATE PENSION PLANS
Joshua Rauh
Working Paper 13240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13240

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2007

I thank James Wang and Michael Wong for excellent research assistance. I am grateful to John Birge,
John Campbell, Murillo Campello, Chris Crevier, Mike Faulkender, Sean Finucane, Charles Hadlock,
Dirk Jenter, Steve Kaplan, Vicky Kiosse, Gordon Latter, Deborah Lucas, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez,
Mitchell Petersen, James Poterba, Michael Roberts, Antoinette Schoar, Berk Sensoy, Morten Sørensen,
Per Strömberg, Amir Sufi, Michael Weisbach, Steve Zeldes, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants
at MIT Sloan, the 2006 Corporate Finance Conference at the Washington University Olin School of
Business, the 2006 NBER Corporate Finance Summer Institute, and the 2006 UBS Pensions Research
Programme Conference at the London School of Economics for helpful comments and discussions.
I thank seminar participants at the Chicago GSB finance faculty lunch, the European Central Bank,
the University of Illinois, and Michigan State University for comments on an earlier version of this
work entitled "Who Manages Pension Fund Risk?" The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Shifting versus Risk Management: Investment Policy in Corporate Pension Plans
Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 13240
July 2007
JEL No. G23,G31,G32,H32
ABSTRACT
The asset allocation of defined benefit pension plans is a setting where both risk shifting and risk management
incentives are likely be present. Empirically, firms with poorly funded pension plans and weak credit
ratings allocate a greater share of pension fund assets to safer securities such as government debt and
cash, whereas firms with well-funded pension plans and strong credit ratings invest more heavily in
equity. These relations hold both in the cross-section and within firms and plans over time. The incentive
to limit costly financial distress plays a considerably larger role than risk shifting in explaining variation
in pension fund investment policy among U.S. firms.
Joshua Rauh
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jrauh@ChicagoGSB.edu

Corporations with some probability of defaulting on their debt face conflicting incentives with
respect to the management of cash flow risks. On the one hand, shocks to cash flows for financially
constrained firms can lead to bankruptcy (Smith and Stulz (1985)) or to the inability to take profitable
investment projects in the future (Mayers and Smith (1987), Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1993)). In
contrast, the theory of asset substitution (Jensen and Meckling (1976)) suggests that managers can
increase the value of shareholders’ equity by raising the volatility of the firm’s assets when there is a
significant probability of default. In this paper I empirically examine these conflicting motives in a
setting where both risk shifting and risk management incentives are likely to be present: investment
policies of defined benefit (DB) pension plans sponsored by U.S. corporations.
Since Sharpe (1976) and Treynor (1977), it has been argued that the institutional structure of DB
pensions in the U.S. and the control that management exercises over pension fund asset allocation create
moral hazard incentives for firms to underfund pension plans and invest the assets in risky securities. The
liabilities of a DB plan resemble regular corporate debt in that limited liability protects shareholders from
having to transfer or liquidate non-corporate assets to compensate the creditors (or workers) in the event
of bankruptcy. If the assets perform well and the firm avoids bankruptcy, then the resulting improvement
in pension funding reduces the need to fund the pension out of liquid corporate assets. Furthermore, since
the creation of the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) in 1974, if a firm enters
bankruptcy with insufficient pension assets to cover its liabilities to workers, the U.S. government
provides plan recipients with their annual pensions up to a statutory maximum amount. The security the
PBGC receives is the firm’s dedicated pension assets, and the PBGC has a low priority in bankruptcy
thereafter, so that general corporate assets enjoy some protection.
However, an important constraint on this moral hazard is that should the firm avoid bankruptcy
but face poor performance in its pension fund, it must continue to fund the pension plan with liquid
resources. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 and several rounds of later
legislation established a system of mandatory pension contributions, intended to ensure adequate funding
of DB pension plans. Such cash requirements increase the probability that the firm will default on its

1

regular nonpension debt and incur costs of financial distress. Furthermore, cash drains from required
contributions depress capital investment at the firm level (Rauh (2006)). The system of required
contributions thus creates an incentive to limit risk taking in pension plans, as large mandatory
contributions may affect the ability to invest in attractive projects. This has been the case for much of the
U.S. airline, automobile, and steel industries. This influence against risk taking in pension funds has been
ignored by previous literature which instead has emphasized the tax benefits of funding with debt (Black
(1980), Tepper (1981)) as a countervailing force against the moral hazard associated with pension
investment (Sweeting (2005), Campbell and Viceira (2005)).
There are therefore theoretical reasons why pension risk might optimally increase as the
sponsoring firm approaches financial distress, and theoretical reasons why it might optimally decrease.
The results in this paper suggest that risk management incentives to avoid costly financial distress
dominate risk shifting on average in pension fund investing. In a large sample of administrative data
covering primarily small to medium sized DB plans during 1988-2003, the better funded pension plans —
which should have less incentive to engage in risk shifting — in fact invest in riskier assets than the more
poorly funded plans which would be the typical risk shifting candidates. This is also the case within plans
over time. After the funding status of a given pension plan improves, the plan assets tend to be invested
more in equities; after the funding status deteriorates the plan assets tends to be invested more in safe
assets such as government debt and cash.
Analysis conducted using survey data on pension fund asset allocation for a smaller sample of the
largest publicly traded DB pension sponsors from 1997-2004 corroborates the importance of risk
management. Firms with better credit ratings and therefore lower expected costs of financial distress take
more risk in pension plans than firms which have higher expected costs of financial distress. The
allocation to safe assets rises and the allocation to risky assets declines within a given firm over time if its
credit rating deteriorates, and vice versa if its credit rating improves. However, there is no evidence that
firms dynamically tailor pension investments to correlate with their own investment opportunities (as

2

would be predicted by Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993)). For example, there is zero within-year
correlation between the return on pension assets and the return on operating assets within this sample.
A related investigation estimates probabilities of a PBGC bankruptcy termination or a corporate
bankruptcy filing in the plan-level and firm-level samples and considers the relation between pension
fund asset allocation and the estimated probability of default. In both contexts, the percentage of DB
assets allocated to equity declines as the probability of bankruptcy increases, while the percentage
allocated to safer assets rises. This is consistent with risk management dominating risk shifting
considerations, even as firms draw closer to bankruptcy.
In both the plan-level and firm-level samples I also find that asset allocation is correlated with
short-term lagged investment returns, with higher returns preceding higher equity allocations and lower
allocations to debt and cash. While consistent with pure risk management, this finding is also consistent
with a number of other frictions including transactions costs of rebalancing, behavioral biases such as
investor inertia effects (Thaler (1980), Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988)), or an excessive focus by
managers on the short-term lagged return in assessing the likely risks and returns of investing in risky
securities. The results that link asset allocation to the financial health of firms and plans are robust to
controlling for lagged investment returns, suggesting that they are not explained by the tendency of shortterm asset allocation to be affected by lagged performance.
As an alternative test of pension risk behavior near bankruptcy, I consider the ex-ante asset
allocation of plans that were ultimately terminated in bankruptcy with the PBGC or whose firms
eventually filed for bankruptcy. Any evidence that firms and plans which ultimately went bankrupt took
more pension risk in the pre-termination period represents an upper bound on the amount of risk shifting
that could have occurred, because it also reflects reverse causality: firms more heavily invested in risky
securities for reasons unrelated to the insurance incentive are more likely to experience bad draws and
pension problems, and consequently to file for bankruptcy. The evidence that firms and plans which
ultimately went bankrupt took more pension risk ex ante is weak. A correlation only appears when all
observable measures of the probability of financial distress are controlled for. Moreover, plans that

3

ultimately terminated had less volatile returns on invested pension fund assets over the entire sample
period than the average plan in the sample. The time-series standard deviation of investment returns of
assets in plans that ultimately terminate is no greater than that of assets in plans that do not terminate, or
than the standard deviation of investment returns on assets held by the PBGC itself.
The restrictions and covenants that other claimants of the firm place on the firm’s activities may
affect risk-taking behavior by firms in equilibrium, limiting risk shifting and increasing risk management
as firms approach technical defaults. Debt agreements, however, do not specify restrictions on pension
fund investment policy, even though parties could write contracts that restrict this corporate decision. To
the extent that the topic of pensions arises in debt agreements, lenders are typically only prohibiting
various kinds of expropriation in the event that the firm defaults on its pensions with the PBGC in
bankruptcy. While the existence of covenants might possibly be the mechanism through which firms are
financially constrained in the event of general adverse shocks, covenants do not explicitly prevent firms
from taking pension risk.
This paper also contributes to the debate on the causes of risk-taking in pension funds. Much of
the theoretical literature starts from the demonstration that under certain assumptions, the goal of
shareholder maximization is accomplished by investing the pension fund entirely in bonds (Black (1980),
Tepper (1981), Bodie (1990)). On average, however, large U.S. pension sponsors invest roughly 60% of
pension fund assets in equity securities. The incentive for risk shifting is the factor that is often pointed to
as providing the incentives for equity investment, but the results in this paper suggest that risk shifting is
not the primary reason, as the firms for whom this insurance would be the most valuable in general take
the least risk.
If risk shifting is not the reason that corporations put money in equities, then what is? While a
large fraction of the variation in pension fund asset allocation at the firm level remains unexplained by the
empirical analysis, I find a robust, significant, and positive correlation between risk taking and the share
of active employees in the pension plan. This result is consistent with Lucas and Zeldes (2006) and
Sundaresan and Zapatero (1997), who argue that equity investing in pension funds may hedge against

4

increases in pension benefits. This works because pension benefits are tied to real wages, which are
positively correlated with stock returns. Thus, if firms are investing optimally then their equity investing
may be a hedge against increases in the wage-linked components of benefits.1 Another plausible
explanation, not tested here, is that the earnings impact of risky pension investment strategies creates an
incentive to invest pension assets in more volatile securities (see Bergstresser, Desai, and Rauh (2006)).2
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 discusses the incentives for pension fund
asset allocation and funding behavior in the context of incentives for risk management and speculation. It
also reviews existing literature in these areas. Section 2 describes the data used in this study and presents
an example of the pension investment behavior of United Airlines, as well as the asset allocation of a
small cross-section of the largest pension sponsors in 2003. Section 3 considers the relation between plan
characteristics and asset allocation in plan level data. Section 4 considers the relation between firm
characteristics (including those of the firm’s pension plans) and asset allocation in firm-level data.
Section 5 estimates probabilities of PBGC termination and bankruptcy and examines the relationship
between asset allocation and bankruptcy probabilities. Section 6 analyzes the characteristics of DB plans
that were ultimately terminated relative to the universe of DB plans. Section 7 concludes.
1. Pension Investment Incentives, Risk Shifting, and Risk Management
This section discusses the incentives for pension fund asset allocation and funding behavior in the
context of incentives for risk shifting and risk management.
1.1. Defined Benefit Pension Plans and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
In a DB pension plan, the sponsoring firm pledges retirement benefits to employees according to
a formula that is generally a function of each employee’s age, tenure, and salary. The firm then funds
these liabilities with dedicated financial assets, the allocation of which is determined by officers of the
corporation often in consultation with investment advisors. Although DB pension plans have been
declining in importance relative to defined contribution (DC) plans, assets in private sector domestic DB
plans still amounted to $1.9 trillion as of the end of 2003 (Buessing and Soto (2006)).

5

If a firm enters bankruptcy with insufficient pension assets to cover pension liabilities, the PBGC
takes over the pension plan and guarantees that plan recipients receive their annual pensions up to a
maximum that is set annually by law ($47,659 in 2006 for employees retiring at age 65). Firms pay for
this insurance with premiums that depend on the number of covered workers and financial health of the
plans, but not the amount of risk taken with financial assets. The PBGC then receives all of the firm’s
dedicated pension assets, but if it wishes to recover any underfunding the agency in practice has similar
priority to that of a general unsecured creditor (Center on Federal Financial Institutions (2004)).
Recent pension fund terminations have strained the financial position of the PBGC. Annual
information made available by the PBGC reveals that a surplus of $9.7 billion as of the fiscal year ending
September 2000 had deteriorated to a deficit of $22.7 billion by the end of the 2005 fiscal year (PBGC
(2005)). This is by far the worst position in the history of the PBGC, and essentially all of this decline
has been due to losses from complete and probable terminations (Coronado and Liang (2005)). The
PBGC has projected a “reasonably possible” exposure of as large as $108 billion, representing the
estimated amount of unfunded vested benefits at firms with a large probability of default. Such deficits
come about as a combined result of poor investment performance and low levels of voluntary
contributions. The recent termination of the pension plans of United Airlines was the largest termination
event in history, with the PBGC assuming $6.6 billion of United’s $9.8 billion in unfunded liabilities.
1.2. Pension Investment Incentives in Previous Literature
Sharpe (1976) and Treynor (1977) first demonstrated that the contract between plan sponsors and
pension beneficiaries (or guarantors) is essentially a put option exercisable in bankruptcy and written on
the assets of the pension plan with a strike price equal to the value pension liabilities. This was the case
even before the formation of the PBGC in 1974, as in bankruptcy the pension beneficiaries were generally
bound to accept whatever reduced pensions could be provided to them by the bankrupt firm using the
firm’s pension assets. The introduction of the PBGC exacerbated the moral hazard problem in that it gave
the pension beneficiaries a muted incentive to monitor the corporation’s pension investment policy. The

6

PBGC exerts little control over the corporation when it is a going concern, outside of the contribution
requirements and the collection of the insurance premiums which are not risk-based.
Under this arrangement, if asset values rise then the firm’s need to fund the pension fund with
cash is reduced. If pension fund asset values fall, and the firm enters bankruptcy, then the firm is relieved
of its pension liability. The more volatile the pension assets, the more valuable this pension put option.
Harrison and Sharpe (1983) derive optimal funding and asset allocation rules and show that under some
conditions the put option may be valuable enough to lead to a corner solution in which the firm makes
minimal contributions to the pension fund and invests any assets completely in equity securities. A
number of papers have calculated explicit values for the PBGC put option, either from the point of view
of the individual company (Marcus (1987), Pennacchi and Lewis (1994)) or from the perspective of the
PBGC (Boyce and Ippolito (2002)). Kroszner (2005) and others have compared the current condition of
the PBGC to the situation of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) on the eve of
the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s.
These incentives are a manifestation of the classic risk-shifting incentives originally discussed in
Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Myers (1977). When debt is underwater in some states, investments or
transactions that increase the volatility of cash flows also increase the value to shareholders of their call
option on the firm’s assets. Parrino and Weisbach (1999) examine the likely importance of these kinds of
stockholder-bondholder conflicts using numerical techniques. However, empirical evidence of risk
shifting has been thin. Andrade and Kaplan (1998) find no evidence that the financially distressed firms
they study engage in risk shifting. Kroszner and Strahan (1996) show that while insolvent savings and
loan institutions (S&Ls) appear to have increased dividends to shareholders, such payouts are generally
positively correlated with the financial health of the institution.
Shareholder-creditor agency problems such as risk shifting arise from flexibility of ex post
actions, i.e. after debt is in place, and when the firm’s risk strategy cannot be contracted upon ex ante
(Leland (1998)). This seems an appropriate assumption about risk-taking in pension funds, as firms
cannot commit to pension beneficiaries or the PBGC not to underfund the pension and take risks with the

7

assets. While creditors could theoretically demand that restrictions on pension fund investment be written
into financial covenants, in practice this seems not to happen, perhaps because the PBGC faces such a low
priority in the event of a default.
Other theoretical analysis has demonstrated that in the absence of pension insurance, firms may
have strong incentives to fully fund the liabilities of the pension plan and invest entirely in fixed income
securities with the same duration as the liabilities owed to beneficiaries. If pension fund assets perform
well, the firm will be under pressure from employees to increase benefits (Bulow and Scholes (1983),
Bodie (1990)). This likelihood is increased by the fact that once a firm has contributed to a pension plan,
it cannot withdraw the assets except in order pay beneficiaries or in certain rare circumstances.3
Therefore, if the PBGC insurance were not valuable, shareholders would own more of the deficit created
by poor asset performance than the surplus created by good performance, and in fact would have written a
put option on the value of the assets in the pension fund, rather than owning such a put option. There are
also strong tax arguments for holding more heavily taxed assets within the pension fund. Firms that hold
equity in pension funds and bond-like assets outside the pension fund are acting in a tax inefficient
manner. They could undertake tax arbitrage transactions that increase shareholder value by reducing
equity exposure within the pension fund (Black (1980) and Tepper (1981)).
Given that firms invest pension funds so heavily in risky assets, there must be benefits to this
behavior that are outside of the above models. The PBGC is often considered the primary driver of risktaking in pension funds, a claim which I evaluate in this paper, and for which I find little evidence. There
are numerous alternative hypotheses that may explain why firms invest in equity at all in pension funds.
First, the firm may desire to offer pension beneficiaries the upside to good performance in
pension assets (Sweeting (2005)) or access to alternative securities that may not be available to individual
investors (Campbell and Viceira (2005)). Second, as hypothesized by Gold (2005) and demonstrated by
Bergstresser, Desai, and Rauh (2006), firms may wish to maximize the short-term earnings impact of
selecting an equity investment strategy that allows for the assumption of a high rate of return on pension
assets. Third, as in Lucas and Zeldes (2006) and Sundaresan and Zapatero (1997), firms may invest in

8

equity to hedge against increases in projected benefits owed to employees; these projected benefits are a
function of real wages which are likely correlated with the stock market.
Fourth, some observers have proposed that decisions about pension funds are made in a vacuum
with respect to the rest of the firm’s operations. This last explanation is denied in conversations with
industry insiders as well as in voluntary disclosures about the pension investment governance process (see
for example Lucent Retirees Organization (2003)). The board of the corporation and committees of its
managers are responsible for setting pension fund investment policy and appointing or hiring investment
managers to execute it. Many firms have entire internal divisions responsible for investing pension assets
(Denmark (2006)). A lack of consideration of corporate objectives in pension fund investing is
nonetheless a possibility at poorly managed firms.
This study focuses primarily on asset allocation within pension plans as a function of other
characteristics of the plans and their sponsors. The study of the funding decision is also of interest but is
characterized by the fact that firm actions are constrained by law. Firms must fund pension plans up to
legally mandated statutory levels, and since 1987 have only received tax deductions for contributions to
underfunded plans, using a strict definition. Furthermore, Rauh (2006) shows that most underfunded
pension plans contribute at the statutory minimum amount, although there are examples of large voluntary
contributions (e.g. General Motors in 2003).
In untabulated specifications, I also examine contribution behavior, but the results do not
contribute greatly to understanding risk taking in pension funds. Firms contributions to pension plans are
greatest when the plans are more underfunded, consistent with the fact that this is when mandatory
contribution requirements are the strongest. Firms also make larger contributions when they have more
cash on hand and more cash flow. The unrestricted nature of asset allocation in pension funds makes it a
more fruitful area for consideration.
There have been a number of previous empirical studies of pension funding and asset allocation
that examine these incentives, with generally conflicting conclusions. These studies include Friedman
(1983) which uses a cross-section of approximately 8,000 plans from 1977; Bodie, Mørck, and Taggart

9

(1985) and Bodie, Mørck, and Taggart (1987), which draw on a dataset of 939 firms from 1980; Petersen
(1996) which uses IRS 5500 data from years 1988-1990; Hsieh, Chen, and Ferris (1994) which uses a
cross-sectional dataset of 176 firms in 1989, and Coronado and Liang (2005) which uses a cross-section
of 363 observations from 2002. These studies have reached conflicting conclusions about both the degree
integration of corporate pension policy with real corporate decisions and the direction of the effects. For
example, Bodie, Mørck, and Taggart (1987) find a negative correlation between risk taking and funding,
consistent with risk shifting, whereas Petersen (1996) finds a positive correlation. The primary obstacle
has been that until now a sufficient panel dataset has never been compiled to study these issues in a way
that allows the consideration of both cross-sectional relations and relations within firms and plans over
time.
The results in this paper contrast with the findings of Cocco and Volpin (2007), who find a
positive relationship between firm leverage and allocation to risky assets among a sample of 90 U.K.
firms when the pension trustees are aligned with shareholder interests. This is probably due to the fact
that the institutions governing the U.K. system are different from those of the U.S. system. In particular,
the system of mandatory contributions may not be as punishing if the pension gets underfunded, allowing
firms in the U.K. system more leeway to take risk.
1.3. Risk Management and Other Constraints on Risk Shifting in Pension Funds
The literature has identified a number factors that limit the risk-shifting conflict of interest
between shareholders and creditors (see Harris and Raviv (1991) for a review). For pension fund
investing, the incentive to manage cash flow risk is one such factor. As emphasized in a general context
by Leland (1998), there is a tension between any factor that makes risk management more valuable and
any incentives for risk shifting. Poor realizations from pension fund investing require the firm to make
cash contributions to pension funds (Rauh (2006)), which in turn create several problems for the firm.
First, mandatory contributions may contribute to the firm incurring costs of financial distress if
the cash drain causes a default on the firm’s nonpension debt. Mayers and Smith (1982) and Smith and
Stulz (1985) formalize the idea that if financial distress is costly then risk management can increase

10

shareholder value by reducing the probability of financial distress. Indeed, one prediction of these models
is that as firms get closer to financial distress they should take fewer risks that might cause the costs of
financial distress to be incurred.
Second, mandatory contributions may force financially constrained firms to forgo investment
projects. Several models link the benefits of risk management to debt overhang (Mayers and Smith
(1987)), and to the covariances between the stochastic process underlying the risk and the firm’s
investment opportunities. As in Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993), firms that are financially constrained
can create value by minimizing the risks of ending up in the state of the world where they have profitable
investment opportunities that need to be funded from internal funds, which are depleted because of the
risk outcome. Building on this argument, Acharya, Almeida and Campello (2007) develop a relationship
between hedging demand and corporate cash and debt policies. Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2006)
explicitly model the impact that future financing costs might have on financial and investment policy,
particularly with respect to incentives for limiting risk-taking behavior.4 Translating these arguments into
the pension context, the higher the probability that the firm suffers a pension loss but still survives, the
greater are the risk management incentives. Indeed, Petersen (1994) has looked at the choice of pension
plan type (DB versus DC) as a risk management strategy.
According to Almeida and Philippon (2007), the 5-year historical default probability for BBB, B,
and B rated firms are 1.95%, 11.42%, and 31.00% respectively. Both the risk-shifting incentive and the
risk-management incentive to avoid costly financial distress would therefore be expected to increase as
credit ratings decline. The risk-management incentive to avoid the state where there are high mandatory
contributions but the firm survives might be expected to be stronger for investment grade firms when
default probabilities are low. On the other hand, investment grade firms may have more easy access to
external finance, and therefore they may have less incentive to be concerned about financial constraints.
Another often hypothesized factor that mitigates risk shifting is the existence of explicit
covenants on firm behavior in loan agreements (Lehn and Poulsen (1991)). However, such agreements
do not specify restrictions on pension fund investment policy, even though pension fund asset allocation

11

is a contractible choice. Furthermore, as evidenced by the variety of risky and alternative assets held by
pension funds, ERISA is also extremely permissive.
In the case of pension funding and investment policy, the tension between risk shifting and risk
management is very apparent. If the firm goes bankrupt, the unfunded liability is low in priority. This
creates an incentive for the firm to take risks with the assets that back that liability during the period
before a possible bankruptcy. On the other hand, if the firm survives and has to make large statutory
contributions to its pension plan, it will have lost all of the potential benefits from risk management. In
particular, it may face financial distress, and it may lose the opportunity to undertake profitable
investment projects This creates an incentive for the firm to limit pension fund risk ex ante.
The empirical predictions that emerge from this analysis are as follows. If risk shifting is an
important determinant of risk taking in pension funds, then one should observe plans of firms near
financial distress taking large risks. Within plans over time and within firms over time, risk should
increase as funding and financial condition deteriorate. If risk management is an important constraint on
risk taking in pension funds, then risk taking should be smaller as funding and financial condition
deteriorate.
2. Data and Summary Statistics
I use two sources of asset allocation information in this paper: 1.) the electronic IRS 5500 filings
from the Department of Labor on a large sample of small to medium sized plans and 2.) the survey-based
data on the largest corporate pension sponsors from Pensions and Investments matched to Compustat.
These data are used in two different sets of analyses, as their coverage for asset allocation generally does
not overlap, for reasons described below.
2.1. IRS 5500 Filings and the United Airlines Pension Plan
The most detailed pension allocation data are contained in the IRS 5500 filings. All sponsors of
pension plans with more than 100 employees must file the IRS form 5500 on an annual basis. The U.S.
Department of Labor (DOL) is entrusted with keeping the information on file and providing it to the
public upon request. A full filing consists of many schedules, plus what generally amounts to dozens of

12

pages of attachments. The DOL makes all of the schedules available electronically for years after 1984,
usually with a 2-3 year lag. The attachments, however, are only available in hard copy. The latest year
for which all the data are available is 2003. The electronic data from 1984-1987 contain only a subset of
the requisite variables for this study and so I do not use those years. The data include non-profit
organizations and unions but primarily consist of corporate sponsors.
Information on asset allocation may appear in two parts of the filing. First, Schedule H, which is
part of the electronic dataset, contains a breakdown of asset allocation into standardized categories.
However, on this form, firms may classify assets as belonging to opaque categories that are not
informative as to their risk. So while firms can declare assets as being in corporate stock or government
bonds, they can also assign those assets to common or collective trusts, pooled separate accounts, master
trusts, 103-12 investment entities, and registered investment companies. It is generally larger pension
sponsors that avail themselves of these vehicles. In order to determine the full asset allocation of these
opaque categories, one must look at the hard-copy attachments.
Table 1 shows a summary of information that can be gleaned from the filings of UAL
Corporation, the parent company of United Airlines. UAL Corporation filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
in 2002 and terminated its pension plans with the PBGC in 2005 after lengthy bankruptcy proceedings.
Covering the period 1999-2004, this table shows the allocation of the United Airlines pension trust to four
asset classes: common and preferred equities, corporate and government debt, private equity, and cash
and short-term instruments. This trust contains the assets backing the pensions of the entire domestic
workforce of United Airlines. The first column of the table shows the deep decline in and then partial
recovery of available pension assets over time. Variation in this quantity is due to changes in the market
value of the assets as well as the level of contributions net of benefit payments. The share of assets
allocated to risky investments such as stock and private equity did not rise substantially right before
UAL’s bankruptcy filing, with assets allocated to common and preferred equities declining from 66.8% in
1999 to 59.7% in 2001. The percentage allocation to private equity rose from 2.2% to 4.4% over this
period, but the percentage allocation to the safer asset classes (debt and cash) rose more substantially.

13

Allocation to risky assets did rise somewhat during the bankruptcy proceedings, during which time the
managers of UAL Corporation still controlled the pension assets.
These patterns may be partially explained by passive or inertial investing in which asset classes
which have increased in value end up with higher asset allocation shares, or some direct cost of
rebalancing. The final two columns of Table 1 show the predicted share if there is no rebalancing under
different assumptions about the reinvestment of dividends and interest payments. The allocation shares
generally move in direction that would be predicted if there were no rebalancing, though they do not
move as far. For example, the allocation to equities declined from 59.7% to 56.9% between 2001 and
2002, whereas if there had been no rebalancing and dividends and interest payments had been reinvested,
they would have been predicted to decline to 54.4%.
This detail of information cannot be collected for a large sample of plans, so the large-sample
analysis in this paper that draws on the IRS 5500 filings is restricted to those plans whose asset allocation
can be obtained from the electronic data. For this analysis I examine asset allocation as revealed only by
plans for which these opaque assets are less than five percent of the total, which is roughly 40% of the
sample. This sample selection skews the sample towards small to medium sized plans, which are less
likely to use these investment vehicles. The mean size of plans that survive this filter is $48 million,
compared with $84 million of the entire sample. Furthermore, consistent definitions of pension liabilities
are only available after 1990, so I further restrict the sample to cover the years 1990-2003.
I identify plans which terminated in bankruptcy by constructing a web crawler to extract the
reports of terminated plans on the PBGC website.5 This procedure uncovers 3,574 plans that were
terminated between 1974 and the present, which compares to a total count of 3,585 from the PBGC
annual report (PBGC (2005)). Of these plans, 1,130 could be matched to plans between 1988 and 2003 in
the IRS 5500 database, compared to a total count of 1,822 for years 1988-2003 in the PBGC annual report
(PBGC (2005)). The loss of 692 observations here reflects the restriction of the IRS 5500 dataset to plans
with more than 100 employees.

14

The effects of the sample selection and the summary statistics for the main variables used in this
analysis are detailed in Tables 2a and 2b. Table 2a shows summary statistics for the full 1988-2003
sample. The only sample restrictions are that the observation had to be a DB plan with greater than 100
employees, with information on beginning-of-year plan assets (which also had to be nonzero),
contributions, and investment income. PBGC terminations from the termination database were then
merged onto this data by EIN and plan number. This procedure added some observations back to the
dataset since often the year of the termination was after the plan’s final complete IRS 5500 filing. Table
2b shows summary statistics for the sample used in the analysis. It restricts the sample to only those
observations which are in 1990-2003 and for which opaque assets are less than 5% of total pension assets.
The full sample of plan-level data consists of 214,015 observations on 33,144 unique plans (as
identified by unique EIN and plan number combinations) and 23,456 unique employers (as identified by
unique EINs). The mean pension plan observation in the sample has asset value of $84.46 million as of
the beginning of the plan year and the median has asset value of $6.53 million, so size is highly skew in
this sample with some larger firms having a large impact on the sample moments. Investment income
from these firms is similarly skewed. The largest dollar value return on invested assets was $8.7 billion
for General Motors primary pension plan in 1999, and the most negative return on invested assets was
−$5.5 billion for the same pension plan in 2001.
Table 2a also provides ratios in percentage terms for plan terminations, funding status, and
investment returns. Investment returns are calculated as investment income divided by beginning of year
assets and therefore incorporate the assumption that contributions are not made until the end of the year.
Investment returns of less than −80% or greater than 500% are replaced as missing, which only affects a
total of 32 observations. The remaining ratio variables are winsorized at the 1% level to avoid outliers.
The mean value of contributions is 9.30% of beginning-of-year assets..
As revealed by plans in this sample with less than 5% of assets in opaque trusts, plans held an
average of roughly 30.6% of assets in government debt and cash, 25.5% of assets in corporate equity, and
23.2% of assets in insurance company general accounts. In insurance company account arrangements, the

15

insurance company provides an annuity that pays the pension benefits and keeps plan assets in their
general pool of funds. This is comparatively a very safe arrangement for the pension sponsor, as the risk
has been transferred to the insurance company which invests only in high grade securities. Only if the
insurer defaults on its contracts is the pension sponsor potentially exposed to the risk of its beneficiaries
not receiving their pension annuities. Alternative statistics are also shown in the table in which insurance
company general account assets are excluded from the denominator.
The corporate equity calculation includes the own stock of the employer, which on average is
present only in a trace amount (0.3% at the mean), due to statutory restrictions and practical limitations
posed by the firm’s fiduciary responsibilities to beneficiaries. It does not include private equity.
Figure 1 illustrates the development of the mean asset allocation in the major asset classes over
the time period of the sample. The top graph includes insurance arrangements and the bottom graph
excludes them. In both cases, the clear pattern emerges that allocation to stocks has increased
dramatically, on the order of 25% between 1988-2003. Allocation to cash and government debt have
declined by a similar amount. If anything over this time period, risk management incentives should have
increased as funding rules were made somewhat stricter by the Retirement Protection Act of 1994. Risk
shifting incentives may have been stronger or weaker at various times depending on the financial
condition of firms. This figure is most consistent with the idea that firms moved assets towards equity in
order to keep the expected return on pension assets constant over a period of falling bond yields. As
yields declined over this time period, there were two ways that firms could maintain a constant expected
return on pension plan assets: either they could increase allocation to equity relative to bonds, or they
could shift allocations away from bonds towards stocks.
Table 2b shows the summary statistics when the sample is restricted to the observations that can
be used in the estimation (1990-2003 and less than 5% opaque investment assets). As discussed above,
the mean size of the pension plan declines from $84 million to $48 million; the median declines from
$6.53 million to $6.24 million. Sample firms have roughly half the average level of investment income

16

and contributions as firms in the IRS 5500 universe. Roughly the same proportion of observations
represents a bankruptcy termination (0.25 percent versus 0.27 percent).
2.2. Pensions and Investments Survey Data and the Largest U.S. Pension Sponsors
Large, publicly-traded companies, such as those in Compustat, are more likely to have a large
proportion of assets in opaque trusts. Furthermore, accurate matching of the IRS 5500 database to
Compustat was only feasible before 1998 (see Rauh (2006)) when the IRS 5500 forms contained a CUSIP
field, in addition to an EIN and a company name. A corporate entity with subsidiaries consists of
companies with several different names and EINs. For these reasons, focusing on the matchable nonopaque sample between 1990 and 1998 yields an insufficient sample.
In this study I therefore also perform separate analysis using the Pensions and Investments survey
matched to Compustat for 1997-2004. The newspaper Pensions and Investments annually profiles the
1,000 pension sponsors from all sectors of the economy (public and private) with the largest amount of
assets. The newspaper surveys the sponsors with regard to the asset allocation of their pension funds as
of September 30th of the year in question. I match the results of this survey to Compustat by company
name, first using a name-matching algorithm and then hand-matching as many unmatched companies as
possible.
Table 3 shows information obtained from Pensions and Investments for a sub-sample of 13 large
DB pension sponsors in the U.S. in 2003, and compares it to the information on these sponsors that was
able to be obtained from the IRS 5500 attachments. The companies consist of 9 of the 10 largest pension
sponsors, plus major airlines that filed for bankruptcy.6 The two sources are not taken at exactly
comparable time periods, as the typical plan year ends in December whereas the survey is taken as of
September. However, correlation coefficients between the two sources are quite high. The correlation
coefficient between the percent in stocks according to the IRS 5500s and the percent in stocks according
to Pensions and Investments is 0.88. For the percent in bonds plus cash it is 0.85, for private equity it is
0.94, and for real estate it is 0.86.

17

Table 3 also compares these two sources to another source of information on pension asset
allocation, the disclosures recently available in SEC 10-K filings. Since the FASB revision of SFAS 132
in 2003, firms have been required to present such information, so that for most firms an asset allocation
breakdown is available from 10-K filings for fiscal years ending 2002-2004. However, the asset
allocation categories are coarse, as shown in the table. Correlation coefficients between the cross-sections
of stock and bond allocations from this source and the other two sources run from 0.80 to 0.96.
Importantly, a cursory analysis of Table 3 does not suggest that more financially troubled firms
choose to take more risk in their pension plans as revealed by the allocation to the different classes of
investment. Based on the Pensions and Investments data, the highest allocation to stocks plus private
equity is 71.7% (= 52.6% + 12.2%) at Verizon, which has an A+ S&P credit rating. The lowest allocation
excluding firms that were already in bankruptcy in 2003 (United Airlines and U.S. Airways) is General
Motors at 57%, and this company has a BBB rating. Of the companies in Chapter 11 in 2003, United
Airlines allocated 64% of its pension fund to stocks and private equity, whereas U.S. Airways allocated
only 42%.
In order to perform statistical analysis with credit ratings, it is necessary to have a numerical scale
for the S&P credit rating. I scale the Compustat credit rating variable so that values are between zero and
one, with higher values implying better credit ratings. If the firm has an AAA credit rating with S&P then
the credit rating variable equals 0.929, if the firm has a D rating then the credit rating variable has a value
of 0.036, and each of the 28 rating steps in between raises the credit rating variable by 0.036 (or 1/28).
For the observations in Table 3, the correlation coefficient between this credit rating variable and
the percentage allocated to stock and private equity is 0.44 including all of the companies in the table, and
0.22 including only the ones not in Chapter 11 as of 2003. This implies that if anything the correlation
runs in the direction of worse-rated companies having lower allocations to equity and better-rated
companies having higher allocations to equity. In other words, this first analysis is more suggestive of
risk management than risk shifting, but clearly this is only suggestive.

18

Table 4 shows summary statistics for the key variables from the portion of the Pensions and
Investments survey database that was able to be matched to Compustat. The final dataset contains 2,186
total observations on 438 unique firms. Observations for which asset allocation shares were missing due
to survey non-response or did not add up to one were dropped, which led to a loss of 690 observations.
Only observations for which Compustat data was available for all the variables in the table were retained.
Observations with no credit rating receive a value of zero for that data item, but there is also an indicator
for observations with no credit rating, which equals one for 8.7% of sample observations. It should be
emphasized that this paper’s sample is far from representative of public firms. In the Compustat universe,
roughly one-quarter of firms have a bond rating.
Pension assets are measured as U.S. pension assets at the end of the year as collected from SEC
10-K filings. Where this information is unavailable, global pension assets from Compustat
(data287+dat296) are used. Pension liabilities are measured as the U.S. projected benefit obligation at the
end of the year, again as collected from 10-K filings where possible, otherwise using Compustat
(data286+data294). The pension funding status is the pension funding surplus or deficit (pension assets
minus pension liabilities) scaled by pension liabilities. Firms in the sample have a mean of $3.5 billion
dollars in pension assets and have pension liabilities that at the mean amount to 20% of the firm’s
operating assets. These observations are at the mean 5.2% overfunded, at the median roughly fully
funded, and the funding status has a standard deviation of 30%.
Table 4 also shows summary statistics for other control variables from Compustat, including
pension related variables. These are reported on a global basis. Benefits measures include projections of
pension benefits that will be owed to employees as their wages and years of service increase over time.
Altman’s Z-Score is (3.3*EBIT / Operating Assets) + (Sales / Operating Assets) + 1.4*(Retained
Earnings / Operating Assets) + 1.2*(Net Working Capital / Operating Assets). The ratio of cash flow to
assets is cash flow (net income + depreciation and amortization + pension expense = data14 + data18 +
data43) divided by total assets (data6).

19

Allocation to debt and cash averaged 30.41% over the sample period, and allocation to equity
averaged 63.20%. One drawback of the survey is that respondents are not asked to distinguish
government and corporate bonds. Allocation to private equity and real estate averaged 3.54%, while all
other assets accounted for 2.85% at the mean. Insurance company arrangements do not typically play a
large role in the investment of pension assets for the large publicly traded companies covered by the
Pensions and Investment survey, and these arrangements are aggregated into the “other” category.
3. Plan Characteristics, Firm Characteristics and Asset Allocation
One method of testing the risk shifting hypothesis against the risk management hypothesis is to
examine the observable components of risk exposure with respect to characteristics of the sponsoring
plan. In this section I examine this relation in the IRS 5500 plan level data.
At the plan level, the main explanatory variable of interest is the funding status of the pension
plan. The level of assets to fund a given liability is the cumulative result of all past investment returns, as
well as past decisions about how much to contribute to the plan net of benefits paid out. Plans that are
well-funded are likely to reflect financially healthy sponsors. Furthermore, the more underfunded the
pension plan, the further in the money is the put option for the pension sponsor. Under the risk shifting
hypothesis, therefore, better funded plans should take less investment risk, whereas under the risk
management hypothesis they would take more risk.
Table 5 shows a series of 8 regressions (4 in each panel) documenting the relationship between
the percentage of the pension fund invested in equity and plan characteristics. The first two columns are
pooled regressions, including year effects but no plan fixed effects. The last two columns include both
year and plan fixed effects. The dependent variables are scaled in terms of percentage points. The second
and fourth columns contain controls for the one year lag of investment returns to examine how past
investment returns may affect investment allocation shares.
The regressions in the first two columns reveal that in the cross-section, plans that are better
funded invest more in equity securities. A 10 percentage point higher funding status is correlated with
0.545-0.676 percentage points greater allocation to equity. Within firms over time, a 10 percentage point

20

higher funding status is correlated with an 0.163-0.229 percentage point greater allocation to equity, as
revealed by the last two columns of the top panel. The second panel of Table 5 shows similar but inverse
patterns for the relation between funding status and allocation to the safe asset classes. If pension funding
deteriorates within a firm over time, the percent of the pension fund invested in safe securities tends to
increase.
All specifications contain linear and log controls for the size of pension assets in order to absorb
size effects. The size effects themselves are generally non-monotonic, with the positive log effect
dominating at values of up to $3.2 billion. Based on coefficients of -1.5 for assets in billions of dollars
and 4.8 for the natural log of assets, an additional $100 million of assets at mean characteristics ($45
million in assets) is correlated with 5.47 percentage points higher equity exposure (.15 percentage points
lower equity exposure through the linear term and 5.62 percentage points higher equity exposure through
the log term). The negative size effect that dominates at higher values is of a relatively small magnitude,
with a $50 billion dollar fund predicted to have a 1.4% lower allocation to equity than a $3 billion fund.
Controls are also included in all specifications for the active share of employees. The coefficient
in the pooled equity regressions is 3.76-4.32 and is highly statistically significant. This implies that firms
with a 10 percentage point larger share of active employees have roughly 0.4 percentage point higher
allocations to equity. The coefficient in the within-firm regressions is between 3.1 and 3.4. These results
suggest that as the active share decreases and the liabilities on average must be met sooner, the firm takes
less pension investment risk. Note that since new employees are increasingly not brought in on DB plans,
the active share has been decreasing over time at most firms.
The controls for lagged investment returns in the second and fourth columns of the table show
that the percentage of assets invested in each category does appear to vary in statistically significant ways
with the lagged investment return. In the pooled specification, a 10 percent higher investment return
leads to a 2.9 percentage point higher allocation to equity; within firms over time the effect is 0.9
percentage points. The percentage of the pension fund invested in safe assets appears to decline
accordingly when lagged investment returns are high. Most of the variation in investment returns is likely

21

caused by fluctuations in the values of the most volatile assets. The significance of lagged investment
returns in explaining asset allocation might represent the fact that when investment returns are bad,
pensions become less funded and then the need to manage risk becomes greater. Alternatively, it reflects
a behavioral inertia effect in investing, a cost of rebalancing, or an excessive focus by managers on the
one-year lagged return in assessing the likely risks and returns of investing in risky securities. The effects
of the other variables are still strong even in the presence of these controls.
Figure 2 shows the relationship between the decile of the funding status and the percent of total
assets invested in equities versus government debt and cash. The top graph illustrates the coefficient
results from two pooled regressions of asset allocation (one regression for equity, the other for debt, cash,
and insurance) on funding deciles with year controls. The relation between funding status and percent of
total assets invested in stocks is monotonically increasing, whereas the relationship between funding
status and the percent invested in government debt, cash and insurance is monotonically decreasing. The
omitted category in both graphs is the lowest funding decile. Therefore, the top graph shows that plans in
the second (i.e. second-worst) decile of funding have allocations to stocks that are 4 percentage points
greater than those in the first (i.e. worst) decile of funding in the same year. Plans in the top (i.e. best)
decile of funding have allocations to equity that are 15 percentage points greater than plans in the worst
funding decile in the same year. The allocation to government debt, cash, and insurance shows a roughly
inverse response. The lower graphs shows the same coefficients within firms over time, controlling for
plan fixed effects. A similar relation holds, though of magnitudes that are roughly only 25% as large as
those in the pooled specification.
Table 6 shows the specifications in Table 5, but considers only plans with assets not 100%
invested in insurance company general accounts and redefines the dependent variables to be the percent
of all non-insurance pension assets held in the given asset class. The dependent variable in the top panel
is therefore the percent of the plan’s non-insurance pension assets held in equity and the bottom is the
percent of the plan’s non-insurance pension asset held in government debt and cash. The results are

22

similar to the results in Table 5. Funding status effects on pension fund asset allocation are generally
even stronger.
The relationships between pension fund asset allocation and plan characteristics can be
summarized as follows. Plans with worse funding in general take less investment risk than plans with
better funding, even controlling for both calendar year effects and firm fixed effects. This effect is of a
similar magnitude to Petersen (1996). Moreover, plans whose employees are on average farther away
from retirement take greater risk in the pension plan. Therefore, pension plans take fewer risks when
those risks could be most costly to the firm’s operations in the future.
4. Firm Characteristics and Asset Allocation
This section considers between firm characteristics and risk-taking in pension plans. For reasons
explained in Section 2, I address this question with a different dataset, the Pensions and Investments data
on pension fund asset allocation. In particular, I focus on the relationship between firm credit ratings and
asset allocation, as the credit rating is arguably the best available measure of the firm’s financial strength
and the likelihood of defaulting on debt agreements.
Table 7 shows the results of regressions of pension fund investment strategies on firm
characteristics in pooled specifications, i.e. without individual firm effects. The left panel presents
regressions on the percentage of assets invested in debt and cash, and the right panel presents regressions
on the percentage of assets invested in equity. Within each panel there are three different specifications
with different sets of control variables. The first column contains only controls for the size of the firm’s
operating assets and pension assets. The second column contains additional controls for the Z-Score
measure of bankruptcy probability and the standard deviation of operating cash flow. The final column
also includes controls for the size of the pension obligation relative to operating assets, and to the pension
funding status (the pension surplus or deficit scaled by pension assets).
The results in Table 7 demonstrate that S&P credit ratings are positively correlated with the share
of pension fund assets invested in equity, and negatively correlated with the percentage of the pension
fund assets invested in debt and cash. The coefficients on the S&P credit rating represent the

23

approximately the difference in allocation shares between an observation with the worst credit rating and
the best credit rating. This difference is -5 to -6 percentage points for debt and +8 to +10 percentage
points for equity. This result is statistically significant in all but one of the specifications. The results
reveal that firms with better credit ratings invest their pension funds in more risky assets.
The credit rating result is the opposite of the expected prediction if risk-shifting incentives were
driving pension fund asset allocation, and is much more consistent with the risk management hypothesis.
Furthermore, the positive correlation between credit rating and asset allocation is the opposite of what
would be expected if credit ratings were being set endogenously to reflect the risk that firms were taking
in their pension funds. If anything, rating agencies should tend to give lower ratings to firms with riskier
positions for a given level of funding.
Table 7 indicates that the 8.7% of the sample with no credit rating are likely to have somewhat
higher allocations to equity than firms with a credit rating. This result is difficult to interpret given that
some of these firms are high-quality firms that have no need of accessing the credit markets — especially
those without a credit rating for the entire sample period, or young firms which gain credit ratings during
the sample period. Other firms without a credit rating may be distressed firms. I return to this below
when I consider the results within firms over time.
The control variables in Table 7 other than size are not statistically significant. The pension
funding status coefficients have t-statistics of approximately one in both the debt specification and the
equity specification, but the direction of correlation goes in the same direction as in the plan-level
regressions. If these coefficients were statistically significant, one would predict that an observation with
a 10 percentage point higher pension funding status would have 0.260 percentage points less investment
in debt and cash and 0.245 percentage points more investment in equity, again consistent with risk
management, not risk shifting.
Table 8 repeats Table 7 but estimates the model using panel data techniques that account for
unobserved effects at the firm level. Instead of presenting firm fixed effect specifications, I present
random effects specifications because the random effects estimator is more efficient and Hausman tests of

24

the consistency of random effects versus fixed effects are highly supportive of the consistency of random
effects. The chi-squared test statistics and associated rejection probabilities are shown in the table.
Generally one would only reject the consistency of random effects of these statistics were close to zero
(less than 0.10 if working with 90% confidence intervals); they are all 0.80 or above.7
Table 8 shows that a very similar relationship between the credit rating and the pension fund asset
allocation strategy emerges in the random effects specification, compared to the pooled specifications in
Table 7. The conclusions of the cross-sectional analysis therefore also carry over to considering variation
in the credit rating within firms over time. The higher the credit rating, the larger the proportion of assets
that are invested in riskier securities such as equity and the smaller the proportion of assets that are
invested in safe securities such as debt and cash.
The risk management hypothesis predicts that this effect should be stronger for firms with a
reasonably high demand for capital. In untabulated results, I divide the sample into groups of firms based
on historical 1984-1997 ratios of investment to cash flow and rerun the Table 8 regressions. The results
are consistently the largest and strongest in the groups with the highest historical investment to cash flow
relation, e.g. above-median firms compared to below-median firms, and top-third firms compared to the
other two categories. However, the results are not strong enough to be able to reject the statistical
hypothesis that the coefficients in the different groups are of equal magnitude, and the coefficients are not
monotonic across the tritiles.
These regressions also suggest that a firm tends to have greater allocation to equity during a year
when it lacks a credit rating compared to a year when it has a credit rating. This result is driven by firms
that gain credit ratings, not by firms that lose them. There are 38 firms out of 448 that at some point had a
credit rating and at some point did not. Of these firms, 12 of them lost credit ratings, while the remainder
gained credit ratings for the first time. In untabulated results, I find that removal of the firms that lost
credit ratings from the sample regression strengthens the results with this coefficient rising from 4-5 to
approximately 9 with very strong statistical significance. Removal of the firms that gained credit ratings
from the sample regression reduces the magnitude and destroys the statistical significance. Therefore, the

25

finding that a given firm has greater allocation to equity during a year when it lacks a credit rating
indicates that firms reduce risk when they get a credit rating for the first time. This could well be because
S&P examines the firm’s pension risk before granting a credit rating.
The R-squared of the regressions in Tables 7 and 8 is quite low (0.01-0.02), considerably lower
than the R-squared of the plan-level regressions (0.09-0.12). This may be related to the fact that the
dependent variable is a survey variable that is measured with error. Furthermore, there is a large amount
of persistence in asset allocation choices. The addition of lagged asset allocation to the pooled
regressions would increase the R-squared to 45-50% without affecting the inference about the other
explanatory effects. There is in any case a large component of pension fund asset allocation that is not
explained by observable characteristics of the firm and its pension assets and liabilities, and may be
determined by the investment philosophies and risk attitudes of the sponsors.
In untabulated results, I also examine the correlation between the hedging demand measures
proposed by Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) and asset allocation in pension funds. This is done
in order to test whether firms select pension investments to correlate with their own investment
opportunities (Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993)). The measures I consider are the correlation between
a firm’s Q and its cash flow scaled by assets, the correlation between a firm’s Q and the annual return on
the S&P 500, and the correlation between a firm’s cash flow scaled by assets and the annual return on the
S&P 500. I also investigate the same correlations using industry median Q instead of a firm’s Q. Firms
whose own investment opportunities are highly correlated with the market should have a lower hedging
demand and be able to take on more risk, since when the stock market (and their pension funding) is
down, so is their need for cash to fund profitable investment opportunities. Firms whose own cash flows
are highly correlated with the market should have a higher hedging demand and want to take on less risk,
since when the stock market (and their pension funding) is down, so is their supply of cash. The results
of this investigation were inconclusive, however.
As a further test of the hypothesis that firms optimally hedge pension fund risk, I examine the
correlation of the pension investment return with the ratio of cash flow to lagged assets in the presence of

26

year fixed effects. On the 2,000 observations for which both of these variables are available, the
coefficient in a regression of the pension investment return on the ratio of cash flow to lagged assets is
0.020 with a firm-clustered standard error of 0.023. While it is certainly the case that years when firms
have high cash flow are years when pension funds perform well, there is essentially zero within-year
correlation.
Given the plan level results, Table 9 examines another plausible determinant of pension fund
asset allocation, the return on pension assets during the fiscal year, in the context of specifications similar
to those in Tables 7 and 8. The sample is 2,008 observations, smaller by 186 observations due to the
unavailability of this data item, which was collected from SEC 10-K filings. The left panel and right
panel consider the percentage of asset in safe (debt) and risky (equity) securities respectively. Each panel
contains three columns: a pooled regression, a fixed effects regression, and a random effects regression.
The fixed effects regressions are shown in addition to the random effects regression because the test for
the consistency of random effects is somewhat marginal in the left panel (debt and cash), with a
probability value of 0.1545. The test is unequivocal in the right panel (equity).
The first row of Table 9 shows the coefficient on the return on invested pension assets. A 10
percentage point increase in the investment return (roughly one standard deviation) reduces the
percentage of assets in debt and cash by 0.772 percentage points in the pooled specification, but by an
insignificant amount in the regressions with firm effects. However, a 10 percentage point increase in the
investment return raises the percentage of assets invested in equity by over 0.998 percentage points in the
pooled specification, and by 0.712 percentage points in the random effects specification. The effect is not
statistically significant in the fixed effects regression, but since the random effects regression is consistent
and more efficient, the statistical inference should be based on the random effects results.
The remaining rows of Table 9 show the effects of the other variables, which are quite similar to
their values in Tables 7 and 8. Controlling for the investment return does not appear to affect the
conclusion: pension investment behavior of firms relative to their observable characteristics seems best
characterized by the risk management hypothesis. The fact that this result is robust to controlling for

27

lagged returns — as well as to the pension characteristics included in Tables 7 and 8 — suggests that it is
not driven purely by investor inertia or observationally similar tendencies created by transactions costs.
Financially stronger firms still take more risk than financially weaker firms, and allocations to safe assets
increase as credit ratings deteriorate.
5. Bankruptcy Probabilities and Asset Allocation
In this section, I estimate pension termination and corporate bankruptcy probabilities directly in
both the plan level and firm level data. I then non-parametrically examine the equilibrium relationship
between the ex ante estimated probability of default and the firm’s pension fund asset allocation.
One challenge of this exercise is the definition of the bankruptcy or termination date. As was the
case with United Airlines, there may be a lag between the filing of bankruptcy and the termination of the
plan with the PBGC. This is much more common when bankruptcies are complicated, as is more likely
to be the case with the larger firms in the firm-level analysis than with the firms in the plan-level analysis.
The plan-level data only reveals the date of PBGC termination, not of the bankruptcy filing,
which may happen before the termination. In the plan-level analysis I therefore use the date of PBGC
termination as the default date of interest, which implicitly assumes that either i.) the date of bankruptcy
filing is close to the date of PBGC termination; or ii.) the firm’s managers continue to control the asset
allocation of the pension fund during Chapter 11. The management of the plan while the firm is in
bankruptcy is generally still in the domain of corporate managers, although the PBGC may place
unobserved constraints pension fund decisions. There are 1,130 pension terminations in the plan-level
database. The binary default variable is defined as 0 up until the last observation before termination.
In the firm-level analysis I use a measure of the date of bankruptcy as the date of default. To
identify the bankruptcy date, I use the last data year before the firm was delisted in CRSP, or before the
date of bankruptcy filing if there was no identifiable delisting. Using the last year before the bankruptcy
filing does not change the inference, nor does redefining the event indicator to be two or three years
before the event. There are only 16 corporate bankruptcies of the 448 firms in the sample; these are listed
with dates in Appendix Table 1.

28

Not every firm that files for bankruptcy terminates its pension plan with the PBGC, as sometimes
the plans are sufficiently funded to pay off the pension liability. However, PBGC terminations can only
happen in Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Table 10 shows logit estimates in the plan-level data of the probability that a pension plan will be
terminated in financial distress with the PBGC the following year, using the explanatory variables from
the investigation in Table 5 and controlling for year effects. Odds ratios are presented in square brackets,
in addition to coefficients and standard errors. The left regression includes the funding status linearly and
the right regression includes the funding status in deciles. These regressions are estimated in the full IRS
5500 sample described in Table 2a for which pension liability information is available (170,080
observations); the sample is not conditioned on the existence of information about asset allocation.
The results of Table 10 reveal several drivers of pension fund terminations. First, plans that are
better funded are considerably less likely to terminate in bankruptcy than firms that are worse funded.
This seems logical as overfunded plans do not need to exploit the PBGC put option, even in the case of
bankruptcy. However, it is interesting to note that this relation is approximately monotonic when the
funding status is separated out by deciles. The odds ratio for a firm in the second funding decile (i.e.
second-worst) compared to the worst decile is 65.1%. For the third decile compared to the first it is
60.0%, for the fourth decile it is 42.4%, and so on. So the negative relation between funding and
termination probability is not just driven by the difference between underfunded and overfunded plans.
Table 10 also shows that plans which have had poor investment returns are more likely to terminate, as
are plans with smaller shares of active employees (implying larger shares of retirees).
Figure 3 then examines the relation between the predicted probability of bankruptcy based on the
estimates in Table 10 (left column) and the pension fund asset allocation. The top two graphs plot the
mean asset allocation (with lines for plus and minus two standard errors) against the probability of
bankruptcy. The graphs at the bottom of the page examine the deviation of asset allocation from its
within-year mean value against the deviation of termination probability against its within-year mean
value. The graphs on the left of the page examine the probability of termination deciles from the least

29

likely to terminate to the most likely to terminate. The graphs on the right examine the probability of
termination percentiles and focusing only on the top of the distribution, i.e. the 91st-100th percentile
groups.8
In all of the graphs the allocation to risky assets is decreasing with the probability of bankruptcy,
and the allocation to safe assets is increasing with the probability of bankruptcy. The upper left graph
shows that average allocation to equity (as a share of all pension assets including insurance) is
approximately 35% for plans in the least likely termination decile and 24% for plans in the highest
termination probability decile. The upper right graph shows that this value declines to below 20% in the
highest termination probability centile. The lower right graph shows that a plan in the least likely
termination decile within a given year has an allocation to equity that is 7 percentage points higher than
the average for the plans in that year, and a plan in the most likely termination decile within a given year
has an allocation to equity that is more than 10 percentage points lower than the average for the plans in
that year.
Logit estimates of bankruptcy probability in the firm-level data are presented in Table 11.
Unsurprisingly, worse credit ratings, higher standard deviations of operating cash flow, and lower ratios
of cash flow to assets are related to higher probabilities of bankruptcy. These regressions are conducted
without year fixed effects as there are a number of years in which there were no bankruptcies.
Furthermore, if the goal of the exercise is to generate predicted ex ante probabilities of bankruptcy it is
unclear that we want the firm to expect ex ante that the probability of bankruptcy will be higher in a given
year. Figure 4 then repeats the analysis of Figure 3 but now on the firm-level sample. The results here
are not as conclusive given the much smaller sample and number of bankruptcies in the sample, but are
still indicative of downward sloping relationships between risk-taking in pension funds and bankruptcy
probabilities.
6. Ex-Post Analysis
If moral hazard is an important determinant of pension investment behavior, plans that actually
terminated in bankruptcy should have taken on more investment risk in the years preceding the

30

termination. However, it is also the case that plans that take greater risk for any reason (not necessarily
moral hazard) are more likely to terminate in bankruptcy. A test of whether firms that ultimately went
bankrupt took more risk than firms that did not provides a useful upper bound on the extent of risk
shifting that could possibly have occurred. If there were no effect of risk taking on bankruptcy
probability, then this fact would purely represent risk shifting. As there is surely an effect of risk taking
on bankruptcy probability, this fact overstates moral hazard.
Table 12 shows the coefficients on ex post indicators of pension fund termination when added to
specifications in the previous tables. I try indicators of both one year and three years before termination
in the plan level data, and one year and three years before bankruptcy in the firm level data. The goal of
this exercise is to compare the asset allocation of firms that ultimately terminate with those that do not.
Each cell in the table represents one regression with controls, but only the coefficient of interest is shown
in the table. The pooled regressions for plan level data with controls use the specification in Table 5,
column 1, augmented with the pre-termination indicator. The firm effects regressions for plan level data
with controls use the specification in Table 5, column 3, augmented with the pre-termination indicator.
The pooled regressions for firm level data with controls use the specification in Table 7, columns 1 and 4,
augmented with the pre-termination indicator. The firm effects regressions for firm level data with
controls use the specification in Table 8, columns 1 and 4, augmented with the pre-termination indicator.
Table 12 reveals that in most specifications there is neither a statistically nor economically
significant relationship between risk taking in pension plans and ex post indicators of pension plan
termination or bankruptcy. In the top panel, which considers the plan level data from the IRS 5500
filings, the one regression in which an effect appears is that in the last observation before termination a
plan has a 6.1% larger allocation to stocks and 8.9% smaller allocation to government debt and cash than
a plan in the same year that does not terminate. Within the plan over time, these coefficients are 3.5%
and -4.7%. It is important to note that this effect only appears with this strength in the regression with
controls, i.e. when all of the other observable indicators for financial distress are controlled for. This is
much more suggestive of the reverse causality story than of risk shifting. It is only relative to firms with

31

the same ex ante observable indicators of financial strength that firms which ultimately terminated took
additional risk.
Another consideration is whether plans that actually terminated in bankruptcy had more volatile
investment returns during the period of their existence than plans that did not terminate. Figure 5 shows
the within-year mean investment returns of private sector plans that eventually terminated against those
that did not. Additionally it shows the investment performance of the PBGC, and of the value-weighted
NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq returns including dividend distributions. The PBGC itself appears to have at least
as volatile investment returns in pension fund investing compared to the universe of private sector plans.
Plans that ultimately terminated do not appear to have had more volatile annual investment returns over
the sample period than those that did not terminate. Time series standard deviations of returns for 19882003 for these different samples confirm this: 12.4% for the PBGC, 8.1% for value-weighted private
sector returns of non-terminating plans, and 6.9% for value-weighted private sector returns of plans that
did terminate. The lower graph in Figure 5 shows the same lines but net of the market return line.
Appendix Table 2 shows a more detailed analysis of the mean and standard deviation of returns
for the terminating versus the non-terminating sample of firms. The top panel shows for each year the
cross-sectional mean of the within-plan mean returns for plans that terminated in the listed year versus
those that did not terminate though the listed year, and the cross-sectional standard deviation of those
within-plan means. The lower panel shows for each year the mean of the within-plan standard deviations
for terminating versus non-terminating firms. The bottom lines of each panel summarize the results for
all plans. The mean returns of plans which ultimately terminated was 1.3% lower than the average,
accounting for year fixed effects. Plans that ultimately terminated had an average standard deviation of
8.0%, compared to firms that did not terminate which had an average standard deviation of 9.4%.
The comparison of terminating versus non-terminating plans thus reveals that the investment
returns of plans that terminated were no more volatile than those of plans that did not terminate, or of the
PBGC’s own investments.
7. Conclusion

32

Observers have often assumed that moral hazard plays a role in pension fund asset allocation.
However, this study finds that plans and firms in fact have less risky pension fund asset allocations when
their financial condition is weaker. Allocations of pension fund assets to safer assets (debt and cash) are
higher when the plan is less funded and when the sponsor has a lower credit rating. These findings,
which are robust both in the cross-section and within firms over time, run counter to the moral hazard
hypothesis and suggest that risk management incentives to avoid costly financial distress dominate on
average in this context. However, there appears to be zero within-year correlation between the return on
pension assets and the return on operating assets, suggesting that firms do not dynamically tailor pension
investments to correlate with their own investment opportunities (as would be predicted by Froot,
Scharfstein and Stein (1993)). I also find that the allocation of pension fund assets to equities is
positively correlated with the share of plan participants who are current employees, indicating that firms
consider the duration of pension liabilities in formulating pension fund investment strategy.
The fact that risk management in pensions is empirically witnessed even close to bankruptcy
stands in contrast to the evidence of moral hazard found in analyses of the incentives faced by savings and
loan institutions in the 1980s. Nonetheless, one conclusion of the savings and loan literature is that risk
shifting only happened at thrifts whose financial condition was extremely poor. Kroszner and Strahan
(1996), for example, show that while insolvent thrifts increased dividends to shareholders, such payouts
are generally positively correlated with the financial health of the institution.
Risk shifting is only one type of conflict between creditors and shareholders. Creditors clearly
use covenants in loan agreements to prevent direct expropriation and value extraction by shareholders.
Some forms of direct expropriation, such as spinning off profitable divisions, may have little or no risk
consequences for the firm. However, it is notable that creditors do not restrict the risk behavior of firms
in their pension funds. This fact suggests that it is risk management incentives and not an explicit
restriction on behavior that generates the observed results.
I conclude with three natural directions for further research. First, further research is necessary to
understand what appear to be non-trivial effects of lagged investment returns on asset allocation, and

33

whether this is efficient or not. Second, it seems important to examine the extent to which the tradeoff
between risk shifting and risk management also governs firms’ chosen exposure to other risks, such as
currency and foreign exchange fluctuations. Third, given that a large part of firm-level variation in asset
allocation remains unexplained, further studies could aim to identify other factors that affect variation
pension fund investment strategies.

34

Figure Legends
Figure 1: Pension Fund Asset Allocation in IRS 5500 Data
The graphs show mean allocation to the major asset classes by year. The top graph includes insurance
contracts. The sample consists of all observations for which assets in opaque investment categories were
less than 5% of total assets. The bottom graph shows the share of total non-insurance assets. The sample
consists of all observations for which assets in opaque investment categories were less than 5% of total
assets and for which the assets are not 100% in insurance vehicles. Error bands are plus or minus two
standard errors.

Figure 2: Effects of Funding Status on Asset Allocation in IRS 5500 Data
These figures show the effects of funding status decile on the percent of pension assets invested in stocks
versus government debt, cash and insurance. The top graph illustrates the coefficient results from two
pooled regressions of asset allocation on funding deciles with year controls. The bottom graph shows the
coefficient results from two regressions of asset allocation on funding status deciles with both year
controls and plan fixed effects. Coefficients are relative to the omitted category, which is the first or
lowest decile.

Figure 3: Distress Termination Probabilities and Asset Allocation in IRS 5500 Data
Distress termination probabilities are estimated using the specification in the first column of Table 10 and
their quantiles are plotted against beginning of year asset allocation. The top two graphs show unadjusted
results and the bottom two graphs show the asset allocations net of adjustments for year fixed effects.

Figure 4: Bankruptcy Probabilities and Asset Allocation in Firm-Level Data
Distress termination probabilities are estimated using the specification in the third column of Table 11
and their quintiles are plotted against end of year asset allocation. The top two graphs show unadjusted
results and the bottom two graphs show the asset allocations net of adjustments for year fixed effects.

Figure 5: Investment Returns of the PBGC and the Private Sector
Investment returns of assets held by the PBGC are from PBGC annual reports (PBGC (1995) and PBGC
(2005)). The PBGC fiscal year end is in September. Value weighted NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq returns are
calculated from CRSP data from September of year (t-1) to September of year (t). I calculate valueweighted investment returns of private sector plans from the sample of IRS 5500 filings tabulated in
Table 2a. Investment returns are defined as investment income divided by beginning-of-year pension
assets.

35

References
Acharya, V., H. Almeida and M. Campello, 2007, “Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging Perspective on
Corporate Financial Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.
Almeida, H., M. Campello, and M. Weisbach, 2006, “Corporate Financial and Investment Policies when
Future Financing is not Frictionless,” Working Paper, University of Illinois.
Andrade G. and S. Kaplan, 1998, “How Costly is Financial (Not Economic) Distress? Evidence from
Highly Leveraged Transactions That Became Distressed,” Journal of Finance 53(5), 1443-1493.
Bergstresser, D., M. A. Desai, and J. D. Rauh, 2006, “Earnings Manipulation, Pension Assumptions, and
Managerial Investment Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 157-195.
Black, F., 1980, “The Tax Consequences of Long-Run Pension Policy,” Financial Analysts Journal 36,
July-August, 21-29.
Bodie, Z., J. O. Light, R. Mørck, and R. A. Taggart, 1985, “Corporate Pension Policy: An Empirical
Investigation,” Financial Analysts Journal 41, 10-16.
Bodie, Z., J. O. Light, R. Mørck, and R. A. Taggart, 1987, “Funding and Asset Allocation in Corporate
Pension Plans: An Empirical Investigation,” in Issues in Pension Economics, Zvi Bodie, John
Shoven, and David Wise, eds., Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 15-47
Bodie, Z., 1995, “On the Risk of Stocks in the Long Run,” Financial Analysts Journal 51(3), 18-22.
Bodie, Z., 1990, The ABO, the PBO, and Pension Investment Policy, Financial Analysts Journal 46, 27–
34.
Boyce, S., and R. A. Ippolito, 2002, “The Cost of Pension Insurance,” Journal of Risk and Insurance 69,
121-170.
Buessing, M., and M. Soto, 2006, “The State of Private Pensions: Current 5500 Data,” Center for
Retirement Research Issue in Brief 42.
Bulow, J., and M. Scholes, “Who Owns the Assets in a Defined-Benefit Pension Plan?” in Financial
Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, Zvi Bodie and John Shoven, eds., Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1983.
Campbell, J., and L. Viceira, 2005, “Strategic Asset Allocation for Pension Plans,” prepared for the
Oxford Handbook of Pensions and Retirement Income, forthcoming.
Center on Federal Financial Institutions, 2004, PBGC: A Primer.
Cocco, J., and P. Volpin, 2007, “The Corporate Governance of Defined Benefit Pension Plans: Evidence
from the United Kingdom,” Financial Analysts Journal 63(1), 70-83.
Coronado, J., and N. Liang, 2005, “The Influence of PBGC Insurance on Pension Fund Finances,”
Pension Research Council Working Paper, 2005-10.

36

Denmark, F., 2006, “Internaional Paper Company: Out of the Woods, ” Institutional Investor’s Alpha,
June issue, 19-29.
Friedman, B. M., 1983, “Pension Funding, Pension Asset Allocation, and Corporate Finance: Evidence
from Individual Company Data,” in Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, Z. Bodie and
J. Shoven, eds., Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 107-147.
Frieman, Adam, Justin Pettit, Azad Badakhsh, and Kyle Barker, 2005, “Optimal Capital Structure and the
Corporate Pension,” UBS Investment Banking Note, UBS AG, New York.
Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein, 1993, “Risk management: Coordinating corporate
investment and financing policies,” Journal of Finance 48, 1629-1658.
Gold, J., 2005, “Accounting/Actuarial Bias Enables Equity Investment by Defined Benefit Pension
Plans,” North American Actuarial Journal.
Harris, M., and A. Raviv, 1991, “The Theory of Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance 46, 297-335.
Harrison, M. J. and W.F. Sharpe, 1983, “Optimal Funding and Asset Allocation Rules for Defined
Benefit Pension Plans,” in in Financial Aspects of the U.S. Pension System, Z. Bodie and J.
Shoven, eds., Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Hsieh, S.-J., A. Chen, and K. Ferris, 1994, “The Valuation of PBGC Insurance Premiums Using an
Option Pricing Model,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 89-99.
Ippolito, R., 2002, “The Reversion Tax’s Perverse Result,” Regulation, Spring 2002, 46-53.
Lehn, K., and A. Poulsen, 1991, “Contractual Resolution of Bondholder-Stockholder Conflicts in
Leveraged Buyouts,” Journal of Law and Economics 34, 645-673.
Leland, H. E., 1998, “Agency Costs, Risk Management, and Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance 53,
1213-1243.
Lucas, D., and S. Zeldes, 2006, “Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension Obligations — The Role
of Stocks Revisited,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Lucent Retirees Organization, 2003, “Lucent Discloses Pension Governance Process and Fund
Performance,“ http://www.lucentretirees.org/docs/lucent_discloses_pension_governa.htm.
Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.
Kroszner, Randall S., 2005, Testimony before the Committee on Finance, United States Senate,
http://www.chicagogsb.edu/news/2005-02-28txt_kroszner.pdf.
Kroszner, R. S., and P. E. Strahan, 1996, “Regulatory Incentives and the Thrift Crisis: Dividends, Mutualto-Stock Conversions, and Financial Distress,” Journal of Finance 51, 1285-1319.
Marcus, A., 1987, “Corporate Pension Policy and the Value of PBGC Insurance,” in Issues in Pension
Economics, Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and D. Wise eds., Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

37

Mayers, D., and C. W. Smith, 1982, “On the Corporate Demand for Insurance,” Journal of Business 55,
281-296.
Mayers, D. and C. W. Smith, 1987, “Corporate Insurance and the Underinvestment Problem,” Journal of
Risk and Insurance 54, 45-54.
Merton R.C. and P.A. Samuelson, 1974, “Fallacy of the Log-Normal Approximation to Portfolio
Decision-Making over Many Periods,” Journal of Financial Economics 1(1), 67-94.
Morellec, E., and C. W. Smith, 2007, “Agency Conflicts and Risk Management,” Review of Finance 11,
1-23.
Myers, S., 1977, “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147-175.
Parrino, R., and M. Weisbach, 1999, “Measuring Investment Distortions Arising from StockholderBondholder Conflicts,” Journal of Financial Economics 53, 3-42.
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), 1995, Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation Annual
Report, http://www.pbgc.gov/docs/1995_annual_report.pdf.
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), 2005, Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
Performance and Accountability Report, http://www.pbgc.gov/docs/2005par.pdf.
Pennacchi, G. G. and C. M. Lewis, 1994, “The Value of Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
Insurance,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 26, 735-753.
Petersen, M., 1992, “Pension reversions and worker-stockholder wealth transfers,” Journal of Finance
107, 1033-1056.
Petersen, M., 1994, “Cashflow Variability and Firm's Pension Choice: A Role for Operating Leverage,”
Journal of Financial Economics, December, 1994, Volume 36, pp. 361-383
Petersen, M., 1996, “Allocating Assets and Discounting Cash Flows: Pension Plan Finance,” in Pensions,
Savings, and Capital Markets, eds., Phyllis A Fernandez, John A. Turner, and Richard P. Hinz,
Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Labor.
Purnanandam, A., 2007, “Financial Distress and Corporate Risk Management: Theory and Evidence,”
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Rauh, J. D., 2006, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of Corporate
Pension Plans,” Journal of Finance 61, 33-71.
Sameulson, P.A., 1963, “Risk and Uncertainty: A Fallacy of Large Numbers,” Scientia, 6th series, 57th
year, 1-6.
Samuelson, P.A., 1994, “The Long-Term Case for Equities and How It Can Be Oversold,” The Journal of
Portfolio Management 21(1), 15-24.
Samuelson, W., and R. Zeckhauser, 1988, “Status Quo Bias in Decision Making,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 1, 7-59.

38

Smith C. and R. Stulz, 1985, “The Determinants of Firms’ Hedging Policies,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 20, 391-405.
Sharpe, W. F., “Corporate Pension Funding Policy,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1976, 183-193.
Sundaresan, S., and F. Zapatero, 1997, “Valuation, Optimal Asset Allocation and Retirement Incentives
of Pension Plans,” Review of Financial Studies 10, 631-660.
Sweeting, P., 2005, “Funding and Asset Allocation Strategies — Why Firms and Trustees Behave As
They Do,” Working Paper, Presented to the 2005 U.K. Finance and Investment Board
Conference.
Treynor, J., 1977, “The Principles of Corporate Pension Finance,” Journal of Finance 32, 627-638.
Tepper, I., 1981, “Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy,” Journal of Finance 36, 1-13.
Thaler, R., 1980, “Towards a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 1, 39-60.

39

Footnotes
1

There is an alternative interpretation of the result that firms with a large share of active retirees invest in safer

securities. Some investors, even institutional investors, may believe that stocks are a safer investment over the long
run. Indeed, according to Bodie (1995), “The conventional wisdom in the professional investment community
seems to be that investors with a long time horizon should invest more heavily in stocks than investors with a short
time horizon.” The fallacy in the so-called long-run case for equity investing is studied in Samuelson (1963),
Merton and Samuelson (1974), Samuelson (1994) and Bodie (1995).
2

Firms book as income an expected return on pension plan assets, and investing in equity allows that expected

return to be higher than investing in securities with lower expected returns. Indeed, industry sources such as
Frieman et al (2005) argue that pension accounting under GAAP is “an opaque method of accounting that highlights
the rewards of equity but obscures its risks.”
3

Before 1986, firms could withdraw surplus pension assets essentially without penalty (see Petersen (1992)). Under

this regime, the pension fund was an optimal place for storing financial slack. Firms could make voluntary
contributions to the pension fund, take an immediate tax deduction, and defer all taxes on the investment earnings of
the assets in the pension fund until the assets were withdrawn. Since 1986, firms have had to pay excise taxes on
pension withdrawals, and since 1990 the excise tax rate has been a substantial 50% (see Ippolito (2002)).
4

The tension between risk shifting and other motivations for risk management has been a subject of other recent

theoretical work. Purnanandam (2007) builds a model in which such a tension arises due to product-market related
costs of financial distress. In his model, risk-shifting incentives dominate the risk-management incentives if firms
are close to financial distress. Morellec and Smith (2007) consider a generalized model of agency conflicts (both
stockholder-debtholder and management-stockholder) and risk management.
5

See http://www.pbgc.gov/workers-retirees/find-your-pension-plan/PlanPage/ for these plan pages.

6

The Boeing Corporation is excluded from this table; while it is one of the ten largest corporate DB pension

sponsors, it did not respond to the Pensions and Investments survey and its asset allocation in aggregate is
inscrutable in the IRS 5500s due to the very large number of separate plans that it sponsors. Unambiguous asset
allocation for General Motors pension fund was not obtainable from the 5500 attachments. Northwest Airlines did
not respond to the Pensions and Investments survey.
7

This of course implies that the fixed effects results are not much different from the random effects results; the fixed

effects coefficients are indeed very similar, just with slightly larger standard errors.
8

The top group in the graph is the 1/100th of the sample most likely to terminate, the second group from the top is

the 1/100th of the sample second most likely to terminate, etc.

40

Table 1: UAL Corporation (United Airlines) Defined Benefit Pension Asset Allocation
Data on total pension assets, assets in each of the four categories (common and preferred equities, government and corporate
debt, private equity, and cash and short-term instruments), and appreciation of assets in each of the four categories are collected
from the attachments to the UAL Corporation 5500 filings. End-of-year category assets do not sum exactly to total end-of-year
pension assets because of small amounts (<0.3%) of real estate and other assets. The predicted share if no rebalancing assumes
given appreciation during the year for each asset class and no change in asset allocation due to contributions or benefit
distributions. The second-to-last column shows the predicted share assuming no dividends and interest (or alternatively assuming
that dividends and interest are reinvested in the same proportion as the other assets). The final column shows the predicted share
assuming dividends come from equities and are reinvested in equities while interest comes from debt and is reinvested in debt.
UAL Corporation filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2002, and its pension plans were terminated in 2005.

Total End-of-Year
Pension Assets ($
thousands)

End-of-Year
Assets in
Category ($
thousands)

Share of
Total

Appreciation
During Year in
($ thousands)

Appreciation
(%)

Predicted Share if Predicted Share if
No Rebalancing No Rebalancing
(Assuming No
(Dividends and
Dividends and
Interest
Interest)
Reinvested)

Common and Preferred Equities

2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999

7,115,030
6,934,364
6,248,602
7,521,831
8,450,291
8,631,020

4,549,841
4,361,317
3,557,178
4,491,800
5,107,256
5,762,327

63.9%
62.9%
56.9%
59.7%
60.4%
66.8%

605,815
1,119,525
-840,847
-629,967
-367,932
1,131,196

2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999

7,115,030
6,934,364
6,248,602
7,521,831
8,450,291
8,631,020

1,595,315
1,678,009
1,868,887
2,198,873
2,948,235
2,224,745

22.4%
24.2%
29.9%
29.2%
34.9%
25.8%

66,708
147,794
40,400
79,579
54,080
-74,774

2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999

7,115,030
6,934,364
6,248,602
7,521,831
8,450,291
8,631,020

361,315
365,996
313,405
331,107
370,305
193,385

5.1%
5.3%
5.0%
4.4%
4.4%
2.2%

51,516
61,973
-36,372
-58,700
99,128
10,047

2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999

7,115,030
6,934,364
6,248,602
7,521,831
8,450,291
8,631,020

598,529
513,714
488,378
475,535
24,188
449,045

8.4%
7.4%
7.8%
6.3%
0.3%
5.2%

13.9%
31.5%
-18.7%
-12.3%
-6.4%

65.0%
61.9%
54.7%
57.1%
64.1%

64.8%
61.7%
54.4%
56.7%
62.8%

4.0%
7.9%
1.8%
2.7%
2.4%

22.8%
26.7%
33.6%
38.6%
27.1%

23.2%
27.1%
34.1%
39.1%
28.7%

14.1%
19.8%
-11.0%
-15.9%
51.3%

5.5%
5.0%
4.4%
4.0%
3.5%

5.4%
4.9%
4.3%
3.9%
3.4%

6.8%
6.4%
7.3%
0.3%
5.3%

6.6%
6.3%
7.1%
0.3%
5.2%

Government and Corporate Debt

Private Equity

Cash and Short-Term Instruments

3,478
-1,420
10,671
948
-388
-24,989

41

0.7%
-0.3%
2.2%
3.9%
-0.1%

Table 2a: Plan-Level Summary Statistics, Full Sample (1988-2003)
Data are from the IRS 5500 filings. This table shows summary statistics for the full sample of defined benefit plans with plan years ending in 1988-2003 and with greater than 100
employees. Observations are required to have information on beginning-of-year plan assets (which also had to be nonzero), contributions, investment income, and employees, and
duplicated observations are removed. PBGC terminations from the termination database were merged into this data by EIN and plan number. Plan assets come from the main
5500 form (1998 and earlier) or Schedule H (1999-2003). Plan liabilities are on the OBRA87 basis for plan years ending 1990-1994 and on the RPA94 basis for plan years ending
1995-2003. Investment income is calculated as total income from the main form or Schedule H, minus contributions minus other non-investment income. Investment returns are
restricted to lie between -80% and +500%. Contributions are from Schedule B. Asset allocation figures are only for observations with less than 5% of assets in opaque investment
vehicles.

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

Maximum

Number of
Observations

84.46
81.72
6.93
2.89

6.53
6.64
0.33
0.21

733.30
705.40
96.65
55.48

0.00
-7.51
-5540.00
0.00

54357.85
57030.00
8706.00
15310.00

214,015
170,080
214,015
214,015

0.0027
0.1533
0.0886
0.0930
0.6373

0.0000
0.0428
0.0877
0.0475
0.6736

5.2300
0.3864
0.1324
0.1560
0.2350

0.0000
-0.4839
-0.8000
0.0000
0.0000

1.0000
1.6583
5.0000
1.0506
1.0000

214,015
170,080
214,015
214,015
214,015

Asset Allocation (%)
Corporate Equity
Government Debt and Cash
Insurance Company Accounts
All Other

25.51
30.57
23.24
20.68

16.72
23.90
0.00
8.35

27.64
31.39
39.93
28.92

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00

80,717
80,717
80,717
80,717

Allocation as Share of Non-Insurance Assets (%)
Corporate Equity
Government Debt and Cash

31.54
40.44

33.44
33.67

28.52
40.22

0.00
0.00

100.00
100.00

68,359
68,359

Levels (in Millions of Dollars)
Assets
Liabilities (1990-2003)
Investment Income
Contributions
Ratios
Last Observation before Termination
Funding Status (1990-2003)
Investment Return
Contributions / Assets
Active Share of Employees

Total Observations
Total Unique Plans
Total Unique Employers

214,015
33,144
23,456

42

Table 2b: Plan-Level Summary Statistics, Estimation Sample (1990-2003)
Data are from the IRS 5500 filings. The variable construction is as in Table 2a. The sample is all observations for which allocation of assets to opaque investment vehicles is less
than 5% of total pension assets and for which liability information is available.

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

Maximum

Number of
Observations

47.50
42.67
3.65
1.64

6.24
5.31
0.32
0.23

506.19
423.60
53.11
18.91

0.00
0.00
-3703.00
0.00

49681.07
44170.00
6273.00
3963.00

55,684
55,684
55,684
55,684

0.0025
0.1826
0.0830
0.0853
0.6463

0.0000
0.0800
0.0788
0.0465
0.6809

0.0497
0.3917
0.1201
0.1370
0.2254

0.0000
-0.4839
-0.8000
0.0000
0.0000

1.0000
1.6583
5.0000
1.0506
1.0000

55,684
55,684
55,684
55,684
55,684

Asset Allocation (in %)
Allocation to Corporate Equity
Allocation to Government Debt and Cash
Allocation to Insurance Company Accounts
Allocation to All Other

28.59
28.99
21.73
20.69

28.22
24.16
0.00
11.94

27.40
28.61
39.11
26.54

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00

55,684
55,684
55,684
55,684

Allocation as Share of Non-Insurance Assets (%)
Corporate Equity
Government Debt and Cash

34.73
37.55

39.49
31.78

27.48
29.80

0.00
0.00

100.00
100.00

47,627
47,627

Levels (in Millions of Dollars)
Assets
Liabilities (1990-2003)
Investment Income
Contributions
Ratios
Last Observation before Termination
Funding Status (1990-2003)
Investment Return
Contributions / Assets
Active Share of Employees

Total Observations
Total Unique Plans
Total Unique Employers

55,684
6,844
5,883

43

Table 3: Pension Fund Asset Allocation of Major U.S. Defined Benefit Pension Sponsors in 2003
This table shows pension fund asset allocation according to three primary sources for major U.S. defined benefit pension sponsors. The sample consists of the 10 largest pension
sponsors by pension assets, excluding the Boeing Corporation, plus major airlines that filed for bankruptcy.
General
Electric
43879
37827
575244
AAA

IBM
41679
42104
104457
A+

IRS 5500 and Attachments
Stocks
Own
Preferred
Common
Bonds
U.S. Government Bonds
Other Bonds
Cash and Equivalents
Private Equity
Real Estate
Insurance
Other / Unclassifiable

Dec-02
54.7%
5.9%
0.7%
48.2%
27.8%
13.7%
14.2%
2.5%
9.9%
1.6%
0.0%
3.5%

Dec-03
57.6%
4.4%
0.2%
53.0%
17.1%
10.5%
6.7%
4.8%
8.0%
0.0%
0.0%
12.5%

Dec-03
61.5%
0.0%
0.0%
61.5%
12.9%
6.7%
6.2%
6.4%
5.0%
0.9%
0.0%
13.3%

Dec-03
52.6%
0.2%
0.3%
52.0%
11.3%
5.6%
12.0%
16.8%
12.2%
2.7%
0.0%
4.4%

Dec-03
56.8%
0.0%
0.1%
56.7%
23.4%
11.5%
11.8%
0.8%
10.6%
5.5%
0.0%
2.8%

Pensions and Investments
Stocks
Own
U.S.
Non-U.S.
Bonds
U.S.
Non-U.S.
Cash
Private Equity
Real Estate
Other

Sep-03
60.0%
6.0%
37.0%
17.0%
21.0%
21.0%
0.0%
2.0%
7.0%
7.0%
3.0%

Sep-03
59.6%
5.2%
32.7%
21.7%
29.2%
26.9%
2.3%
0.0%
7.8%
3.4%
0.0%

Sep-03
65.0%
0.0%
50.0%
15.0%
28.0%
28.0%
0.0%
1.0%
5.0%
1.0%
0.0%

Sep-03
61.6%
0.0%
38.8%
22.7%
18.6%
14.5%
4.1%
2.8%
10.2%
3.8%
3.1%

Sep-03
57.0%
0.0%
41.0%
16.0%
24.0%
24.0%
0.0%
0.0%
9.0%
9.0%
1.0%

SEC 10-K Filing
Stocks / Equities
Bonds and Cash
Real Estate
Other

Dec-03
73%
20%
1%
6%

Dec-03
67.5%
29.2%
3.3%

Dec-03
66%
27%
3%
4%

Dec-03
55.9%
17.3%
3.3%
23.5%

Dec-03
68%
23%
9%
0%

Pension Assets
U.S. Pension Liabilities
Operating Assets
Bankruptcy Filing
Credit Rating

SBC
Verizon
28154
42776
27617
40968
100166
167468
A+
A+

General Lockheed
Delta
Northwest
AT&T
Motors
Martin Ford Motor Airlines
Airlines
17555
86169
20913
37016
6818
4806
15767
87285
21918
40463
12477
8554
47988
448507
26175
295222
24720
13289
2005
2005
BBB
BBB
BBB
BBBBBB+

44

Dec-03
60.3%
0.0%
0.2%
60.1%
28.5%
18.0%
12.0%
5.2%
2.9%
0.1%
0.0%
3.0%

Dec-03
69.4%

0.0%
4.9%

Jun-03
51.2%
0.0%
3.6%
47.6%
14.5%
4.9%
9.7%
11.3%
14.9%
6.7%
0.6%
0.9%

Sep-03
52.0%
5.0%
28.0%
19.0%
34.0%
29.0%
5.0%
0.0%
5.0%
8.0%
1.0%

Sep-03
63.0%
0.0%
46.0%
17.0%
30.0%
28.0%
2.0%
3.0%
3.0%
0.0%
1.0%

Sep-03
71.3%
0.0%
47.2%
24.1%
28.4%
28.4%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.0%

Sep-03
45.0%
0.0%
30.0%
15.0%
26.0%
24.0%
2.0%
3.0%
12.0%
9.0%
5.0%

Dec-03
49%
31%
8%
12%

Dec-03
63%
33%

Dec-03
72.2%
26.3%
0.2%
1.3%

Sep-03
50%
25%
14%
11%

4%

20.3%
11.7%
11.4%
5.4%

United
US
Airlines
Airways
Lucent
6961
1667
30148
13117
2589
31235
21185
8555
15765
2002
2002
B
B
B-

Dec-03
60.2%

Dec-03
62.9%

Dec-03
28.7%

22.2%

24.2%

8.3%
8.7%

7.4%
5.3%
0.0%

45.4%
30.4%
15.1%
14.3%
6.2%
2.4%

0.6%

0.2%

3.0%

Dec-03
63.0%
0.0%
0.2%
62.8%
20.4%
13.6%
6.8%
3.3%
8.6%
4.0%
0.0%
0.8%

Sep-03
59.0%
0.0%
46.0%
13.0%
36.0%
36.0%
0.0%
0.0%
5.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Sep-02
39.0%
0.0%
28.0%
11.0%
45.0%
45.0%
0.0%
9.0%
3.0%
4.0%
0.0%

Sep-03
62.8%
0.0%
41.3%
21.5%
23.9%
23.9%
0.0%
0.0%
7.7%
5.6%
0.0%

Dec-03
70.8%
20.0%

Dec-03
60%
35%

9.2%

5%

Dec-03
39.0%
46.0%
4.0%
11.0%

Sep-03
63%
24%
5%
8%

Table 4: Firm-Level Summary Statistics (1997-2004)
Pension asset allocation data are from the annual Pensions and Investments survey of the top 1,000 pension sponsors.
Firm characteristics are from Compustat. Pension characteristics are from Compustat and SEC 10-K filings. Firms
incorporated outside the U.S. are removed from the sample. The S&P credit rating variable (data280) is scaled so that
values are between zero and one with higher values implying better credit ratings. If the firm has a AAA credit rating
then the credit rating variable equals 0.929, if the firm has a D rating then the credit rating variable has a value of
0.036, and each of the 28 rating steps in between raises the credit rating variable by 0.036 (or 1/28). Altman’s Z-Score
is (3.3*EBIT / Operating Assets) + (Sales / Operating Assets) + 1.4*(Retained Earnings / Operating Assets) + 1.2*(Net
Working Capital / Operating Assets). Debt to cash flow is total long short-term and long-term debt (data9+data34)
divided by cash flow (net income + depreciation and amortization + pension expense = data14 + data18 + data43).
Pension assets are measured as U.S. pension assets at the end of the year as collected from SEC 10-k filings; where this
information is unavailable global pension assets from the 10-k filings or Compustat (data287+data296) are used.
Pension liabilities are measured as the U.S. projected benefit obligation at the end of the year as collected from SEC
10-k filings; where this information is unavailable, the global projected benefit obligation from the 10-k filings or
Compustat (data286 + data294) is used. The pension funding status is pension assets minus pension liabilities, divided
by pension liabilities.

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

Maximum

0.605
0.087
24.66
9.084
1.558
0.087
0.042

0.643
0.000
8.22
9.015
1.496
0.086
0.038

0.219
0.282
77.76
1.267
0.861
0.080
0.022

0.000
0.000
0.03
3.230
-2.412
-1.318
0.006

0.929
1.000
1264.03
14.050
5.025
0.920
0.199

0.082

0.114

0.118

-0.283

0.502

Pension Characteristics
Pension assets ($ billions)
Ln(Pension assets in $ millions)
Pension Liabilities / Operating Assets
Pension Funding Status

3.521
7.187
0.202
0.052

1.191
7.083
0.171
0.004

14.440
1.230
0.131
0.303

0.013
2.565
0.000
-0.505

583.963
13.278
0.442
1.168

Asset Allocation (%)
Debt and Cash
Equity (Publicly Traded)
Private Equity and Real Estate
All Other

30.41
63.20
3.54
2.85

30.00
64.33
1.00
0.00

11.45
12.47
4.76
9.29

0.00
0.00
0.00
-1.20

100.00
100.00
24.00
100.00

Total Observations
Total Unique Firms
Number of Bankruptcies

2,186
438
16

Firm Characteristics
S&P Credit Rating (0 to 1)
No S&P Credit Rating
Operating Assets ($ billions)
Ln(Operating Assets in $ millions)
Altman's Z-Score
Cash Flow to Assets Ratio
Standard Deviation of Operating Cash Flow
Over Lagged Book Assets
Investment Return†

† The number of observations for this variable is only 2,008.

45

Table 5: Pension Fund Asset Allocation and Plan Characteristics
The sample consists of all observations for which assets in opaque investments were less than 5% of total assets. See
Table 2b for summary statistics and variable construction. In the second and fourth columns, lagged investment returns
are included as a control. The sample for these columns consists of those observations for which lagged information is
available. All variables are calculated from the IRS 5500 data and are measured as of the beginning of the plan year.
The investment return is calculated return on pension assets in the previous year.

Funding Status
Active Share of
Employees
Assets ($ billions)
Ln(Assets)
Investment Return (t-1)
R-squared
Funding Status
Active Share of
Employees
Assets ($ billions)
Ln(Assets)
Investment Return (t-1)
R-squared
Year Fixed Effects
Plan Fixed Effects
Observations

Percent of Pension Invested in Equity
5.45***
2.29***
1.63***
(0.65)
(0.43)
(0.50)
4.32***
3.44***
3.05 **
(1.14)
(1.19)
(1.34)
-1.54**
-0.86**
-0.52
(0.72)
(0.39)
(0.69)
4.57***
3.20***
2.23***
(0.15)
(0.50)
(0.62)
29.21***
9.88***
(5.26)
(1.92)
0.19
0.19
0.22
0.22
Percent of Pension Invested in Government Debt, Cash, and Insurance
-4.84***
-3.34***
-1.03*
-0.80
(0.71)
(0.83)
(0.59)
(0.66)
-3.46**
-3.68**
-3.20**
-3.81 **
(1.36)
(1.48)
(1.60)
(1.68)
1.26***
1.27**
1.08*
1.03*
(0.49)
(0.51)
(0.57)
(0.62)
-5.67***
-5.53***
-5.43***
-4.72***
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.70)
(0.86)
-22.59***
-5.41***
(4.97)
(1.52)
0.12
0.12
0.09
0.09
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
55,684
45,097
55,684
45,097
6.76***
(0.57)
3.76***
(1.06)
-1.53**
(0.71)
4.80***
(0.13)

All standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, **
statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant at the 10% level.

46

Table 6: Pension Fund Asset Allocation Excluding Insurance and Plan Characteristics
The sample consists of all observations in Table 2b for which pension assets are not 100% held in insurance company
general accounts. In the second and fourth columns, lagged investment returns are included as a control. The sample
for these columns consists of those observations for which lagged information is available. All variables are calculated
from the IRS 5500 data and are measured as of the beginning of the plan year. The investment return is calculated
return on pension assets in the previous year.

Percent of Non-Insurance Pension Assets Invested in Equity
9.29***
8.10***
2.86***
2.35***
(0.61)
(0.71)
(0.51)
(0.59)
Active Share of
5.43***
6.33***
3.44**
2.32
Employees
(1.14)
(1.23)
(1.42)
(1.62)
Assets ($ billions)
-1.33**
-1.26**
-1.06**
-0.70
(0.64)
(0.62)
(0.51)
(0.79)
Ln(Assets)
3.65***
3.34***
3.00***
1.80***
(0.14)
(0.16)
(0.58)
(0.69)
Investment Return (t-1)
27.59***
10.34***
(5.74)
(2.27)
R-squared
0.16
0.16
0.05
0.05
Percent of Non-Insurance Pension Assets Invested in Government Debt and Cash
Funding Status
-7.39***
-6.75***
-1.83***
-2.00***
(0.65)
(0.75)
(0.64)
(0.71)
Active Share of
-5.70**
-6.62**
-2.86
-3.77 **
Employees
(1.28)
(1.39)
(1.79)
(1.91)
Assets ($ billions)
0.38***
0.26**
0.98*
0.84
(0.16)
(0.15)
(0.59)
(0.61)
Ln(Assets)
-2.41***
-2.18***
-5.09***
-3.93***
(0.15)
(0.17)
(0.75)
(0.89)
Investment Return (t-1)
-6.10*
-2.80
(3.31)
(1.75)
R-squared
0.05
0.05
0.02
0.02
Year Fixed Effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Plan Fixed Effects
N
N
Y
Y
Observations
47,627
38,810
47,627
38,810
Funding Status

All standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, **
statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant at the 10% level.

47

Table 7: Pension Fund Asset Allocation and Firm Characteristics, Pooled Specifications
This table presents regression results using firm-level data from Compustat and Pensions and Investments. See Table 4 for summary statistics. Dependent variables are measured
as of September 30th. Explanatory variables and controls are measured as of the end of the fiscal year. Year effects are accounted for in all specifications by demeaning the data
by year before estimation. Firm effects are not included in this table.

S&P Credit Rating
No S&P Credit Rating
Ln(Operating Assets)
Ln(Pension Assets)
Z-Score
Standard Deviation of Operating Cash Flow
Pension Funding Status
Pension Obligation / Operating Assets
Cash Flow to Assets Ratio
Observations
Firms
R-squared

Percentage of Assets Invested in Debt & Cash
(1)
(2)
(3)
-6.11 *
-6.93 *
-5.26
(3.43)
(3.68)
(4.28)
-2.01
-2.45
-1.22
(2.92)
(2.96)
(3.16)
0.31
0.19
-0.47
(0.60)
(0.56)
(0.74)
-0.33
-0.29
0.37
(0.48)
(0.48)
(0.71)
-0.13
-0.12
(0.51)
(0.51)
-0.29
-0.28
(0.18)
(0.17)
-2.60
(2.47)
-5.30
(5.73)
-3.81
(4.40)
2,186
2,186
2,186
448
448
448
0.01
0.01
0.01

Percentage of Assets Invested in Equity
(4)
(5)
(6)
10.54 ***
9.94 **
8.03 *
(3.91)
(4.04)
(4.62)
6.50 **
6.09 *
4.72
(3.12)
(3.15)
(3.36)
-1.60 **
-1.49 **
-1.26
(0.70)
(0.67)
(1.06)
0.54
0.53
0.34
(0.60)
(0.60)
(1.04)
0.33
0.33
(0.55)
(0.56)
0.05
0.08
(0.22)
(0.23)
2.45
(2.46)
0.57
(7.21)
3.48
(4.64)
2,186
2,186
2,186
448
448
448
0.02
0.02
0.02

Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, ** statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant
at the 10% level.

48

Table 8: Pension Fund Asset Allocation and Firm Characteristics, Random Effects Specifications
This table presents regression results using firm-level data from Compustat and Pensions and Investments. See Table 2 for summary statistics. Dependent variables are measured
as of September 30th. Explanatory variables and controls are measured as of the end of the fiscal year. Year effects are accounted for in all specifications by demeaning the data
by year before estimation. The random effects estimator is used to account for firm-level unobservables. The Hausman χ2 Statistic is the test statistic for the Hausman test of the
random firm effects model versus an otherwise identical firm fixed effects model. The probability associated with the χ2 statistic is the probability with which the consistency of
random effects can be safely not rejected (so that probabilities close to one are supportive of the consistency of random effects).

S&P Credit Rating
No S&P Credit Rating
Ln(Operating Assets)
Ln(Pension Assets)
Z-Score
Pension Funding Status
Pension Obligation / Operating Assets
Cash Flow to Assets Ratio
Hausman χ2 (Fixed vs. Random Effects)
Probability > χ2
Reject Consistency of Random Effects?
Observations
Firms
R-squared

Percentage of Assets Invested in Debt & Cash
(1)
(2)
(3)
-6.06 **
-6.40 **
-6.06 **
(3.00)
(3.02)
(3.07)
-2.57
-2.77
-2.56
(2.12)
(2.09)
(2.07)
-0.30
-0.25
-0.17
(0.46)
(0.45)
(0.50)
-0.03
-0.04
-0.07
(0.33)
(0.33)
(0.34)
0.19
0.16
(0.40)
(0.41)
-1.19
(1.42)
1.80
(3.86)
0.13
(2.41)
0.88
1.93
3.82
0.9277
0.8584
0.8731
N
N
N
2,186
2,186
2,186
448
448
448
0.01
0.01
0.01

Percentage of Assets Invested in Equity
(4)
(5)
(6)
9.75 ***
9.30 ***
8.92 **
(3.63)
(3.55)
(3.54)
5.11 **
4.85 **
4.54 *
(2.50)
(2.43)
(2.39)
-1.23 **
-1.16 **
-0.78
(0.54)
(0.52)
(0.61)
0.80
0.79
0.46
(0.49)
(0.49)
(0.56)
0.25
0.34
(0.47)
(0.47)
2.05
(1.51)
3.40
(4.34)
-1.16
(1.94)
1.40
1.59
3.29
0.8433
0.9021
0.9145
N
N
N
2,186
2,186
2,186
448
448
448
0.02
0.02
0.02

Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, ** statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant
at the 10% level.

49

Table 9: Effects of Lagged Investment Returns on Pension Fund Asset Allocation
The investment return is the return on pension assets measured as pension fund investment appreciation (or depreciation) in dollars during the fiscal year divided by the beginningof-year pension assets. Dependent variables are measured as of September 30th, and other explanatory variables and controls are measured as of the end of the fiscal year. This
table presents regression results using firm-level data from Compustat and Pensions and Investments. See Table 2 for summary statistics. Year effects are accounted for in all
specifications by demeaning the data by year before estimation. The Hausman χ2 Statistic is the test statistic for the Hausman test of the random firm effects model versus the firm
fixed effects model in the same panel. The probability associated with the χ2 statistic is the probability with which the consistency of random effects can be safely not rejected (so
that probabilities close to one are supportive of the consistency of random effects).

Investment Return
S&P Credit Rating
No S&P Credit Rating
Ln(Operating Assets)
Ln(Pension Assets)
Z-Score
Estimation
Hausman χ2 (Fixed vs. Random Effects)
Probability > χ2
Reject Consistency of Random Effects?
Observations
Firms
R-squared

Percentage of Assets Invested in Debt & Cash
(1)
(2)
(3)
-7.72 *
-1.51
-3.22
(4.14)
(2.53)
(2.40)
-6.94 *
-8.33 **
-7.17 **
(3.88)
(4.19)
(2.96)
-2.50
-4.69 *
-3.66 *
(3.09)
(2.77)
(2.03)
0.44
-0.90
-0.21
(0.60)
(1.00)
(0.54)
-0.55
-0.63
-0.30
(0.55)
(1.22)
(0.55)
-0.29
0.50
0.03
(0.54)
(0.75)
(0.42)
OLS
FE
RE
—
—
9.36
—
—
0.1545
—
—
N
2008
2008
2008
407
407
407
0.01
0.01
0.01

Percentage of Assets Invested in Equity
(4)
(5)
(6)
9.98 **
5.08
7.12 **
(4.50)
(3.10)
(2.86)
10.14 **
9.55 **
9.80 ***
(4.15)
(4.36)
(3.31)
6.19 *
4.83 *
5.13 **
(3.24)
(2.80)
(2.26)
-1.82 ***
-0.84
-1.43 **
(0.68)
(1.15)
(0.61)
0.84
3.76 *
1.25 *
(0.66)
(1.95)
(0.75)
0.62
0.37
0.69
(0.58)
(0.89)
(0.51)
OLS
FE
RE
—
—
4.58
—
—
0.5985
—
—
N
2008
2008
2008
407
407
407
0.02
0.02
0.02

Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, ** statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant
at the 10% level.

50

Table 10: Predictions of Distress Terminations at the Plan Level
Each column represents a logit regression of distress termination on plan-specific characteristics from the IRS 5500
data. Standard errors clustered by firm are in parentheses, and odds ratios are in brackets below them. The dependent
variable is measured as the year before a PBGC termination filing. Both regressions contain year fixed effects.

Funding Status
Active Share of Employees
Assets
Ln(Assets)
Investment Return
Funding Status Decile 2
Funding Status Decile 3
Funding Status Decile 4
Funding Status Decile 5
Funding Status Decile 6
Funding Status Decile 7
Funding Status Decile 8
Funding Status Decile 9
Funding Status Decile 10 [Best]
Constant
Observations

Dependent Variable: Year Before Distress Termination [0/1]
-2.159***
(0.255)
[0.115]
-2.343***
-2.346***
(0.168)
(0.167)
[0.096]
[0.096]
0.037
0.041
(0.033)
(0.030)
[1.037]
[1.042]
-0.202***
-0.206***
(0.030)
(0.030)
[0.817]
[0.814]
-1.977***
-1.996***
(0.399)
(0.404)
[0.139]
[0.136]
-0.429***
(0.152)
[0.651]
-0.511***
(0.166)
[0.600]
-0.857***
(0.181)
[0.424]
-1.054***
(0.209)
[0.349]
-1.105***
(0.212)
[0.331]
-1.513***
(0.271)
[0.220]
-2.064***
(0.341)
[0.127]
-2.044***
(0.337)
[0.130]
-2.138***
(0.338)
[0.118]
-2.253***
-0.356
(0.602)
(0.472)
170,080
170,080

Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, **
statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant at the 10% level.

51

Table 11: Logit Predictions of Bankruptcy for DB Sponsors at the Firm Level
Each column represents a logit regression of bankruptcy on plan-specific characteristics from the IRS 5500 data.
Standard errors clustered by firm are in parentheses, and odds ratios are in brackets below them. The dependent
variable is measured as the year before a CRSP delisting, or the last year of data before the bankruptcy filing if the
stock was not delisted or was delisted before the bankruptcy filing

Dependent Variable: Year Before Bankruptcy [0/1]
-8.964***
-5.358***
-4.825***
-4.315***
(1.247)
(1.500)
(1.536)
(1.535)
[0.0001]
[0.0047]
[0.0080]
[0.0134]
No S&P Credit Rating
-3.674***
-1.587**
-1.284*
-1.048
(0.800)
(0.755)
(0.768)
(0.703)
[0.0254]
[0.2045]
[0.2770]
[0.3505]
Ln(Operating Assets)
-0.297
-0.284
-0.210
-0.091
(0.254)
(0.254)
(0.243)
(0.382)
[0.7433]
[0.7528]
[0.8105]
[0.9128]
Ln(Pension Assets)
0.405**
0.325*
0.312*
0.174
(0.172)
(0.183)
(0.176)
(0.338)
[1.4986]
[1.3843]
[1.3656]
[1.1900]
Z-Score
-0.256
-0.249
-0.172
(0.294)
(0.284)
(0.290)
[0.7741]
[0.7800]
[0.8420]
Standard Deviation of Operating Cash Flow
0.184***
0.169**
(0.069)
(0.082)
[1.2025]
[1.1842]
Pension Obligation/ Operating Assets
2.488
(2.444)
[12.0345]
Pension Funding Status
-0.922
(1.338)
[0.3979]
Cash Flow to Assets Ratio
-0.179***
-0.180***
-0.167***
(0.038)
(0.039)
(0.045)
[0.8365]
[0.8349]
[0.8466]
Constant
-0.4559
-0.9594
-2.7956
-3.8629*
(2.010)
(1.959)
(1.985)
(2.203)
Observations
2,186
2,186
2,186
2,186
S&P Credit Rating

Robust standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, **
statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant at the 10% level.

52

Table 12: Pension Fund Asset Allocation Before Distress Terminations
This table shows the coefficients on ex-post indicators of pension fund termination if added to regressions in the
previous tables, in order to compare the asset allocation of firms that ultimately terminate with firms that do not. This
effect represents an upper bound on risk-shifting because it also reflects the fact that firms more heavily invested in
risky securities for reasons unrelated to the insurance incentive are also more likely to file for bankruptcy. Each cell
represents one regression with controls, although only the coefficient of interest in shown here. The pooled regressions
for plan level data with controls use the specification in Table 5, column 1, augmented with the pre-termination
indicator. The firm effects regressions for plan level data with controls use the specification in Table 5, column 3,
augmented with the pre-termination indicator. The pooled regressions for firm level data with controls use the
specification in Table 7, columns 1 and 4, augmented with the pre-termination indicator. The firm effects regressions
for firm level data with controls use the specification in Table 8, columns 1 and 4, augmented with the pre-termination
indicator.

Specification

Pooled

Plan/Firm Fixed Effects

Stocks

Government
Debt, Cash,
Insurance

Indicator if Last Observation Before Termination -1.391
Regression without Controls
(1.897)

3.523
(2.605)

2.551
(1.618)

-1.712
(2.437)

Indicator if Three Years Before Termination
Regression without Controls

0.490
(3.835)

-2.213
(1.793)

0.923
(2.339)

Indicator if Last Observation Before Termination 6.128 ***
Regression with Controls
(2.321)

-8.889 ***
(3.087)

3.543 *
(1.860)

-4.681 *
(2.807)

Indicator if Three Years Before Termination
Regression with Controls

-3.660
(4.408)

-4.111
(2.537)

1.357
(2.883)

Dependent Variable

Stocks

Government
Debt, Cash,
Insurance

Plan Level Data from IRS 5500s (N = 55,684)

-2.052
(2.777)

1.981
(3.247)

Firm Level Data from Compustat and Pensions & Investments (N = 448)
Indicator if Last Observation Before Bankruptcy -1.967
Regression without Controls
(3.418)

-0.828
(2.343)

-3.067
(2.906)

1.715
(2.406)

Indicator if Three Years Before Bankruptcy
Regression without Controls

-2.269 *
(1.376)

2.739
(2.089)

-0.634
(1.036)

Indicator if Last Observation Before Bankruptcy -0.670
Regression with Controls
(3.365)

-2.377
(2.398)

-2.204
(2.627)

0.988
(2.154)

Indicator if Three Years Before Bankruptcy
Regression with Controls

-3.105 **
(1.473)

2.317
(2.000)

-0.194
(1.018)

1.680
(2.015)

2.349
(1.992)

Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by firm. *** statistically significant at the 1% level, **
statistically significant at the 5% level, * statistically significant at the 10% level.

53

Appendix Table 1: Bankruptcies in Firm Level Data
This table details the 16 bankruptcies that occur in the firm level data. The overall sample is described in Table 4.
There are two conventions to indicate the last year before bankruptcy. The first is the last year of data before CRSP
delisting, or the last year of data before the bankruptcy filing if the delisting date of the stock cannot be identified. The
second is the last year of data before bankruptcy is filed. Results in this paper are presented using the first definition
although they are robust to the use of the second.

UAL (United Airlines) Corp
Delta Air Lines Inc
Northwest Airlines Corp
Bethlehem Steel Corp
Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E)
US Airways Group
National Steel Corp
Solutia Inc
Polaroid Corp
Owens Corning
Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical
Weirton Steel Corp
Enron Corp
USG Corp
Consolidated Freightways
Agway Inc

Bankruptcy
Filing

Delisting

12/9/2002
9/14/2005
9/14/2005
10/15/2001
4/6/2001
8/11/2002
3/6/2002
12/17/2003
10/12/2001
10/5/2000
2/12/2002
5/19/2003
12/2/2001
6/25/2001
9/3/2002
10/1/2002

4/2/2003
10/12/2005
9/23/2005
6/11/2002
—
9/21/2004
3/15/2002
12/16/2003
10/9/2001
12/18/2002
4/2/2002
9/5/2001
1/11/2002
—
10/3/2002
—

54

Termination

2005
Seeking
Seeking
2003
—
2003
2003
—
2002
—
2003
2003
—
—
2003
—

Last Data
Year
Before
Delisting

2003
2004
2004
2001
2000
2002
2001
2001
2000
2001
2002
2001
2000
2000
2001
2001

Last Data
Year
Before
Filing

Pension
Liabilities

2001
2004
2004
2000
2000
2001
2001
2001
2000
1999
2001
2001
2000
2000
2001
2001

$13,117
$12,140
$9,425
$6,495
$5,405
$5,287
$2,290
$1,706
$1,197
$1,157
$913
$904
$746
$670
$338
$333

Appendix Table 2: Comparison of Time-Series Returns
Within-Plan Mean Returns Through Year
Terminating
Year of
Termination
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
All
All††

Mean
8.8%
11.7%
8.4%
9.0%
6.8%
7.9%
8.2%
8.2%
8.6%
9.2%
9.7%
9.2%
9.9%
8.1%
7.0%
6.8%
8.2%
8.2%
-1.3%

Standard
Deviation
2.7%
9.6%
2.7%
4.3%
4.7%
3.2%
4.4%
2.6%
6.0%
3.0%
4.4%
2.2%
3.6%
3.6%
5.5%
4.6%
3.8%
4.4%
4.0%

Count
5
12
36
37
41
46
28
29
31
30
33
25
52
80
98
91
59
678
678

Mean
12.4%
8.2%
11.7%
10.6%
10.6%
8.4%
10.4%
10.7%
11.5%
11.6%
11.5%
9.7%
7.5%
5.8%
7.1%
–
–
8.7%
0.0%

Within-Plan Standard Deviation of Returns Through Year
Terminating
Year of
Termination
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
All

Mean
3.4%
9.8%
5.7%
5.9%
7.7%
5.1%
6.5%
6.4%
7.9%
5.7%
6.6%
5.6%
8.4%
8.7%
11.4%
9.8%
11.6%
8.0%

Standard
Deviation
0.9%
17.8%
3.7%
4.9%
9.1%
5.0%
7.3%
3.4%
6.4%
5.1%
4.2%
2.4%
4.5%
3.5%
9.3%
6.4%
4.0%
6.6%

Count
12,347
15,435
16,865
14,684
15,764
15,845
14,411
14,658
13,757
12,957
10,121
10,653
11,414
10,901
10,264
–
–
23,391
23,391

Test of
Test of
Equal
Equal
Standard
Means
Deviations
0.0423
0.0087
0.2302
0.3980
0.0000
0.0000
0.0338
0.0000
0.0000
0.0016
0.2288
0.0000
0.0149
0.0006
0.0000
0.0000
0.0137
0.8536
0.0001
0.0001
0.0252
0.1784
0.2403
0.0000
0.0000
0.0002
0.0000
0.0000
0.8965
0.0000
0.4756†
0.0903†
0.0350†
0.5104†
0.0038
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Count
8,150
11,490
15,111
13,888
14,995
15,242
13,843
14,095
13,227
12,411
9,550
10,017
10,918
10,901
10,264
–
–
23,391

Test of
Test of
Equal
Equal
Standard
Means
Deviations
0.0846
0.0076
0.6508
0.2181
0.0003
0.0000
0.1079
0.0000
0.4350
0.1789
0.0029
0.0000
0.1554
0.0521
0.0187
0.0000
0.9670
0.0049
0.0333
0.0004
0.1381
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2454
0.0000
0.0058
0.0000
0.4820
0.0000
0.2000†
0.4831†
0.0929†
0.0000†
0.0000
0.0000

Non-Terminating
Standard
Deviation
12.4%
12.0%
9.6%
9.5%
7.0%
7.7%
7.8%
7.0%
6.2%
5.7%
5.3%
5.4%
5.5%
5.5%
4.1%
–
–
6.0%
5.4%

Non-Terminating

Count
3
9
34
36
41
46
28
29
31
30
33
25
52
80
98
91
59
670

Mean
4.9%
7.0%
8.3%
7.2%
6.6%
7.4%
8.5%
8.0%
7.9%
7.8%
7.7%
8.4%
9.1%
9.8%
10.7%
–
–
9.4%

Standard
Deviation
14.0%
13.9%
12.8%
11.4%
10.8%
9.5%
9.9%
9.7%
9.9%
9.0%
8.3%
7.6%
7.3%
6.9%
6.8%
–
–
10.1%

† Test is relative to the within-plan sample moment (mean or standard deviation) including all years through 2003.
†† Net of year effects

55

Figure 1: Pension Fund Asset Allocation in IRS 5500 Data
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
Cash and Government Debt
Insurance
All Other
Stocks

5%
0%

1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

Cash and Government Debt

10%

All Other
Stocks
0%
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

56

Figure 2: Effects of Funding Status on Asset Allocation in IRS 5500 Data
20
Percent of Total Assets

15

10

5

0
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Funding Status Decile

-5

-10

-15

-20
Stocks

Government Debt, Cash and Insurance

8

6

Percent of Total Assets,
Controlling for Plan
Fixed Effects

4

2

0
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Funding Status Decile

-2

-4

-6

-8
Stocks

Government Debt, Cash and Insurance

57

10

0.014

80

0.040

60

0.012

70

0.035

50

0.010

60

0.030

50

0.025

40

0.008
40

0.020

30

0.006
30

0.015

20

0.004
20

0.010

10

0.005

%

%

70

0.002

10

0.000

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Least Likely

0

10

0.000
91

Most Likely

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

15

25

0.010

0.035

20

0.008

10

100
Most Likely

Probability of Termination Percentile

Probability of Termination Decile

0.030

%, net of year fixed effects

15
%, net of year fixed effects

%

Figure 3: Distress Termination Probabilities and Asset Allocation in IRS 5500 Data
1
Equity Allocation (Left Scale)
Government Cash, Debt, and Insurance Allocation (Left Scale)
Probability of Termination (Right Scale)
0

0.006
5
0.004
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0.002

-5
0.000

0.025
10
0.020

5
0

0.015
91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

-5
0.010
-10

-10

-0.002

0.005

-15
-15

-0.004
Least Likely

Most Likely

-20

Least Likely

Most Likely

Probability of Termination Percentile

Probability of Termination Decile

58

0.000

33

1

68

1

32
66

31

0.1

0.1

64

29

0.01

%

%

30

28

62

0.01

60

27

0.001

0.001

58

26

25

56

0.0001
1

2

3
4
Probability of Bankruptcy Quintile

0.0001
1

5

3

2

3
4
Probability of Bankruptcy Quintile

5

3

0.030

0.030
0.025

0.025

2

2

0.020

0.020
0.015

0.015

1

%, net of year effects

%, net of year effects

%

Figure 4: Bankruptcy Probabilities and Asset Allocation in Firm-Level Data
1
Equity Allocation (Left Scale)
Government Cash, Debt, and Insurance Allocation (Left Scale)
Probability of Termination (Right Scale)
0

0.010

0

0.005
1

2

3

4

5
0.000

-1
-0.005

1
0.010
0

0.005
1

2

3

4

5
0.000

-1
-0.005

-0.010

-0.010

-2

-2
-0.015

-0.015

-0.020

-3

-3

Probability of Bankruptcy Quintile

59

Probability of Bankruptcy Quintile

-0.020

Figure 5: Investment Returns of the PBGC and the Private Sector
40.0%

Investment Income(t) / Investment Assets(t)

30.0%

20.0%

10.0%

0.0%
1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

-10.0%

-20.0%

-30.0%

Value-Weighted NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq Returns
Investment Returns of Assets Held by PBGC
Value-Weighted Private Sector Return of Eventually Terminated Plans
Value-Weighted Private Sector Return
Year

30.0%

Investment Income(t) / Investment Assets(t)

20.0%

10.0%

0.0%
1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

-10.0%

-20.0%
Investment Returns of Assets Held by PBGC, minus Value-Weighted NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq
Value-Weighted Private Sector Return of Eventually Terminated Plans, minus Value-Weighted NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq
Value-Weighted Private Sector Return, minus minus Value-Weighted NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq
-30.0%
Year

60

