                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHAT DO NONPROFITS MAXIMIZE? NONPROFIT HOSPITAL SERVICE PROVISION
                    AND MARKET OWNERSHIP MIX

                                           Jill R. Horwitz
                                           Austin Nichols

                                        Working Paper 13246
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w13246


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2007




We thank David Cutler, Carole Gresenz, Jim Hines, Edward Parson, and Jonathan Skinner for comments.
We thank Laurence Baker, Mike Chernew, Leemore Dafny, Jonathon Kolstadt, Kristin Madison,
Jean Roth, and the National Bureau of Economic Research for data. Jackie Julien, Tomislav Ladika,
Aimee Mangan, and the University of Michigan Law School Library provided helpful research support.
We thank Hillary Muscato for administrative and editorial assistance. We also thank participants
in workshops at the National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Michigan Law School Fawley
and Tax Policy series, University of Michigan School of Public Health, Cornell Law School Junior
Empirical Legal Scholars Conference, and the University of Victoria Faculty of Law and Department
of Economics. Horwitz thanks the University of Victoria School of Public Administration and Faculty
of Law for her visiting appointment during the 2006-7 academic year. Thank you to the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation's Changes in Health Care Financing and Organization (HCFO) Initiative for a
generous grant to fund this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2007 by Jill R. Horwitz and Austin Nichols. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What Do Nonprofits Maximize? Nonprofit Hospital Service Provision and Market Ownership
Mix
Jill R. Horwitz and Austin Nichols
NBER Working Paper No. 13246
July 2007, Revised June 2008
JEL No. H1,I1,L1,L13,L22,L3

                                             ABSTRACT

Conflicting theories of the nonprofit firm have existed for several decades yet empirical research has
not resolved these debates, partly because the theories are not easily testable but also because empirical
research generally considers organizations in isolation rather than in markets. Here we examine three
types of hospitals – nonprofit, for-profit, and government – and their spillover effects. We look at
the effect of for-profit ownership share within markets in two ways, on the provision of medical services
and on operating margins at the three types of hospitals. We find that nonprofit hospitals’ medical
service provision systematically varies by market mix. We find no significant effect of for-profit market
share on the operating margins of nonprofit hospitals. These results fit best with theories in which
hospitals maximize their own output.


Jill R. Horwitz
University of Michigan Law School
625 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1215
and NBER
jrhorwit@umich.edu

Austin Nichols
Urban Institute
2100 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
anichols@ui.urban.org
I. Introduction

       Economists have proposed and debated conflicting theories of the nonprofit firm
for several decades. Related empirical research -- which has mainly concerned the
hospital industry where mixed markets have persisted for over half a century -- has done
little to resolve these debates. This indeterminacy persists, in part, because the theories
have not generated testable predictions (Abraham, Gaynor et al., 2005) and because of
the inherent difficulties of estimation in health care markets which are rife with failures
(Arrow, 1963). It also persists because the vast empirical research on hospital ownership
is incomplete. Studies typically consider hospital behavior in isolation, rather than in
markets that have varied population, competitive, and ownership characteristics.

       Given this background, we have three goals for the paper: 1) producing new facts
regarding the interaction between hospital ownership and market structure, thus
constraining future theoretical research, 2) making progress to appropriately define
hospital markets and address endogeneity, and 3) using the results to help differentiate
among extant theories of the nonprofit firm.

       Here we examine the interaction between hospital ownership and market mix in
two ways. We first examine whether medical service provision by nonprofit,
government, and for-profit hospitals varies with for-profit market share. Investigating
service offerings is particularly useful because, in a highly regulated industry in which
managers are constrained in their attempts to maximize profits (e.g., it is difficult and
sometimes illegal to turn away low-paying patients), managers have some freedom to
open or close a service as a way to increase profits. This explains why many researchers
find little difference among ownership types among many dimensions, but along
dimensions where administrators can influence profitability there are large differences
(Horwitz, 2007). We also investigate whether hospital operating margins depend on the
interaction between ownership and market mix.

       We find that service provision systematically varies both by firm type and market
mix. Nonprofits in markets with relatively high concentrations of for-profits are more
likely to offer more profitable and less likely to offer less profitable services than those in


                                                                                              1
markets with relatively low concentrations of for-profits. Government hospitals
demonstrate a similar pattern, although the results are somewhat weaker than those for
nonprofits. Among for-profit hospitals, we identified no systematic and significant
relationship in service provision by market type (high or low for-profit market share).

       The possible endogeneity of location makes it difficult to rule out models in
which different types of firms locate in different types of markets. We find, however,
similar results among multiple models 1) including many pooled cross-sections and some
fixed-effect models, 2) using various definitions of for-profit market share, including a
new distance-weighted approach, and various cut-offs for high and low for-profit market
share, and 3) identifying hospitals by their current market type (high for-profit share or
low for-profit share) in some specifications and their market type during the first year of
the study period in others. These results suggest the findings are not artifacts of
endogenous location.

       We also apply the results to differentiate among theories of the nonprofit firm.
We find most convincing a model where nonprofit hospitals maximize their own output
(Baumol and Bowen, 1965; Newhouse, 1970) or a mixed objectives model in which at
least some nonprofits are output-maximizing (Hirth, 1999). If nonprofits were welfare-
maximizing, as other theories suggest, they should exhibit increased provision of
unprofitable services in markets where for-profits have a greater presence; similarly, if
nonprofits were maximizing economic profits and distributing rents disguised as
increased costs, we would expect to see no effect of increased for-profit presence on their
output. Additional results, which show that increased for-profit market share has a
positive effect on for-profit hospitals’ operating margins are also consistent with the
model that nonprofits maximize output, though we cannot rule out a model in which
some maximize outputs and others maximize profits.

II. Background, Previous Research, and Empirical Predictions

       Slightly fewer than two-thirds of U.S. general hospitals within metropolitan
statistical areas (MSAs) are nonprofit, with for-profit and government hospitals making
up roughly equal shares of the remainder; of rural hospitals, about one half are nonprofit



                                                                                              2
and 40 percent are government.1 Despite active hospital market consolidation,
particularly during the late 1990s, ownership shares have remained relatively stable
(Abraham, Gaynor et al. 2005). There has been some growth in the number and size of
for-profit hospitals, but the proportion of for-profit hospitals has increased only modestly.
Hospital ownership statistics from 1988 through 2005 are reported in Table 1.

A. Theoretical Background and Predictions

         Despite many studies explaining why firms adopt nonprofit status and a few
studies explaining why ownership mix within markets persists, there is no generally
accepted theory of the nonprofit firm. First, this may be because competing explanations
are incomparable. Only a few scholars attempt to identify a nonprofit objective function
directly, while most only suggest the mechanisms by which such an objective function
might constrain corporate behavior.

         Second, there is no comprehensive theory of oligopoly or entry deterrence where
firms have different objective functions because developing one is so hard. It is hard to
specify the problem in a way that generates a soluble model, even in the case where firms
offer a homogenous good in a standard Walrasian market. It is harder still to
conceptualize the problem in a market where firms offer different kinds of bundled goods
and where many of the consumption decisions are made without observing prices (in
either the pecuniary sense of how much is charged for a particular medical intervention,
or in terms of more comprehensive notions of price including psychic costs or
opportunity costs).

         Further, there is no theory of equilibrium in these markets where neither prices
nor quantities are observed, and the producer and consumer are not typically clearly
identified. Although we cannot base our predictions on a comprehensive theory, we can
offer some rough predictions based on an informal discussion of the various theories of
nonprofits and hospital behavior in the existing literature. For the purposes of this
discussion, we will assume that entry and exit of types of hospitals is “sprinkled


1
 Here we focus on non-rural hospitals. Although almost half of all general hospitals are rural, they account
for only 1/6 of admissions. We will examine rural hospitals in future work.



                                                                                                          3
randomly” around markets, so that there is exogenous variation in numbers of hospitals
and the proportion of each type in various markets.

       Finally, there is no agreement on the theory of a nonprofit firm because the
various theories have not been effectively tested. These theories tend to generate similar,
sometimes identical, predictions about firm behavior. Observing whether the medical
services offered by hospital ownership types (nonprofit, for-profit, and government)
depends on the mix of firm-types in the market offers some traction on this problem.
Here we discuss how our findings regarding ownership, market mix, and service
provision help either rule out or narrow four major categories of nonprofit firm theories.
These categories are: 1) firm output maximization theories, 2) market output
maximization theories, 3) “for-profit in disguise” theories, and 4) a combination of the
firm output maximization and disguise theories. We summarize these theories and
predictions in Table 6.

       1. Firm Output Maximization Theories

       In the first theory, Newhouse (1970), where nonprofits maximize own output
(some weighted average of various measures of quantity and quality of care), the
nonprofit will offer more health care until profits are driven to zero (in expectation, at
least, since the data suggest that hospitals lose money one year and make money the
next). It may seem that managers of nonprofit hospitals should be relatively indifferent
to the mix of hospitals around them, since their neighbors cannot dictate output decisions.
Some theorists have sought to explain that this is the case because certain kinds of actors
control nonprofits: managers with particularly altruistic goals (Rose-Ackerman 1996) or
consumers who control the mission of nonprofit organizations institution directly (Ben-
Ner 1983; James and Rose-Ackerman 1986; Ben-Ner and Gui 1993).

       A nonprofit’s neighbors, however, will take some of its “customers” and thereby
affect its patient pool. If their neighbors are driven more by profit motives, then the
nonprofit will tend to treat less profitable patients who seek less profitable types of care.
In this case, the nonprofit’s behavior will be affected through the binding constraint on
profits—in the absence of the profit-seeking competitors “cream-skimming” patients,
they would have offered a mix of services (and served a mix of patients), call it X, that


                                                                                                4
generated zero profit, but in the presence of the profit-seekers, the mix X will lose money,
so they must alter their behavior to generate additional profits. Thus a nonprofit will be
induced to look more like a profit-seeker in an environment where there are more profit-
seekers, by both being less likely to offer unprofitable services and more likely to offer
profitable ones.

        2. Market Output Maximization Theories

        In the second theory, Weisbrod (1988) suggests that nonprofits maximize total
market output, meeting community health care needs where market and government
failures leave them unmet. Salamon (1987) models government, rather than the
voluntary sector, as the residual sector. Frank and Salkever’s (1991) model includes total
industry output as a maximand. In a theory of nonprofits that maximize market output,
nonprofit hospitals may attempt to generate more revenue by adding more profitable
services, but they also will react to a mix of neighbors that is more profit-seeking by
increasing their propensity to offer less profitable services or to serve less profitable
patients to offset the more mercenary behavior of their neighbors. Thus a nonprofit will
be induced to look less like profit-seekers in an environment where there are more profit-
seekers, in at least one way, by being more likely to offer unprofitable services, and more
like profit-seekers in that it may also become more likely to offer profitable services.

        3. For-Profits in Disguise

        Researchers have suggested that both nonprofit and for-profit hospitals maximize
profits, but profits go to shareholders in the case of for-profits and privileged employees
in the case of nonprofits. Pauly and Redisch (1973) develop a set of three models in
which staff physicians capture all rents from nonprofit hospitals. While some distortions
may arise from operating hospitals to benefit a subset of physicians, two of their models
imply that such hospitals would be essentially identical to for-profit hospitals in
equilibrium, with economic profits counted as costs (salaries or perks accruing to staff
physicians).

        Many empirical findings have demonstrated that nonprofit and for-profit hospitals
are substantially alike in important ways (cost, revenue, profits, etc.) (for a literature



                                                                                              5
review see Sloan 2000). Evidence that nonprofits and for-profits are similar along many
dimensions tends to support the theory that nonprofit hospitals maximize economic (if
not accounting) profits. We therefore hypothesize that if both nonprofits and for-profits
are maximizing profits, nonprofits should not act differently depending on the proportion
of for-profits in their markets.

        4. Mixed Objectives Theories

        A fourth class of theories combines the first and third, with the same predictions
regarding service provision in different types of markets. Hirth (1997, 1999) develops a
theory based on competition over quality under which competition from non-profit-
maximizing nonprofits causes positive spillover effects on the performances of both for-
profits and “for-profits in disguise” (i.e., nonprofits that are solely motivated by profits).
According to the theory, nonprofits drive out low-quality for-profits (that charge high
quality prices) and increase the utility of the uninformed consumers who continue to seek
care at for-profits. Hirth concludes that quality differences can disappear in markets with
a sufficiently high proportion of nonprofits. Even under this fourth model (Hirth), where
only some nonprofits are profit-seekers, an increase in for-profit penetration (holding
constant numbers and sizes of neighbors) should only affect behavior to the extent that
the nonprofits displaced are not profit-seekers. Thus the hybrid model offers a hybrid
prediction, somewhere between the Pauly-Redisch model that predicts that nonprofits
will look essentially like for-profits, and the Newhouse model that predicts that
nonprofits may look more like for-profits in the presence of more for-profits. Still, we
would be unlikely to find differences among ownership types if the variation within the
nonprofit form was greater than the variation between nonprofits and other types.

5. Mixed Oligopoly

        A complete theory needs to specify the objective functions of firms and the
mechanism by which the market mix is maintained. A fully developed theory would also
explain why some industries, such as health and education, support government, for-
profit, and nonprofit production, while others industries exhibit only one or two types of
producers. A start has been made on models of mixed oligopoly incorporating public
(either welfare or revenue maximizing) and for-profit agents (see e.g., Cremer, Marchand


                                                                                                 6
et al., 1989, De Fraja and Delbono, 1989). However, there is no theory incorporating the
three types of producers, so we rely on intuition as to how these different species of
nonprofits should be expected to respond to shifts in the composition of their competitors.

       Several theories explain how nonprofits and for-profits can continue to occupy the
same market. The first and most common one is that where there are informational
asymmetries between providers and recipients of health care (Arrow 1963), quality of
care cannot be fully contracted, and consumers are heterogeneous in their preferences
and/or informational disadvantage (See, e.g., Hansmann 1980; Ben-Ner and Hoomissen
1991; Hirth 1999; Glaeser and Shleifer 2001). Therefore, for-profits and nonprofits offer
different quality services and possibly price them differently (where price should be
construed as including various nonpecuniary compensation mechanisms, e.g., how much
emphasis is placed on the nature of conversations with patients). This type of model
underlies many other discussions in health economics, including discussions of insurance
or regulation. It is unclear, however, how much control over quality providers exert or
the power of these incentives — some studies show no, or only very small, responses to
large incentives, with rewards going to those who already exhibited high quality before
the incentives were implemented (See e.g., Rosenthal, Frank et al. 2005; Rosenthal and
Frank 2006; Epstein 2007).

       The second idea about how ownership mix is maintained is that nonprofits (who
are assumed to enjoy a cost advantage over for-profits) are in short supply; the number of
altruists who found and run nonprofits is fixed, while for-profit entrepreneurs are in
abundance (Lakdawalla and Philipson 2005). In this type of model, the marginal firm is
a for-profit, so equilibrium is determined by for-profit behavior, with some constraints
imposed by the presence of nonprofits. This is the only model that does not require some
heterogeneity in patients. However, it imposes a very stringent constraint on hospital
managers, dividing them into two types with one in infinite abundance and one with a
finite population.

       The third is the Hirth (1997; 1999) model in which two types of firms – one with
for-profit objectives, the other with altruistic objectives – both adopt nonprofit status.
That both types incorporate under the same status reduces the signal quality of


                                                                                             7
organizational type. This situation creates an equilibrium where customers cannot be
sure of receiving higher quality care at a nonprofit, though it may be higher in
expectation, and for-profits offering a “price” advantage over nonprofits. Patients who
differ in risk aversion or information sets choose one type of hospital over another, and
both types are present in equilibrium.

       The fourth is that there are different financial advantages enjoyed by the two
types, where for-profits have access to equity and nonprofits may have lower tax
expenses, so that one type may be more or less advantaged in different places or different
times (See e.g., Hansmann 1987). If in some markets the financial advantage switches
between the organizational forms over time, both types may be observed at a point in
time if the future expected return to each justifies their continuous operation.

       A similar pattern of fluctuating fortunes is implied by Pauly and Redisch, in that
there is no difference in objectives between for-profits or nonprofits, but there are costs
and benefits associated with each type (a physicians’ cooperative organized as a nonprofit
that cannot distribute profits per se may be forced to “pay” doctors in perquisites or other
non-cash compensation). If there is heterogeneity in doctors’ preferences, or differences
in costs and benefits in different places or different times, both types of profit-seeking
firms will be observed.

       Finally, if nonprofits exist because they offer different goods than other types
(Rose-Ackerman 1996), then they are actually in different markets and the puzzle of why
different hospital types co-exist within markets dissolves. There is some evidence for
this explanation in hospital markets. Horwitz (2005a; 2007), for example, has found that
medical service provision varies significantly by ownership type. This finding implies
two distinct types of product differentiation. First, for example, hospital types specialize
in various services (e.g., some government hospitals offer psychiatric emergency care and
for-profits in the market do not). One could also consider the different bundles of
services offered at hospitals to be different goods. Second, one could understand the
product offered by hospitals as health care, a multidimensional commodity. Different
patients, or their doctors and insurers, have different preferences over the mix of services




                                                                                              8
and service attributes offered by hospitals. Consumers may sort by hospital type based
on their preferences for quality, quantity, and hotel services.

       These notions of product differentiation lead one to think of a model of
monopolistic competition, in which the interaction between for-profits and nonprofits is
concentrated in the arena of defining a hospital’s unique position in the product space.
This model does not, however, address the central question of why nonprofits and for-
profits would compete in this way. Nor does it suggest the optimal level of quality and
quantity of medical services, a particularly difficult question where there is imperfect
information as in medical services markets. But the idea of product differentiation does
suggest that nonprofit output decisions would not depend on market mix. Nonprofits
would simply specialize in the some types of services and not in other types of services,
regardless of the number of for-profit competitors.

       We prefer the first of these models of self-sustaining market mix, relying on the
heterogeneity of preferences among consumers, though each probably captures important
elements of the interactions among hospitals in a market. Another model which should
not be neglected is simple inertia—regardless of the relative advantages of various
organizational forms, or large negative profit margins, many hospitals are slow to close.
Nonprofits may see perpetual operation as part of their mission, even if times have
changed irrevocably. Hansmann, Kessler et al. (2003) have found that secular nonprofits
are less responsive to declines in demand than government or religious nonprofits; for-
profits are the most responsive. There are likely other behavioral economics stories at
play, including a process of institutional isomorphism that induces nonprofits and for-
profits in the same market to behave much the same regardless of their true objectives,
which complicate interpretation of these results as tests of competing theories of rational
behavior.

B. Previous Empirical Research on Ownership Mix

       Related empirical research focuses on two questions: 1) Does firm behavior
depend on the ownership of its competitors? 2) What is the primary direction of
influence between for-profit and nonprofit firms? Although few studies examine the
relationship among firm type, market mix, and medical service provision, the available


                                                                                              9
evidence suggests that the presence of for-profit hospitals in a market is associated with
greater responsiveness to financial incentives among nonprofits in the same market.
Nonprofits in relatively high for-profit hospital penetration markets are more likely than
other types to provide profitable services (Hughes and Luft 1990; Horwitz 2007), to
avoid unprofitable patients (Schlesinger, Bentkover et al. 1987; Schlesinger, Dorwart et
al. 1997a), and to spend less on admitted cardiac patients (Ettner and Hermann 1987;
Kessler and McClellan 2002). They are also more responsive to profit-making
opportunities (Cutler and Horwitz 2000; Duggan 2000; Silverman and Skinner 2004).

       Some scholars, however, explain these differences as evidence of market selection
rather than ownership. For example, Norton and Staiger (1994) find that conditional on
location, nonprofits provide similar amounts of charity care to for-profits, but for-profits
differentially locate where there is less demand for such care. Similarly, studying three
markets, McClellan and Staiger (2000) find that for-profits systematically locate in
markets with lower total quality.

       Scholars also consider the direction of influence among firm types within mixed
markets. Some claim that nonprofits influence for-profits. Hirth (1999), described
above, shows that competition from altruistic nonprofits can raise quality among
competing for-profit and nonprofits that adopt for-profit objectives alike. Several others
have argued, without systematic evidence in support, that nonprofits influence for-profit
competitors through some form of standard setting. They may, for example, define
consumer and community expectations regarding service provision such as charity care,
or stimulate non-price competition such as competing over reputation for contribution to
the community (Marsteller, Bovberg et al. 1998; Clement, White et al. 2002). Hansmann
(1980) reasons that a nonprofit culture in older, established industries such as the hospital
industry deters profiteering among nonprofits, immunizing them from for-profit
influence.

       Other scholars identify the opposite relationship—for-profits influencing
nonprofits. Hughes and Luft (1990) predict that nonprofit hospitals with for-profit
neighbors will feel competitively threatened and, therefore, be more likely than other
nonprofits to offer profitable services and less likely to offer unprofitable services. They



                                                                                            10
also predict that nonprofits view local government hospitals both as complementary
institutions, allowing the nonprofit to avoid unprofitable services, and as uncompetitive,
thus allowing them to offer profitable services. Their results, albeit for only two medical
services, support their predictions. Based on two case studies, Cutler and Horwitz (2000)
hypothesize that nonprofit and government hospitals copy the behavior of new for-profit
entrants in a hospital market. Finally, Clement and co-authors (2002) show that as
nonprofits provide more charity care, for-profits provide less in mixed markets.

       Still others contend that there should be no influence of for-profits on nonprofits
or vice versa. According to Lakdawalla and Philipson (2005) because for-profits have
higher operating costs and no endowments, they are the marginal firms and, therefore, the
only firms responding to market changes. This result depends on several strong
assumptions, such as a finite supply of altruistic entrepreneurs and an infinite supply of
profit-seeking entrepreneurs. Further, the result is not robust to changes in the theoretical
model, such as allowing the supply of both profit-seeking and altruistic entrepreneurs to
vary with market characteristics or fixing the supply of both entrepreneurial types.

        Finally, Santerre and Vernon (2005) attempt to identify the efficient ownership
mix. Relying on Grabowski and Hirth (2002), they assert that nonprofits encourage for-
profits to become more trustworthy and for-profits encourage nonprofits to become more
efficient. Thus, they assume that ownership influences run in both directions. They
further assume that nonprofits face relatively high demand because they have higher
quality, but offer relatively low supply because their relatively low efficiency leads to
higher costs. To identify which effect dominates, they regress quantity (e.g., admissions,
surgeries, emergency visits, and others) on nonprofit and government hospital market
share, and other variables that influence demand. Finding negative coefficients on
nonprofit ownership in almost all tests, they conclude that the quality benefit is less than
the inefficiency cost associated with nonprofit ownership and, therefore, there are too
many nonprofit hospitals. This conclusion, however, is not supported by their theory – if
consumers value quantity and quality, then lower quantity and higher quality could
generate greater consumer surplus, and there could well be an inefficiently low number of
nonprofits.



                                                                                             11
III. Data and Empirical Strategy

A. Data

        Annual data (1988 through 2005) on hospital characteristics (e.g., beds,
admissions, ownership status, teaching status, and medical services) are from the
American Hospital Association’s Annual Surveys of Hospitals (AHA). We include all
non-rural, non-federal general medical and surgical hospitals in the United States. We
examine every acute and post-acute medical service reported in the surveys. The AHA
surveys include approximately 80 service questions from which we excluded questions
about facilities, non-medical services, and duplicate questions. Included services and
summary statistics are listed in Tables 2 and 3.
        The AHA data have some limitations. First, they are self-reported and not
independently verified. However, there is no a priori reason to suspect that the data
reliability is correlated with ownership or market type. Further, general medical and
surgical hospitals exhibit a high response rate; in 2003, for-example, it was 86.3 percent.
Second, the survey format has changed slightly over the years. From 1988-1993, the
survey asked hospitals to choose whether a service (e.g., open heart surgery) was offered
at the hospital, another hospital, or not available (allowing the hospital three possible
answers), and from 1993-2005 to answer “yes” to each question if the service was offered
at a 1) hospital or subsidiary, 2) another system location, 3) network, or 4) joint venture
(allowing for 16 possible answers). To ensure that the coding is consistent over time, we
compared the responses in 1993, when the surveys included both question types. For all
years we converted the answers into a dichotomous variable representing whether the
hospital itself offered the service.
        Third, the data suffer from missing values, particularly in the later years, and the
non-respondents were disproportionately for-profit. Of the roughly 46,075 observations
in the sample, before filling in missing values, approximately three percent of nonprofit,
five percent of government, and 17 percent of for-profit hospitals did not report whether
they offered open-heart surgery in 1988. By 2005, those percentages were about 12
percent for nonprofit, 11 percent for government, and 26 percent for for-profit hospitals.
The numbers, however, are considerably lower for nonprofit and government hospitals



                                                                                            12
after weighting by annual admissions. We imputed missing values using data from the
years surrounding the missing year. Generally fewer than five percent of observations
were imputed for each service.
       Fourth, in approximately 350 hospitals, the self-reported variable for whether a
hospital is a general medical and surgical or other type of hospital was inconsistent across
years. We conducted additional research on about 100 of these hospitals by searching the
hospital website, local newspapers, state government reports, and contacting the hospital
directly to determine which value was correct; we excluded 48 of these hospitals from the
sample because they were not general hospitals. We recoded the remaining 267
hospitals with varying designations (approximately five percent) by using the modal
response during all years, therefore only using those hospitals that report being a general
medical and surgical hospital in the majority of study years.

       We constructed demographic controls using tract-level data from the 1990 and
2000 U.S. Census. HMO penetration data (1990 through 2001) are derived from the
National Directory of HMOs (published annually by the Group Health Association of
America) and Interstudy. Baker (1997) provides details on the construction of HMO
market share estimates. We constructed the hospital system membership variable from
three sources: the AHA and databases constructed by Madison (2004) for 1988-1998 and
by Dafny and Dranove (2006) for 1988-2000.

       We constructed hospital operating margins using the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services’ Healthcare Cost Report Information System (HCRIS). The HCRIS
data are updated quarterly and we used data from the March 2006 version for years 1988
through 2004, excluding 2005 from the analysis because the data were incomplete. There
are some limitations to the data, suggested by the fact that within a single hospital
operating margins vary considerably over time. We excluded nearly one percent (330) of
the observations because they showed contractual allowances – the difference between
hospital charges and amounts realizable from third party payers under contractual
agreements – to be larger than total patient revenues. We also excluded an additional five
percent (2,297) of the observations because they were missing at least one variable
necessary to calculate the operating margin.



                                                                                          13
       We developed a database of precise hospital locations from several sources,
starting with addresses from the AHA database, filling in missing addresses through
internet searches and telephone calls to the hospital or the current resident of the building
that housed the closed hospital. We then used geocoding software to match the addresses
to precise longitudes and latitudes, matching 77 percent during the first run and slightly
over 10 percent more after resolving name conflicts or hand-matching the addresses with
the software. We identified the remaining locations by employing various methods
including using Federal Aviation Administration databases to identify hospital heliports
and iterating between topographic maps to locate the hospital visually and mapping
programs to find the street location.

B. Empirical Strategy and Models

       1. Overview and Service Profitability

       Examining medical services provision is useful for several reasons. Service
provision decisions suggest the type of patients, doctors, and payers whom hospitals wish
to attract. By examining multiple services, rather than concentrating on one, we are able
to establish the patterns by which hospitals decide to provide services. Comparing
services also allows us to identify hospitals’ relative responsiveness to financial
incentives. Interactions between medical providers and their patients may also be
influenced less directly by a hospital’s ownership form or market environment than by
whether and how those factors determine the services that hospitals offer, particularly
since hospital administrators can more readily control service offerings than ownership
status or market environment.

       In total, we examine 45 individual medical services to test whether offerings
differ by the interaction between hospital ownership and market type (i.e., high and low
for-profit hospital market penetration). We then sort those services into three
profitability categories – those with relatively high, relatively low, and variable
profitability. Our main method, following Horwitz (2007), assigns relative profitability
based on several sources including peer-reviewed research, interviews (with, e.g.,
hospital administrators, doctors, and policymakers), analyses of patients’ socioeconomic
or insurance status, Medicare payment reports, physician salaries for related services, and


                                                                                             14
trade publications. Although we summarize some of the designations in Table 2, a
detailed report explaining the profitability sorting is available online (Horwitz 2005b).

       Second, as a check on the first method, we categorize relative profitability from
the data itself. We assume that for-profits are more likely than government hospitals to
offer relatively profitable services and less likely to do otherwise. Using results from
equation (1) below, including all the listed control variables, we classify services as
profitable if for-profit hospitals are more likely to offer a service than government
hospitals in more than 10 percent of the study years and less likely to do so in no more
than 10 percent of the study years. We similarly categorize services as unprofitable if
for-profit hospitals are less likely to offer a service than government hospitals in more
than 10 percent of the study years and more likely to do so in no more than 10 percent of
the study years. If for-profits are both more likely to offer a service in more than 10
percent of the study years and less likely to do so in 10 percent of the study years, we
classify the service as variable. Otherwise, we classified the service as indeterminate.
For services that the first method identifies as unprofitable, the second method quite
consistently also identifies them as unprofitable. The approaches are less consistent for
services identified as profitable by the first method (See, Table 2, Column 2).

       Here we report in detail on representative services for each of three categories –
relatively profitable, relatively unprofitable, and variably profitable services. In the
relatively profitable category, we consider open-heart surgery, which was among the
most consistently and unambiguously profitable services over the study period partly
because of the well-insured nature of the patient pool (Cutler, McClellan et al. 2000) and
the fact that as the real price of bypass surgery increased during the 1980s and 1990s, the
costs were either flat or fell during the same period (Cutler, McClellan et al. 2001; Cutler
and Huckman 2003). We also include magnetic resonance imaging technology (MRI)
because it is representative of an elective unit that is often provided by free-standing, for-
profit businesses independent of hospitals.
       We report on two relatively unprofitable services, HIV/AIDS treatment and
psychiatric emergency care. During the 1980s and 1990s, HIV-positive and AIDS
patients were unprofitable patients to treat because almost all community health insurers



                                                                                            15
rated them as uninsurable, although some states forbade HIV antibody testing for
underwriting purposes (Pascal, Cvitanic et al. 1989). Further, Medicaid reimbursement,
the largest source of AIDS/HIV treatment payments in the 1990s (Westmoreland 1999),
did not typically cover the cost of treatment. (Pascal, Cvitanic et al. 1989) Psychiatric
services were generally unprofitable over the entire study period, and have become more
unprofitable in the latter years, as insurers cut back reimbursement. Hospital-based,
psychiatric emergency services are relatively unprofitable for several reasons including
the emergency room setting, the uncertain and often low level of reimbursement, and the
poor, poorly insured, and sick nature of the patient pool (Shwed 1980; Melnick, Serrato
et al. 1989; Deloitte & Touche 1990; Woodward, Epstein et al. 1997; Dhossche and
Ghani 1998; Gentry and Penrod 2000; Tye 2001).
       Finally, home health care and skilled nursing facilities exhibited variable profit-
making opportunities over the study period, being relatively profitable in roughly 1993
through 1997, but neither unambiguously profitable nor unprofitable before or after this
heyday. Legal challenges ensuring Medicare would reimburse these services were
resolved by the early 1990s, and they became quite profitable for hospitals that newly
entered the post-acute market and hospitals that unbundled acute and post-acute services.
With passage of the 1997 Balanced Budget Act, Medicare payments were reduced and
spending on post-acute care fell by a factor of two (Liu, Gage et al. 1999; Newhouse
2001; Newhouse 2002).

       2. Market Definitions

       There are several conventional methods for defining market boundaries and
market share. Because each has strengths and weaknesses, we perform numerous
analyses using both alternative measures of hospital market and for-profit market share.
We summarize the approaches here and provide details, including comparisons of the
methods, in Appendix A and Appendix B. Our main results use a new “distance-
weighted” measure of the percent of other hospitals that are for-profit, averaging across
all hospitals in the country. For each hospital in our sample in each year, we assign a
weight to each other hospital in the country, weighting by its admissions divided by the
square of one plus a constant times the distance squared. This method places more
reasonable relative weights on points of different distances from the hospital than does


                                                                                             16
the more conventional reciprocal of squared distance. We fix the constant used in the
weighting such that the method yields similar results to those of actual patient markets as
reported by Gresenz (2004).2
         We then identify a hospital as being in a high for-profit (HiFP) market if its
market is more than 15% for-profits, and in a low for-profit (LoFP) market if it faces less
than a 10% for-profit market share. Roughly 60-65 percent of the hospitals in the sample
are in low for-profit penetration markets and 25-30 percent are in high for-profit
penetration markets in the years under study. The median of for-profit market share is
close to 10 percent for each definition of for-profit share, and more than a quarter of
hospitals have more than a 15 percent for-profit share in their market, but different
definitions of for-profit market share produce different classifications. We experimented
with alternative cutoffs, including the top third and bottom third of for-profit market
shares, and the results were insensitive to specification differences.

         In the first set of alternative market tests, we identified a hospital’s market as a
disk with an approximately 15-mile radius centered on the hospital’s location. This
“fixed-radius” approach puts a weight on potential competitors that decays smoothly to
zero at 30 miles (i.e., when the distance from the central hospital to its competitor is
twice the radius of the disk, the overlap is zero). Because we identify the hospital
location by its longitude and latitude, rather than situating it at the centroid of the zip
code in which it operates, we avoid some of the imprecision commonly found in the
hospital ownership research. Neither the distance-weighted nor the fixed-radii measure
of for-profit share accounts for barriers to travel such as mountains or rivers.

         We use a third market definition often used in health economics research, MSA
(Chernew 1995; Santerre and Vernon 2005). This approach incorporates a notion of


2
  We chose not to use measures of market that depend on the hospital’s choice variables, such as by varying
the potential geographic area from which a hospital draws its admissions. While such measures have the
benefit of better identifying the area from which a hospital draws its actual patients, the actual patients
served are not identical to a hospital’s market, which is conceptually closer to the potential pool of patients
faced by each hospital. If a hospital changes its product mix, discontinuing one service and instituting
another, the actual patients served might change radically, and the geographic area might shift suddenly.
The potential patient pool is unchanged in this hypothetical example, and the reaction functions of hospitals
in competition, and their behavior in real markets, are determined by characteristics of potential patients as
much as by actual patients.



                                                                                                            17
topographical features and travel time because MSAs are defined by the Census to
encompass an area within which individuals are likely to commute to work. Further,
MSAs are fairly similar to Hospital Referral Regions (HRR), which represent regional
health care markets for tertiary medical care as defined by the Dartmouth Atlas of
Healthcare. Over 65 percent of HRRs include only 1 MSA and 88 percent include 1 or 2
MSAs. The results were not sensitive to these three alternative market definitions.
       We also vary the definition of for-profit market share, by using the first observed
market share (which is not sensitive to entry and exit by other hospitals over the 18 years
of data in our sample), and find similar results. Further, we alternatively include and
exclude each individual hospital from its own market to construct each of the for-profit
market penetration variables. Results are somewhat sensitive to whether a hospital’s own
ownership and admissions are included in its market definition, in the sense that patterns
of predicted probabilities look qualitatively noisier and less sensible, but here we report
only results using not-i market definitions, i.e., those that do not allow a hospital’s own
ownership and admissions from defining the hospital's market type.

       3. Primary Econometric Model

       (a) Hospital Level Specification
       We ask whether hospital types offer different types of services in different market
types measured by for-profit penetration, modeling the effect of ownership mix on
service provision by hospital type as follows:
       (1)     E(ServiceProvided)it = Φ[ βo + β1Fit + β2Yt + β3Yt*Fit + β4FPMarketit + β5
Fit*FPMarketit + β6Yt*Fit*FPMarketit + β7Hit + β8Dit + β9HMOit + β10HHIit]

       where F is a vector of indicator variables for nonprofit, for-profit, or government
ownership; and Y is a vector of indicator variables for year. FPMarket is a dummy
variable that identifies high for-profit markets. H is a vector of hospital characteristic
variables including hospital size (measured by quintiles of total hospital admissions), and
teaching status (measured by two variables: 1) whether the hospital has a residency
training approval by Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, and 2)
whether the hospital is a member of the Council of Teaching Hospitals of the Association
of American Medical Colleges).



                                                                                              18
       We include system membership because individual hospital service provision
depends on system decisions, and the probability of system membership is greater for for-
profit and religious hospitals than others (Madison 2004). System membership may also
be correlated with the measures that we test, such as offering cardiac care, although the
direction of the correlation is unclear (Madison 2004). Finally, systems may acquire
hospitals that provide profitable services so we introduce another endogeneity problem.
Therefore, H includes a binary variable for whether a hospital is a member of a hospital
system, defined as the maximum of two indicator variables based on AHA data: whether
the hospital has a non-missing system identification number and whether the hospital
reports belonging to a system. In some cases, we impute system membership for
hospitals based on corrected system membership data assembled by Madison (2004) or
Dafny and Dranove (2006).

       D is a vector of demographic variables measuring the characteristics of a
hospital’s potential patients. These include population size, ten categories of age, seven
categories of education, five categories of race, sex, marital status by sex, employed
persons by eleven categories of industry (as a proxy for insurance status), ten categories
of household income, income per capita, and twelve categories of travel time to work (as
a proxy of willingness to drive various distances to the hospital). Because the
demographic data are from the years 1990 and 2000 only, we filled the missing years by
linearly interpolating and extrapolating the natural log of each control variable,
amounting to imposing a constant percentage change per year in each population type
within each hospital’s market.

       We compiled these data from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses by averaging across all
tracts in the states and DC, using weights that vary inversely with the distance squared
from hospital i to the centroid of each census tract. All distances are calculated using an
accurate ellipsoidal model of the Earth's surface (Nichols 2007). The results are not
sensitive to the specifics of weighting choices. This is a general feature of averaging
demographic characteristics across fairly large geographical areas. Goody (1993) notes
that in a study of rural hospital markets varying the market definition did not affect mean
socioeconomic variable values at the zip code level.



                                                                                            19
        HMO is market penetration of health maintenance organizations, a measure
commonly used as a proxy for financial pressure in a market. We include this variable
because competitive pressure has been found to explain some variation in nonprofit
behavior such as charity care provision by general hospitals (Gruber 1994; Mann,
Melnick et al. 1995) and psychiatric hospitals (Schlesinger, Dorwart et al. 1997b).
Further, areas with more for-profits have slightly lower HMO enrollment than areas with
fewer for-profit hospitals (Kessler and McClellan 2002).

        During our study period, there was considerable hospital market consolidation,
with many markets reduced to monopolies, duopolies, or triopolies (Gaynor 2006). To
ensure that we estimate the effects of ownership mix rather than market concentration, we
include two measures of market concentration. First, we include a variable (HHI) that
measures market concentration using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index which is the sum
of squares of each hospital’s share of total admissions within each MSA in each year.
Although we hypothesize that ownership of a hospital affects the service provision of its
competitors, we do not interact ownership type with HHI because there is no a priori
reason to believe that the incentive to exploit market power differs by form. In theory,
although the particular motivation for exploiting market power may vary by ownership
type (e.g., earning profits to distribute to owners or furthering nonprofit goals), both types
of firms benefit from exploiting market power (Philipson and Posner 2006). In a
simulation, Gaynor and Vogt (2003) show no difference in the propensity of nonprofit
and for-profit hospitals to exploit market power. Abraham, Gaynor et al. (2005) find that
entry of a second or third hospital in a market leads to a convergence in competitive
conduct, including an increase in the quantity of admissions in a market, but find no
effect of further entry. We therefore include three indicator variables measuring whether
the MSA has 2, 3, 4, or 5 hospitals or more (the excluded category). 3

        Because the probability of a hospital offering a service is not independent from
one year to the next, we correct standard errors by clustering at the hospital level so they
are robust to arbitrary serial correlation (Arellano 1987; Kézdi 2004; Stock and Watson


3
 We drop the few MSAs with only one hospital because the MSA-level, for-profit market share cannot be
calculated for these MSAs.



                                                                                                   20
2006). Test statistics on joint tests when clustering at the MSA level were generally
greater in absolute magnitude, and standard errors on individual coefficients generally
smaller, indicating that errors may be negatively correlated within MSA. Estimating
standard errors, at the hospital level, therefore, is conservative. These cluster-robust
standard errors are also robust to heteroskedasticity in errors.

        By varying only the corporate form and market type of each hospital while
holding the independent variables constant (at 1994 levels), we predict the probabilities
that each hospital in each year would offer a given service. Then we average the
individual predicted probabilities to obtain the probability that a hospital type offers a
service each year. The thought experiment is, in short, what if all hospitals were for-
profits in high for-profit markets in every year? What if all hospitals were non-profits in
high for-profit markets in every year? What if all hospitals were non-profits in low for-
profit markets in every year? How would the behavior of hospitals differ under each of
these counterfactuals in different types of markets? Conducting the empirical tests in this
manner allows us to hold constant non-ownership hospital characteristics, thus yielding
more accurate predictions of how hospitals would behave if they changed form and no
other attributes.

        (b) Service Level
        Instead of modeling the effect of ownership mix on provision by hospital for each
of 45 services separately, we reformat the data so that each observation is of a service-
hospital-year combination, rather than a hospital-year combination, and regress provision
on hospital, market and service characteristics:
        (1b)    E(ServiceProvided)ijt = F[ βo + β1Fit + β2 Pjt + β3 Fit*Pjt + β4FPMarketit +
β5 Fit*FPMarketit + β6 Pjt*Fit*FPMarketit + β7Hit + β8Dit + β9HMOit + β10HHIit + β11Yt]
        where j indexes services and i indexes hospitals, Pjt is an indicator of profitability
(0 for an unprofitable or 1 for a profitable service in each year), and other variables are
the same as in equation 1. The coefficients in the vector β6 are of primary interest, since
they measure the differential impact of profitability for a hospital of a given type between
low and high for-profit markets. In this model, we have included all 39 services
classified as either profitable or unprofitable, excluding the six services we classified as



                                                                                              21
indeterminate. We coded services with variable profitability as profitable in some years
(1993 through 1997) and unprofitable in others.
        We correct standard errors by clustering at the hospital level so they are robust to
arbitrary intraclass correlation. These cluster-robust standard errors are also robust to
heteroskedasticity in errors, and are larger on average than standard errors clustered at the
hospital-year (smaller classes) or MSA (larger classes) level, i.e. they are conservative.

        4. Fixed-effects Model

We also implement an analogous model that includes fixed-effects for each MSA. In this
model, for-profit market share enters linearly and is interacted with hospital ownership,
making year effects common to all hospital types but allowing the effect of for-profit
share on hospitals to differ by nonprofit, for-profit, and government ownership.
Applying the fixed-effects approach using the disk-overlap or distance-weighted methods
to define for-profit market share, the model controls for any unobserved heterogeneity at
the MSA level that is fixed over time. In this model we also cluster at the hospital level.

        Because of the limitations to this model, we do not include a variable for market
fixed-effects in the primary specification. In a model with MSA-level fixed-effects,
using the MSA-level definition of for-profit market share to identify high for-profit
markets, the effect of market share is identified solely off changes within an MSA over
time. These changes are small and non-randomly distributed. Furthermore, much of the
interesting variation in market share is cross-sectional, and most of that cannot affect
behavior in the fixed-effect model. Finally, the demographic characteristics of a city's
population are accounted for by MSA fixed-effects and, therefore, only changes in
composition can be included in the model. However, we estimated changes across years
in composition of the population from two Census years and interpolated to all 18 study
years, so the change in composition would be a noisy measure and hard to interpret in the
estimated model. Therefore, we exclude the Census controls to account for changing
composition of the potential patient population. Including various subsets of Census
controls made little difference to the overall pattern of estimated coefficients, but did
further inflate the variability of estimates.




                                                                                             22
       5. Operating Margins

       We constructed hospital operating margins from the HCRIS by dividing net
income from patient services (total patient revenue less contractual allowances less total
operating expenses) by net patient revenues (total patient revenues less contractual
allowances). We employed the following model

       (2)     Operating Marginit = βo + β1Fit + β2Yt + β3Yt*Fit +
β4FPMarketPenetrationit + β5 Fit*FPMarketPenetrationit + β7Hit + β8Dit + β9HMOit +
β10HHIit + e
       where the variables in (2) are the same as described above in equation (1) except
we use a continuous measure of for-profit market share rather than a dichotomous
variable to measure the impact of for-profit market share. In sensitivity tests we exclude
from D the controls based on characteristics of Census tracts. We estimated the model
both in the pooled cross-section and using a fixed-effects specification analogous to the
tests for medical service provision described above. In this model we cluster at the MSA
level (Kézdi 2004; Stock and Watson 2006). Test statistics on joint tests when clustering
at the hospital level were generally greater in absolute magnitude, and standard errors on
individual coefficients generally smaller, indicating that errors may be positively
correlated within MSA, and our estimated standard errors are conservative.


IV. Results

A. Medical Services

       Here we present findings from the basic specification (i.e., using the distance-
weighted market measure to construct high and low for-profit penetration markets) for
three service types: relatively profitable, relatively unprofitable, and variably profitable
(Figures 1-3). We summarize the results for all 45 services in Table 4 and provide graphs
for all results in Appendix C.

       Nonprofit hospitals in high for-profit markets are more likely to offer profitable
services than those in low for-profit penetration markets. This can be seen best in Figure
1. The regression results confirm the intuition provided by the figures, showing that, on


                                                                                               23
average over the study period, nonprofits in high for-profit markets were 4.8 percentage
points more likely to offer open heart surgery than those in low for-profit penetration
markets (ave p=0.000, joint p=0.021).4 Government hospitals followed a similar pattern
(4.8 percentage points, ave p=0.158, joint p=0.603). For-profit hospitals show a different
pattern, although the results were largely insignificant and, therefore, could indicate no
difference at all. For-profits were less likely to offer open heart surgery in highly for-
profit markets (-1.7 percentage points, ave p=0.556, joint p=0.519). The results for MRI
provision were similar. Nonprofits in high for-profit markets were more likely to offer
MRI services than those in low for-profit penetration markets (5.8 percentage points, ave
p=0.000, joint p=0.001). The results for government (7.1 percentage points, ave p=0.032,
joint p=.194) and for-profit (1.1 percentage points, ave p=0.474, joint p=0.070) hospitals
were similar.

         Nonprofit hospitals were systematically less likely to provide unprofitable
services in for-profit markets than in other markets. Figure 2 for psychiatric emergency
care and HIV/AIDS treatment illustrates the results. On average over the study period,
nonprofits in high for-profit markets were less likely to offer HIV/AIDS treatment (-5.9
percentage points, ave p=0.002, joint p=0.016) and psychiatric emergency care (-6.0
percentage points, ave p=0.001, joint p=0.009) than those in low for-profit penetration
markets. Nonprofit hospitals were more likely to offer only one of the unprofitable
services – burn care – in for-profit markets than in others and the results for this service
were statistically insignificant. For-profit and government hospitals followed a similar
pattern in high for-profit markets, but the results were insignificant.

         These findings are confirmed by the results for services in which profitability
varied dramatically during the study period, the post-acute services home health and
skilled nursing. When the services were most profitable, from 1993 through 1997,
nonprofit hospitals were more likely to offer them in the high than the low for-profit
penetration markets (Home Health: ave p=0.0302, joint p=.0427; Skilled Nursing: ave
p=0.0005, joint p=0.0048). Yet when these services became less profitable, nonprofits


4
  We present results from two types of hypothesis tests, whether 1) the coefficients on hospital type*market
type are different on average over the study period and 2) these coefficients are jointly different.



                                                                                                         24
reduced their likelihood of providing post-acute services more dramatically in high than
low for-profit penetration markets. The results for for-profit hospitals, although weaker,
are similar. The results for government hospitals are ambiguous. As can be seen in
Table 4, these patterns are quite strongly confirmed by results for the other services using
the Horwitz (2005b) classification of relative profitability and, particularly for the
relatively unprofitable services, using the data-generated classification of relative
profitability described above.

       We also attempted to produce a single coefficient to represent the effect of the
ownership-market interaction on service provision. These specifications, estimated at the
service level, strongly support the findings in which we estimated each service at the
hospital level separately. The effect of service profitability on the likelihood of a
nonprofit hospital offering a service in a low for-profit market is large and significantly
negative (see Table 5b, row 4); the effect of profitability on the likelihood of a nonprofit
hospital offering a service in a high for-profit market is positive and significantly
different from zero (see Table 5b, sum rows 4 & 10).

       Consistent with our findings that nonprofit hospitals are more likely to offer
profitable services in high than in low for-profit markets, we estimate a large positive
coefficient on "High for-profit market X nonprofit X profitable service" (Table 5b, row
10), which measures the differential probability of a nonprofit offering a profitable
service (relative to an unprofitable one) in a high for-profit market. Using the distance-
weighted measure of market share, the coefficient 0.432 corresponds to an odds ratio of
1.54, suggesting that the average estimated effect of a higher for-profit share on a
nonprofit hospitals' propensity to offer profitable services or avoid unprofitable services
is quite large (Table 5b, column 3, row 10).

B. Operating Margins

       Estimates from both pooled and fixed-effects regressions of profit margins on
hospital characteristics, with various definitions of for-profit market penetration, show no
effect of market type on nonprofit hospital margins (Table 5). This is unsurprising given
that every theory we discuss predicts this result. The point estimate on the effect of
increased for-profit share on the profit margins among for-profit hospitals, however, is


                                                                                              25
uniformly positive across all specifications we have run, including those not shown in
Table 5.

       For-profit hospitals having higher profits where there are fewer nonprofit
competitors is more consistent with nonprofit hospital output maximization than profit
maximization. Because nonprofit presence is lower when for-profit presence is higher, if
nonprofits are maximizing output and producing more than the profit-maximizing
oligopoly output, a greater for-profit presence results in higher profits for profit
maximizers; conversely, if nonprofits are profit-maximizers in disguise, the for-profit
market share should have no effect on the profits of for-profit hospitals. Using the
nonprofit market share as a measure of market structure produces similar findings;
nonprofit profits are unaffected, but for-profit hospitals’ profits are driven down by
increased nonprofit presence. We cannot, however, rule out the possibility that only
some nonprofits maximize output and others maximize profits.

C. Alternative Explanations, Specifications, and Sensitivity Tests

       These results from the main specification may not differentiate between two
possible reasons for observed differences: 1) as we suggest, nonprofit hospitals may offer
different services in markets with relatively high or low for-profit penetration or,
alternatively, 2) unobserved characteristics about particular markets may both
disproportionately attract for-profit hospitals and cause a relatively high level of
profitable service provision.

       There are good reasons to suspect that the former, rather than the latter, is the
better explanation. If the unobserved characteristic explaining both higher levels of for-
profit hospital market share and profitable service offerings is related to differences in
demand that are correlated with population characteristics – as it is, for example, in the
case of demand for charity care (Clement, White et al. 2002) – the extremely detailed
demographic control variables address some of this concern. Further, there is some
research suggesting that medical service provision does not drive the mix of hospitals in a
market. Santerre and Vernon (2005), for example, note that market shares change little
from year to year; Grabowski and Hirth (2002) claim that the share of nonprofit hospitals



                                                                                             26
is primarily related to historical factors such as the age of the city and to characteristics of
its populace, such as levels of charitable activity.

        A prominent thread in the empirical research, however, suggests that for-profit
hospitals choose location differently from nonprofit hospitals. Norton and Staiger (1994)
demonstrate that nonprofits are more likely than for-profits to serve disadvantaged
populations, both in terms of types of health services demanded and ability to pay for
health services based on income and insurance coverage. Kessler and McClellan (2002)
show “that market and other hospital characteristics are correlated with hospital
ownership status. For example, for-profit areas are substantially more competitive than
non-profit areas (less likely to be very concentrated, i.e., in the top HHI quartile), have
higher rates of bed capacity, and slightly lower rates of HMO enrollment.” They further
argue that there is substantial selection by health status. Patients who go to public
hospitals tend to be much sicker. This bias, however, is at odds with the finding that
public hospitals differ from for-profit hospitals in the provision of profitable services; we
would expect government hospitals to offer more high-tech, invasive services because
they serve the patients who most need them. These services tend to be relatively
profitable. Likewise, for-profit hospitals should be less averse to offering emergency
services, since healthier patients make emergency rooms less unprofitable.

        In addition to controlling for differences in the populations served by different
hospital types by using the detailed Census controls described above, we employ three
other approaches to dealing with possible endogeneity: 1) altering the market penetration
definition, 2) altering the market definition, and 3) employing a fixed-effects model.

1. Market Penetration Definition

        In an additional set of specifications, we define market type (high for-profit
market v. other markets) based on the for-profit market share faced by the hospital in the
first year it is observed. Since hospitals enter markets throughout the study period, the
initial year market for-profit concentration faced by nonprofit hospitals differs from the
current-year concentration, in some cases substantially. The results, however, differ only
modestly in most specifications and for most services. This suggests that our basic
specification does not suffer from endogeneity from selective entry by for-profit hospitals


                                                                                              27
(e.g., for-profits entering where existing provision of profitable services is low relative to
other markets).

2. Alternative Market Definitions: Fixed Radii and MSAs

       Instead of weighting the contribution of each hospital to market structure
proportional to its total admissions, and inversely by its distance from hospital i, one can
imagine weighting each hospital proportional to admissions within a given geographical
area such as an MSA. One might also calculate disks of fixed radius, e.g., distances
commonly found in the literature such as 10 or 15 miles, and weight nearby hospitals'
contributions to market structure by proportion of overlap of its disk with hospital i's
disk. Analyses using the MSA-level and disk-overlap measures of for-profit market
share produce notably similar results to our basic distance-weighted measure. The
correlations in market share are also quite high, as shown in Appendices A and B.

3. Fixed-Effects Model

       The fixed-effects model offers weak confirmation of the results in the basic
specification. The results, reported in Appendix D, suggest that nonprofit hospitals are
increasingly likely to offer cardiac services (angioplasty and cardiac catheterization labs,
but not open heart surgery or cardiac intensive care beds) and MRIs as for-profit market
share increases. On the contrary, they are decreasingly likely to offer certified trauma
care and psychiatric emergency services as for-profit market penetration increases.
However, almost none of these results are significant, perhaps because the within-MSA
cross-time variation in market shares is minuscule compared with cross-sectional
variation in market shares. The fixed-effects results for government hospitals are
puzzling. Government hospitals seem more likely to offer both relatively profitable and
unprofitable services as for-profit market penetration increases. Finally, for-profit
hospitals show no discernable tendency.

VI. Conclusions

       There is a strong and systematic relationship among hospital ownership,
ownership mix in the market, and medical service provision. Nonprofit hospitals located
in markets with high for-profit penetration are more likely to offer relatively profitable



                                                                                             28
services than those in low for-profit penetration markets. With the exception of one
tested service (burn care), nonprofits are less likely to offer every unprofitable service in
high, compared to low for-profit markets. Perhaps the most convincing evidence for the
effect of market mix is the results for home health and skilled nursing, post-acute services
that were first ambiguously profitable, then profitable, then less profitable again. During
the most profitable period, nonprofits were more likely to offer them in high, compared to
low for-profit markets. During less profitable periods, depending on the specification,
there was either no discernable difference or more dramatic exit among nonprofits in for-
profit markets.

        We find no systematic effect of market mix on government and for-profit medical
service offerings. Government hospitals may follow a similar pattern to nonprofits, but
the effect is smaller than for nonprofits, and few results are statistically significant.
Although for-profit hospitals are somewhat less likely to offer many of the tested services
in markets with high, compared to low, for-profit market share, these results are generally
insignificant as well.

        That there is essentially no difference in for-profit or government hospital
behavior in low versus high for-profit markets suggests that the differences we find in
nonprofit hospital behavior are not entirely driven by unmodeled market differences.
More specifically, these results can be interpreted as a difference-in-difference estimate
of the effect of market mix on nonprofit service provision because the estimate of for-
profit (or government) behavior to be subtracted from the nonprofit difference is
essentially zero. These patterns are especially clear in the case of home health, where
nonprofits were significantly more likely to offer the service in high for-profit markets in
the profitable years (1993 to 1997) but the difference disappears after 1998, and for-profit
and government (while clearly responding to incentives) exhibit no real differences by
for-profit market share. The results for skilled nursing facilities are a bit more difficult
to interpret this way since, while we find no effect of market mix on government
hospitals, we find that for-profits in high for-profit markets are more likely than others to
offer skilled nursing during the service’s most profitable period.




                                                                                            29
        The patterns we identify here cannot establish a causal effect, but they do suggest
that the ownership mix in a market influences nonprofit behavior in important decisions
about whether to offer a service. The thought experiment of exogenously changing the
ownership of a typical for-profit to a nonprofit or vice versa cannot be duplicated in real
data, so the relevant counterfactuals cannot be examined. Nonetheless, the observed
patterns are more consistent with some theories of the nonprofit firm than others. Table 6
summarizes some intuitive interpretations of existing theories of nonprofit hospitals’
objectives, suggesting what these theories would predict for hospitals operating in low
for-profit and high for-profit markets.

       Finding that firm types behave quite differently from each other, our examination
implies that the Pauly-Redisch profit-maximization model does not accurately describe
the hospital market. Identifying differences in behavior by ownership type alone,
however, does not rule out a hybrid model, where some nonprofits are profit-seekers.
Nor can they distinguish between models of own-output or market-output maximization.
Our main empirical results concerning the interaction between ownership, market mix,
and service provision help in this regard. Rather than compensating for any deficiencies
in service provision by neighboring for-profits as a market-output model (Weisbrod)
would predict, we observe that nonprofit behavior becomes more like for-profit behavior
in the presence of a higher for-profit share. These results are most consistent with either
an own-output model (Newhouse) or a model in which at least some nonprofits maximize
own-output even while others are maximizing profits (Hirth).

       Based on our results concerning hospital margins, that for-profits have higher
profits in high for-profit markets (Table 5), we also favor a model where nonprofits
maximize output (Newhouse or Hirth). Across many specifications, including those
reported in Table 5, the effect of for-profit market share on the profit margins of for-
profits is consistently positive. Other specifications not reported here confirm that a
higher nonprofit market share is associated with no significant change in nonprofit
margins, but lower profit margins at for-profits. If nonprofits are profit-maximizers in
disguise, we would expect an increased share of nonprofits to have no impact on for-
profits hospitals’ margins; if they maximize output, more nonprofits in a market should



                                                                                           30
result in lower profits for for-profits. However, we cannot rule out that some nonprofits,
perhaps quite a small number, are for-profits in disguise.

        It is possible that the observed empirical patterns are simply the result of selection
or some other source of spurious correlation. A commonly advanced alternative
explanation is that ownership does not lead to differences in service provision but instead
leads to different choices over location. According to this explanation, different hospital
types pick markets based on the characteristics of potential patients and the
characteristics of the other hospitals serving those potential patients. We find this
hypothesis unconvincing. First, the explanation assumes low-cost entry and exit, and a
complete space of possible location choices, when in practice for-profits have typically
purchased nonprofits that were willing to sell or built new hospitals in areas with
population growth. Second, our findings do not support this type of selection
explanation. Coding individual hospitals by their initial for-profit market share or by
their current year for-profit market share yields similar results, suggesting that location
choice does not explain all relevant behavioral differences. If choice of location drives
these results, we would expect the use of the initial-year variable to yield much weaker
differences in the predicted directions, but if anything, the effect of market mix seems
marginally stronger in most specifications.

        Another alternative explanation is that patients choose hospital types based on the
nature of their ailments and the transparency of care quality. This too seems unlikely.
First, given the detailed demographic controls in our study, one needs a complicated story
to explain why patients in locations with high for-profit penetration are more likely to
demand their profitable services from nonprofits than in other locations. Second, patients
are treated by their doctors and, even more often, their insurers restrict their ability to
choose hospitals. Which hospitals accept a patient’s insurance plan or where a patient’s
doctor has admitting privileges are decisions that are generally exogenous to the patients’
illness. Third, to the extent that some patients, through their doctors, are able to match
illnesses and hospitals, quality information is not readily available. Quality report cards,
for example, only exist for a few treatments and cover few hospitals.




                                                                                              31
       Even assuming a causal interpretation of the estimates, we cannot yet identify the
most efficient market mix. Although high concentrations of for-profit markets could be
shown to harm nonprofit service provision, other researchers have identified potential
efficiency gains from for-profit ownership; these may outweigh the danger of
inefficiently low provision of unprofitable services or inefficiently high provision of
profitable services.

       To identify an optimal mix within a market, one needs to know both the
differences among ownership types and the market level implications of those
differences. This work represents a first step in that direction. However, a
comprehensive theory of nonprofit and for-profit coexistence in a market must be
developed before the theoretical models we have discussed can be formally tested, and
such a theory must take account of the non-Walrasian nature of many of these markets
(neither prices nor quantities are observed, and the producer and consumer are not clearly
identified in many of these markets). Such a theory must also explain why nonprofits and
for-profits compete in only some markets. Finally, this theory will have to explain the
empirical regularities we have described in this paper.




                                                                                          32
References


Abraham, J. M., M. S. Gaynor, et al. (2005). Entry and Competition in Local Hospital Markets.
      Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
      11649.
Arellano, M. (1987). "Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Groups Etimators." Oxford
       Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 49(4): 431-434.
Arrow, K. J. (1963). "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care." American
       Economic Review 53(5): 941-73.
Baker, L. C. (1997). "The Effects of HMOs on Fee-for-service Health Care Expenditures:
       Evidence from Medicare." Journal of Health Economics 16: 453-481.
Ben-Ner, A. (1983). Nonprofit Organizations: Why do they Exist in Market Economies? New
      Haven, Yale Program on Non-Profit Organizations, Working Paper 51.
Ben-Ner, A. and B. Gui (1993). The Nonprofit Sector in the Mixed Economy. Ann Arbor,
      Michigan, University of Michigan Press.
Ben-Ner, A. and V. Hoomissen (1991). "Nonprofit Organizations in the Mixed Economy: A
      Demand and Supply Analysis." Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics 63: 519-
      550.
Baumol, W. J. and W. G. Bowen (1965). " On the Performing Arts: The Anatomy of Their
     Economic Problems." The American Economic Review 55: 495-502.
Chernew, M. (1995). "The Impact of Non-IPA HMOS on the Number of Hospitals and Hospital
      Capacity." Inquiry 32: 143-154.
Clement, J. P., K. White, et al. (2002). "Charity Care: Do Not-for-Profits Influence For-Profits?"
      Medical Care Research and Review 59: 59-79.
Cremer, H., M. Marchand, et al. (1989). "The Public Firm as an Instrument for Regulating an
      Oligopolistic Market." Oxford Economic Papers, New Series 41(2): 283-301.
Cutler, D. M. and J. R. Horwitz (2000). Converting Hospitals from Not-for-Profit to For-Profit
        Status: Why and What Effects? The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-
        Profit and For-Profit Institutions. D. M. Cutler, Ed. Chicago, University of Chicago
        Press: 45-79.
Cutler, D. M. and R. S. Huckman (2003). "Technological Development and Medical
        Productivity: the Diffusion of Angioplasty in New York State." Journal of Health
        Economics 22(2): 187-217.
Cutler, D. M., M. McClellan, et al. (2000). "How Does Managed Care Do It?" RAND Journal of
        Economics 31(3): 526-548.
Cutler, D. M., M. McClellan, et al. (2001). Pricing Heart Attack Treatments. Medical Care
        Output and Productivity. D. M. Cutler and E. R. Berndt, Eds. Chicago and London, The
        University of Chicago Press: 305-362.



                                                                                                 33
Dafny, L. S. and D. Dranove (2006). Regulatory Exploitation and the Market for Corporate
       Control. Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 12438.
De Fraja, G. and F. Delbono (1989). "Alternative Strategies of a Public Enterprise in Oligopoly."
       Oxford Economic Papers, New Series 41(2): 302-311.
Deloitte & Touche (1990). U.S. Hospitals and the Future of Health Care. Boston, Massachusetts,
       Deloitte & Touche.
Dhossche, D. M. and S. O. Ghani (1998). "A Study of Recidivism in the Psychiatric Emergency
      Room." Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 10(2): 59-67.
Duggan, M. G. (2000). "Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending." Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 115(4): 1343-1373.
Epstein, A. M. (2007). "Pay for Performance at the Tipping Point." New England Journal of
       Medicine 356(5): 515-517.
Ettner, S. L. and R. C. Hermann (1987). "The Role of Profit Status Under Imperfect Information:
        Evidence from the Treatment Patterns of Elderly Medicare Beneficiaries Hospitalized for
        Psychiatric Diagnoses." Journal of Health Economics 20: 23-49.
Frank, R. and D. Salkever (1991). "The Supply of Charity Services by Nonprofit Hospitals:
       Motives and Market Structure." RAND Journal of Economics 22(3): 43-45.
Gaynor, M. (2006). What Do We Know About Competition and Quality in Health Care
      Markets? Cambridge, MA, NBER, Working Paper 12301.
Gaynor, M. and W. Vogt (2003). "Competition Among Hospitals." RAND Journal of Economics
      34(4): 764-85.
Gentry, W. M. and J. R. Penrod (2000). The Tax Benefits of Not-for-profit Hospitals. The
       Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions. D. M.
       Cutler, Ed. Chicago, Illinois, University of Chicago Press: 285-324.
Glaeser, E. L. and A. Shleifer (2001). "Not-for-profit Entrepreneurs." Journal of Public
       Economics 81(1): 99-115.
Goody, B. (1993). "Defining Rural Hospital Markets." Health Services Research 28(2): 183-200.
Grabowski, D. C. and R. A. Hirth (2002). "Competitive Spillovers Across Non-profit and For-
      Profit Nursing Homes." Journal of Health Economics 22: 1-22.
Gresenz, C. R., J. Rogowski, et al. (2004). "Updated Variable-Radius Measures of Hospital
      Competition." Health Services Research 39(2): 417-430.
Gruber, J. (1994). "The Effect of Competitive Pressure on Charity: Hospital Responses to Price
       Shopping in California." Journal of Health Economics 13(2): 183-212.
Hansmann, H. (1980). "The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise." Yale Law Journal 89: 835-901.
Hansmann, H. (1987). "The Effect of Tax Exemption and Other Factors on the Market Share of
     Nonprofit Versus For-Profit Firms." National Tax Journal 40: 71-82.
Hansmann, H., D. Kessler, et al. (2003). Ownership Form and Trapped Capital in the Hospital
     Industry. The Governance of Not-for-Profit Organizations. E. L. Glaeser, Ed. Chicago,
     University of Chicago Press: 45-69.


                                                                                              34
Hirth, R. A. (1997). "Competition Between For-Profit and Nonprofit Health Care Providers: Can
        it Help Achieve Social Goals?" Medical Care Research and Review 54: 414-38.
Hirth, R. A. (1999). "Consumer Information and Competition Between Nonprofit and For-Profit
        Nursing Homes." Journal of Health Economics 18: 219-240.
Horwitz, J. (2005a). "Making Profits and Providing Care: Comparing Nonprofit, For-Profit and
      Government Hospitals." Health Affairs 24(3): 790-801.
Horwitz, J. R. (2005b). Research Note: Relative Profitability of Acute Care Hospital Services.
      content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/content/full/24/3/790/DC1.
Horwitz, J. R. (2007). "Does Nonprofit Ownership Matter?" Yale J. on Regulation 24: 140-204.
Hughes, R. G. and H. S. Luft (1990). "Keeping Up with the Joneses: The Influence of Public
      and Proprietary Neighbors on Voluntary Hospitals." Health Services Management
      Research 3: 173-81.
James, E. and S. Rose-Ackerman (1986). The Nonprofit Enterprise in the Market Economics.
       Chur, Switzerland, Harwood Academic Publishers.
Kessler, D. P. and M. B. McClellan (2002). "The Effects of Hospital Ownership on Medical
       Productivity." RAND Journal of Economics 33(3): 488-506.
Kézdi, G. (2004). "Robust Standard Error Estimation in Fixed-Effects Panel Models." Hungarian
       Statistical Review Special(9): 96-116.
Lakdawalla, D. and T. Philipson (2005). The Nonprofit Sector and Industry Performance.
      Chicago, Illinois.
Liu, K., B. Gage, et al. (1999). Medicare's Post-Acute Benefit: Background, Trends, and Issues
        to Be Faced. http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/reports/mpacb.htm.
Luft, H. S. and S. C. Maerki (1984). "Competitive Potential of Hospitals and Their Neighbors."
       Contemporary Policy Issues Winter: 89-102.
Madison, K. (2004). "Multihospital System Membership and Patient Treatments, Expenditures,
      and Outcomes." Health Services Research 39(4): 749-769.
Mann, J., G. Melnick, et al. (1995). "Uncompensated Care: Hospitals' Responses to Fiscal
      Pressures." Health Affairs 14: 263-70.
Marsteller, J. A., R. R. Bovberg, et al. (1998). "Nonprofit Conversion: Theory, Evidence, and
       State Policy Options." Health Services Research 33: 1495-1535.
McClellan, M. and D. Staiger (2000). Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Profit and Not-for-
      Profit Hospitals. The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing Not-for-Profit and For-
      Profit Institutions. D. M. Cutler, Ed. Chicago, Illinois, University of Chicago Press: 93-
      112.
Melnick, G., C. Serrato, et al. (1989). "Prospective Payments to Hospitals: Should Emergency
      Admissions Have Higher Rates?" Health Care Financing Review 10(3): 29-39.
Newhouse, J. P. (1970). "Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model of a
     Hospital." The American Economic Review 60(1): 64-74.



                                                                                                 35
Newhouse, J. P. (2001). Medicare Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Working Paper 8531.
Newhouse, J. P. (2002). Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. Cambridge,
     Massachusetts, MIT Press.
Nichols, A. (2007). Vincenty: Stata Module to Calculate Distances on the Earth's Surface.
       http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456815.html.
Norton, E. C. and D. Staiger (1994). "How Hospital Ownership Affects Access to Care for the
       Uninsured." RAND Journal of Economics 25: 171-85.
Pascal, A., M. Cvitanic, et al. (1989). "Special Report: State Policies and the Financing of
        Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Care." Health Care Financing Review 11(1): 91-
        104.
Pauly, M. V. and M. Redisch (1973). "The Not-for-Profit Hospital as Physicians' Cooperative."
       American Economic Review 63(March): 87-99.
Philipson, T. J. and R. A. Posner (2006). Antitrust in the Not-for-Profit Sector. Cambridge, MA,
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 12132.
Rose-Ackerman, S. (1996). "Altruism, Not-for-profits, and Economic Theory." Journal of
      Economic Literature 34: 701-728.
Rosenthal, M. B. and R. G. Frank (2006). "What is the Empirical Basis for Paying for Quality in
      Health Care?" Medical Care Research and Review 63(2): 135-157.
Rosenthal, M. B., R. G. Frank, et al. (2005). "Early Experience with Pay-for-Performance."
      Journal of the American Medical Association 294(14): 1788-1793.
Salamon, L. M. (1987). Partners in Public Service: The Scope and Theory of Government
      Nonprofit Relations. The Nonprofit Sector. W. W. Powell, Ed. New Haven, Connecticut,
      Yale University Press: 99-117.
Santerre, R. E. and J. A. Vernon (2005). Hospital Ownership Mix Efficiency in the U.S.: An
       Exploratory Study, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 1192.
Schlesinger, M., J. D. Bentkover, et al. (1987). "The Privatization of Health Care and Physicians'
       Perceptions of Access to Hospital Services." The Milbank Quarterly 65: 25-58.
Schlesinger, M., R. Dorwart, et al. (1997a). "Competition and Access to Hospital Services:
       Evidence from Psychiatric Hospitals." Medical Care 35: 974-92.
Schlesinger, M., R. Dorwart, et al. (1997b). "The Determinants of Dumping: A National Study
       of Economically Motivated Transfers Involving Mental Health Care." Health Services
       Research 32(5).
Shwed, H. (1980). "Teaching Emergency Room Psychiatry." Hospital & Community Psychiatry
      31(8): 558-62.
Silverman, E. and J. Skinner (2004). "Medicare Upcoding and Hospital Ownership." Journal of
       Health Economics 23(2): 369-389.
Sloan, F. (2000). Not-for-profit Ownership and Hospital Behavior. Handbook of Health
       Economics. A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, Eds, Elsevier Science B.V. 1: 1141-1174.


                                                                                               36
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2006). Heteroskedasticity-Robust Standard Errors for Fixed
        Effects Panel Data Regression. Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Technical Working Paper No. 323.
Tye, L. (2001): "Beth Israel to Keep Psychiatric Unit Most Beds to Stay," Boston,
       Massachusetts: Boston Globe, B2.
Weisbrod, B. A. (1988). The Nonprofit Economy. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard
      University Press.
Westmoreland, T. (1999). Medicaid & HIV/AIDS Policy: A Basic Primer. Washington, D.C.,
     Georgetown University Law Center, Federal Legislation Clinic Henry J. Kaiser Family
     Foundation.
Woodward, A., J. Epstein, et al. (1997). "The Drug Abuse Treatment Gap: Recent Estimates."
     Health Care Financing Review 18(3): 5-17.




                                                                                             37
Table 1. Hospital Ownership (1988-2005) By Year and Rural Status

                    Non-Rural,                     Non-Rural,                                                            Rural,
                                                                                          Rural,
                    Unweighted                     weighted by                                                         weighted by
                                                                                        Unweighted
                                                   admissions                                                          admissions
  Year       Gov        NFP         FP         Gov    NFP      FP                Gov        NFP          FP        Gov    NFP      FP
  1988      17.91      64.46       17.63      17.39 73.12 9.49                  43.17       47.63      9.20       32.00 58.37 9.62
  1989      17.69      64.79       17.52      16.93 73.56 9.51                  43.16       47.81      9.03       31.68 58.51 9.82
  1990      17.67      65.22       17.10      16.80 73.74 9.46                  43.13       48.02      8.85       31.63 58.53 9.83
  1991      17.39      65.94       16.67      16.24 74.51 9.25                  43.58       47.71      8.71       31.02 59.01 9.97
  1992      17.83      65.62       16.54      16.27 74.43 9.29                  43.73       48.41      7.85       31.16 59.84 9.00
  1993      18.27      65.05       16.67      16.68 73.95 9.38                  43.60       48.74      7.66       30.82 60.16 9.02
  1994      18.11      64.51       17.37      16.80 73.03 10.18                 42.05       50.35      7.60       26.55 65.74 7.72
  1995      17.61      64.60       17.79      16.21 72.87 10.93                 43.00       48.84      8.16       30.22 59.85 9.92
  1996      17.64      64.36       18.00      15.75 72.54 11.71                 42.83       48.94      8.23       29.54 60.18 10.28
  1997      16.87      63.81       19.32      14.83 72.66 12.50                 41.50       49.98      8.52       28.49 60.80 10.71
  1998      16.28      64.89       18.83      14.00 73.54 12.46                 40.68       50.67      8.65       27.82 61.57 10.62
  1999      16.34      65.68       17.98      13.91 74.17 11.92                 40.33       51.10      8.56       27.21 61.89 10.90
  2000      15.72      66.01       18.27      13.25 74.43 12.31                 39.76       51.83      8.41       26.83 61.98 11.19
  2001      15.98      65.72       18.30      13.55 74.24 12.21                 39.52       52.11      8.37       26.56 62.28 11.16
  2002      15.93      65.69       18.38      13.67 73.95 12.37                 38.76       52.67      8.57       25.70 62.89 11.41
  2003      15.75      65.24       19.00      13.30 74.16 12.54                 38.64       52.27      9.09       25.09 62.65 12.25
  2004      15.79      64.58       19.63      13.54 73.69 12.77                 38.43       52.00      9.57       25.33 62.11 12.56
  2005      15.60      65.18       19.22      13.45 73.97 12.58                 38.24       51.95      9.81       25.12 62.19 12.70
  Avg.
   all      16.91      65.08       18.01      15.14      73.70       11.16      41.34       50.06      8.60       28.49      61.03       10.48
  years
Source: Authors’ analysis of American Hospital Association Annual Surveys 1988-2005.
Notes:     Includes all general, medical, and surgical hospitals except Veterans’, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of Justice (prison), and
other federal or restricted use hospitals.




                                                                                                                                               38
Table 2. Medical Services, Profitability, and Percentage of Hospitals in Sample Offering
Services

                                Service                   Profit Status   FP>G     %
   Adult Day Care Program                                      U*          U*     0.085
   Alcohol/Chemical Dependency Care Beds (>0)                  U           I      0.158
   Alcohol/Drug Abuse or Dependency Outpatient Services        U           U      0.288
   Angioplasty                                                 P           P***   0.402
   Birthing Room/LDR Room/LDRP Room                            P           U      0.735
   Burn Care Beds                                              U           U      0.047
   Cardiac Catheterization Lab                                 P           P*     0.541
   Cardiac Intensive Care Beds (>0)                            P           P**    0.414
   Certified Trauma Center                                     U           U*     0.284
   Child Psychiatric Services                                  U           U*     0.246
   Computed-Assisted Tomography Scanner (CT Scan)              P           U      0.924
   Diagnostic Radioisotope Facility                            P           P      0.813
   Emergency Department                                        U           U      0.958
   Extracorporeal Shock-Wave Lithotripter                      P           P*     0.208
   Fitness Center                                              P           V      0.258
   HIV-AIDS Services                                           U           U***   0.604
   Home Health Services                                        V           V**    0.411
   Hospice                                                     U†          U**    0.232
   Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)                            P           P      0.533
   Neonatal Intensive Care Beds (>0)                           P           I      0.289
   Neonatal Intermediate Care Beds (>0)                        P           I      0.171
   Obstetric Care Beds (>0)                                    ?           U      0.756
   Occupational Health Services                                ?           I      0.664
   Open-Heart Surgery                                          P           P***   0.346
   Outpatient Surgery                                          ?           U      0.975
   Patient Education Center                                    U†          U      0.756
   Patient Representative Services                             ?           U      0.716
   Pediatric Intensive Care Beds (>0)                          P           I      0.116
   Positron Emission Tomography (PET)                          P           P      0.100




                                                                                           39
Table 2 (continued). Medical Services, Profitability, and Percentage of Hospitals in Sample
Offering Services

                               Service                                    Profit Status       FP>G          %
   Psychiatric Consultation/Liaison Services                                     U               I         0.432
   Psychiatric Education Services                                                U               U         0.327
   Psychiatric Emergency Services                                                U               U         0.455
   Psychiatric Inpatient Beds (>0)                                               U               U**       0.421
   Psychiatric Outpatient Services                                               U               U         0.336
   Psychiatric Partial Hospitalization Program                                   U               U         0.276
   Radiation Therapy                                                             P               U         0.367
   Rehab Services                                                                ?               U         0.771
   Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)                            P               U         0.451
   Skilled Nursing Care Beds (>0)                                                V               V         0.315
                                                                                     †
   Social Work Services                                                          U               U         0.911
   Sports Medicine Services                                                      P               U         0.352
   Transplant Services                                                           ?               P         0.131
   Ultrasound                                                                    P               U         0.951
                                                                                     †
   Volunteer Services Department                                                 U               U         0.888
   Women's Health Center/Services                                                P               P         0.501

 Notes: All designations of profit status are from Horwitz (2005b) unless noted with † = authors’ determination.
 P=relatively profitable; U=relatively unprofitable, V=variably profitable; ? = insufficient AHA description to
 categorize or, in the case of obstetric care because it draws from two distinct patient pools, one profitable, the
 other unprofitable. FP>G results are based on probit regressions using all control variables described in the text
 and predicting probability of offering a service for each year in sample at the mean for-profit market share for for-
 profit and government hospitals. Significance tests from hypothesis
 βFP*Year+βFP*Mkt*YearE(Mkt)=βGov*Year+βGov*Mkt*YearE(Mkt). P= > 10% years show significant differences of FP>G
 and < 10% years show significant differences of G>FP; U= < 10% years show significant differences of FP>G
 and >10% years show significant differences of G>FP, V= > 10% years show significant differences of FP>G and
 > 10% of years show significant differences of G>FP; I=indeterminate. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10.




                                                                                                                   40
Table 3. Summary Statistics

              Variable                   Mean    Std. Dev.   Median
 Residency Program                       0.290     0.454      0.000
 Teaching Hospital                       0.107     0.309      0.000
 Admissions Lowest Quintile              0.202     0.402      0.000
 Admissions Quintile 2                   0.202     0.402      0.000
 Admissions Quintile 4                   0.197     0.398      0.000
 Admissions Quintile 5                   0.199     0.399      0.000
 Only 2 hospitals in MSA                 0.045     0.206      0.000
 Only 3 hospitals in MSA                 0.056     0.229      0.000
 Only 4 hospitals in MSA                 0.063     0.243      0.000
 HHI index                               0.183     0.178      0.115
 HMO penetration                         0.090     0.099      0.056
 Hospital member of system               0.608     0.488      1.000
 Population                              8.327     0.247      8.347
 Number female                           7.664     0.244      7.682
 Number married, male                    6.745     0.366      6.809
 Number married, female                  6.746     0.370      6.810
 Number with Travel time under 5 mins    4.066     0.491      4.097
 Number with Travel time 5 to 9mins      5.311     0.427      5.325
 Number with Travel time 10 to 14mins    5.624     0.361      5.649
 Number with Travel time 15 to 19mins    5.660     0.332      5.692
 Number with Travel time 20 to 24mins    5.515     0.385      5.564
 Number with Travel time 25 to 29mins    4.550     0.490      4.632
 Number with Travel time 30 to 34mins    5.395     0.484      5.457
 Number with Travel time 35 to 39mins    3.680     0.673      3.804
 Number with Travel time 40 to 44mins    3.934     0.730      4.068
 Number with Travel time 54 to 59mins    4.761     0.637      4.867
 Number with Travel time 60 to 89mins    4.417     0.704      4.495
 Number with Travel time over 90mins     3.653     0.789      3.759
 Number who work at Home                 3.944     0.534      4.039
 Number who work in Ag/For/Fish          2.922     1.052      3.165
 Number who work in Mining               1.305     1.438      1.613
 Number who work in Const                4.729     0.465      4.807
 Number who work in Wholesale Trade      4.212     0.437      4.242
 Number who work in Retail               5.493     0.358      5.489
 Number who work in FIRE                 4.861     0.450      4.894
 Number who work in Ent/Rec              3.422     0.534      3.471
 Number who work in Manuf                5.546     0.465      5.593
 Number who work in Health/Ed            5.919     0.324      5.947
 Number who work in Pub Admin            4.447     0.436      4.476
 Number who have educ under 9 yrs        5.349     0.447      5.338
 Number who have educ less than HS       5.816     0.339      5.817
 Number who have educ equiv to HS grad   6.617     0.326      6.649




                                                                      41
Table 3 (continued). Summary Statistics

 Number who have educ of some college           6.077         0.334         6.088
 Number who have educ associate's               5.082         0.387         5.126
 Number who have educ bachelor's                5.949         0.463         6.011
 Number who have educ graduate school           5.405         0.535         5.447
 Number aged under1                             4.000         0.366         4.033
 Number aged 1 to 17                            6.872         0.337         6.910
 Number aged 18 to 21                           5.466         0.373         5.457
 Number aged 22 to 29                           6.157         0.318         6.147
 Number aged 30 to 39                           6.475         0.282         6.488
 Number aged 40 to 49                           6.364         0.341         6.416
 Number aged 50 to 59                           6.030         0.347         6.079
 Number aged 60 to 64                           5.088         0.305         5.111
 Number aged 65 to 79                           5.966         0.314         5.972
 Number aged 80 plus                            4.891         0.398         4.888
 Number white                                   7.898         0.435         7.968
 Number black                                   6.066         0.859         6.152
 Number Native American                         3.029         1.065         3.134
 Number Hispanic                                5.884         1.173         6.014
 Number other race                              4.147         2.538         4.153
 Income per capita                              9.838         0.341         9.864
 Number with HH income under 15k                5.662         0.407         5.628
 Number with HH income 15~19                    4.662         0.370         4.651
 Number with HH income 20~29                    5.360         0.324         5.358
 Number with HH income 30~39                    5.263         0.324         5.284
 Number with HH income 40~49                    5.070         0.373         5.115
 Number with HH income 50~59                    4.838         0.450         4.914
 Number with HH income 60~74                    4.901         0.564         5.012
 Number with HH income 75~99                    4.762         0.763         4.913
 Number with HH income 100~149                  4.371         0.981         4.525
 Number with HH income above $150K              3.838         1.096         3.956

 Notes: N=46,075. Population controls each represent the weighted average of linearly
 interpolated and extrapolated (using 1990 and 2000 Census data) logs of the number of
 relevant individuals in US Census tracts, with tracts weighted inversely by distance of their
 centroids from the hospital. Linear interpolation in logs is similar to assuming constant
 percentage rates of change in the size of subpopulations over 1988-2005.




                                                                                                 42
Table 4. Summary of Results, Service in High v. Low For-Profit Markets, % points


                    Service                         FP>G     NP            Gov           FP
Relatively Profitable Services
    Angioplasty (89-97)                             P***    .068***/**     .017/**      -.024
    Birthing Room/LDR Room/LDRP Room                U       .003          -.013          .009
    Cardiac Catheterization Lab                     P*      .012           .033/*       -.049***/***
    Cardiac Intensive Care Beds (>0)                P**     .018           .060**/***   -.026
    Computed-Assisted Tomography Scanner (CT)       U       .009           .015/**       .001
    Diagnostic Radioisotope Facility                P       .004/**        .044*/       -.011
    Extracorporeal Shock-Wave Lithotripter          P*      .014*/*        .016         -.015
    Fitness Center                                  V       .010           .011         -.007
    Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)                P       .058***/***    .071**/       .011/*
    Neonatal Intensive Care Beds (>0)               I       .066***/***    .041/**       .021/*
    Neonatal Intermediate Care Beds (>0)            I       .021*/         .012/**      -.004
    Open-Heart Surgery                              P***    .048***/**     .049         -.017
    Pediatric Intensive Care Beds (>0)              I       .051***/***    .008          .085***/**
    Positron Emission Tomography (PET) (90-05)      P      -.003          -.009          .006***/
    Radiation Therapy                               U       .017          -.003         -.015
    Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography      U      -.029           .026         -.034
    Sports Medicine Services                        U      -.081***/***   -.029          .005
    Ultrasound                                      U       .004           .002         -.006/*
    Women’s Health Center/Services                  P      -.006/**       -.028         -.034

Relatively Unprofitable Services
    Alcohol/Chemical Dependency Beds (>0) (89-05)   I      -.033 **/      -.021         -.036*/
    Alcohol/Drug Abuse Outpatient Serv              U      -.091***/***   -.071**/      -.029
    Burn Care Beds                                  U       .009           .007         -.005/**
    Certified Trauma Center                         U*     -.023/**        .047         -.082***/***
    Child Psychiatric Services                      U*     -.075***/***   -.052*/        .001
    Emergency Department                            U      -.008/**        .002         -.009/*
    HIV-AIDS Services (94-05)                       U***   -.059***/**     .001         -.019
    Psychiatric Consultation/Liaison Services       I      -.080***/**    -.058*/       -.066**/
    Psychiatric Education Services                  U      -.054***/      -.020         -.023
    Psychiatric Emergency Services                  U      -.060***/***   -.045         -.037
    Psychiatric Inpatient Beds (>0) (89-05)         U**    -.060***/***   -.036         -.047
    Psychiatric Outpatient Services                 U      -.078***/***   -.018         -.006/**
    Psychiatric Partial Hospitalization Program     U      -.038**/*      -.001          .000
    Geriatric Adult Day Care Program†               U*     -.034***/**    -.029*/*       .008
    Hospice†                                        U**    -.073***/***    .000         -.003
    Patient Education Center†                       U      -.048***/**     .005         -.060**/
    Social Work Services†                           U      -.029***/***   -.006/*       -.031/***
    Volunteer Services Department†                  U      -.016/**       -.050**/      -.031*/




                                                                                                43
Table 4 (continued). Summary of Results, Service in High v. Low For-Profit Markets, %
points


                        Service                               FP>G             NP              Gov             FP
Variably Profitable Services
    Home Health Services (1993-1997)                           V**           .056**/**       .034             .029
    Skilled Nursing Care Beds (>0) (1993-1997)                 V             .087***/***     .046             .094**/**

Unknown (e.g., unclear definition, mixed patient
pool)
     Obstetric Care Beds (>0)                                  U            -.004           -.021              .016
     Occupational Health Services                              I            -.030**/*       -.061**/          -.028
     Outpatient Surgery                                        U            -.013            .005             -.020***/
     Rehab Services                                            U            -.028/***        .024             -.002
     Patient Representative Services                           U            -.025/***        .009/*           -.015
     Transplant Services                                       P             .007              0              -.025*/**

Notes: NP=nonprofit, FP=for-profit, Gov=government. Results are from all years 1988-2005 unless noted. Results
for variably profitable services are for years 1993-1997, when the services were profitable. Profitability status in the
first column is assigned according to Horwitz (2005b) except † where categorized according to authors' evaluation.
Profitability status in the second column, FP>G indicates whether a service is U=relatively unprofitable,
P=relatively profitable, I=indeterminate, V=variable based on tests, described in the text, of whether for-profit
hospitals are more likely than government hospitals to offer the service. All results from basic specification
described in text (market measure by distance, controls as described in the text. For the point estimates, we present
results from two types of hypothesis tests, whether 1) the coefficients on hospital type*market type are different on
average over the study period and 2) these coefficients are jointly different. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.10.




                                                                                                                     44
       Table 5. Regressions of Hospital Operating Margin on Characteristics of Hospitals and
       Markets
                 Discrete measure of high FP market (share>15%)                   Continuous measure of FP market share
                     (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)              (8)

                   Pooled       Pooled          FE              FE           Pooled         Pooled            FE               FE

Gov Hosp         -0.0473***   -0.0363***     -0.0537***     -0.0436***     -0.0506***      -0.0460***     -0.0560***     -0.0531***

                   (-5.36)      (-3.19)        (-5.33)        (-3.46)        (-5.77)         (-4.24)        (-5.62)        (-4.39)
FP Hosp          0.0461***    0.0383***      0.0502***      0.0447***       0.0441***      0.0308***      0.0484***      0.0348***

                   (9.29)       (6.93)         (7.97)         (6.39)          (8.71)         (5.12)         (7.55)         (5.00)

Hi-FP*NP                      0.0000239                       0.00860                       -0.0111                       -0.00214
                                (0.01)                        (1.42)                         (-1.14)                       (-0.18)

Hi-FP*Gov                      -0.0286*                       -0.0192                       -0.0315                        -0.0180

                                (-1.84)                       (-1.22)                        (-1.07)                       (-0.59)

Hi-FP*FP                       0.0135**                      0.0183**                      0.0546***                     0.0683***

                                (2.09)                        (2.21)                         (4.16)                        (4.21)

ln(admissions)   0.0640***    0.0646***      0.0655***      0.0658***       0.0647***      0.0649***      0.0667***      0.0666***

                  (10.36)      (10.40)         (9.91)         (9.85)         (10.83)        (10.87)         (10.48)        (10.40)

ln(beds)         -0.0386***   -0.0389***     -0.0390***     -0.0393***     -0.0390***      -0.0389***     -0.0403***     -0.0403***

                   (-5.96)      (-6.04)        (-5.72)        (-5.73)        (-6.14)         (-6.19)        (-6.09)        (-6.09)

Teaching         -0.0318***   -0.0321***     -0.0334***     -0.0336***     -0.0349***      -0.0357***     -0.0358***     -0.0361***

                   (-4.56)      (-4.59)        (-4.61)        (-4.65)        (-5.17)         (-5.19)        (-5.04)        (-5.03)

Residency        -0.0340***   -0.0342***     -0.0361***     -0.0361***     -0.0344***      -0.0343***     -0.0369***     -0.0369***

                   (-6.72)      (-6.79)        (-6.58)        (-6.62)        (-7.12)         (-7.11)        (-7.03)        (-7.05)

In System        0.00815**    0.00827**       0.00391        0.00396        0.00814**      0.00781**       0.00446        0.00420

                   (2.48)       (2.52)         (1.15)         (1.16)          (2.42)         (2.33)         (1.28)         (1.20)

HMO Mkt Sh       -0.0843***   -0.0874***      -0.0377         -0.0389      -0.0810***      -0.0815***      -0.0410*       -0.0406*

                   (-5.73)      (-5.90)        (-1.57)        (-1.63)        (-5.75)         (-5.75)        (-1.71)        (-1.69)

#hosp in Mkt     -0.0004***   -0.0004***     -0.0006**       -0.0006**     -0.0004***      -0.0003***      -0.0005*       -0.0005**

                   (-5.63)      (-5.49)        (-2.13)        (-2.16)        (-5.38)         (-4.95)        (-1.88)        (-2.01)

HHI index        0.0289**      0.0304**       0.00704        0.00870        0.0305**       0.0341***       0.00576        0.00915

                   (2.41)       (2.59)         (0.44)         (0.54)          (2.58)         (2.89)         (0.36)         (0.57)

N                  37,388       37,388         37,388         37,388         39,891         39,891          39,891         39,891

r2                 0.149        0.150          0.187           0.189          0.147          0.149          0.184           0.186



       Notes: Dependent variable is hospital operating margin from patient services = (total patient revenue – contractual
       allowances – total operating expenses)/ (total patient revenues – contractual allowances) from HCRIS data.
       Observations with operating margins below negative 100% are dropped. All regressions use the distance-weighted
       measure of for-profit market share; results using other measures are comparable. t statistics in parentheses adjusted
       for clustering on MSA * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Decennial Census-based controls and year dummies
       are included in all specifications.




                                                                                                                          45
Table 5b. Logit Regressions of P(Offering a Service) on Hospital Ownership, Market Type,
and Profitability Classification of Service (1988-2005)

                                                       FP Market Share Defined by:
                                             Share FP in             Overlap-             Distance-
                                                MSA                 weighted              Weighted
 Government                                   -0.00791              0.00253                -0.00155
                                              (-0.18)               (0.06)                 (-0.04)
 For-profit                                   -0.331***             -0.346***              -0.363***
                                              (-6.29)               (-6.75)                (-7.93)
 Gov x profitable service                     -0.0860               -0.0799                -0.0684
                                              (-1.61)               (-1.53)                (-1.33)
 NP x profitable service                      -0.0615***            -0.0523***             -0.0392**
                                              (-3.30)               (-2.81)                (-2.12)
 FP x profitable service                      0.291***              0.345***               0.340***
                                              (5.06)                (6.28)                 (7.06)
 Hi-FP Market x Gov                           -0.208***             -0.238***              -0.206***
                                              (-3.75)               (-4.23)                (-3.58)
 Hi-FP Market x NP                            -0.321***             -0.296***              -0.298***
                                              (-9.72)               (-8.97)                (-8.57)
 Hi-FP Market x FP                            -0.175***             -0.158***              -0.133**
                                              (-2.92)               (-2.66)                (-2.42)
 Hi-FP Market x Gov x profitable serv         0.286***              0.338***               0.316***
                                              (4.04)                (4.72)                 (4.30)
 Hi-FP Market x NP x profitable serv          0.476***              0.457***               0.433***
                                              (12.60)               (12.10)                (10.88)
 Hi-FP Market x FP x profitable serv          0.146**               0.0903                 0.101
                                              (2.09)                (1.32)                 (1.58)
 MSA-level HHI                                0.255***              0.277***               0.298***
                                              (3.20)                (3.45)                 (3.72)
 HMO share                                    0.0178                0.0311                 0.0190
                                              (0.35)                (0.61)                 (0.37)
 System Membership                            0.0498***             0.0482***              0.0463***
                                              (3.25)                (3.14)                 (3.02)
 Year Fixed Effects                           Yes                   Yes                    Yes
 Hospital Fixed Effects                       No                    No                     No
 Census and Size Controls                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes
 N                                            1,496,424             1,500,623              1,500,023

 Notes: NP=nonprofit, FP=for-profit, Gov=government. Results for all services, all years except as noted in Table
 4. Profitability status determined according to Horwitz (2005b) as described in text. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, ***
 p<0.001; t-statistics in parentheses, robust to clustering at the hospital level




                                                                                                               46
Table 6. Nonprofit Hospitals in Low v. High Markets: Theoretical Predictions, Medical
       Services, and Profit Margins


                 Theories            NP Service Provision in Low v. High FP Markets

                                  NPs Track FPs in        NPs Balance     No Difference
                                  Markets with more      FPs in Markets    by Market
                                          FP             with more FP         Type

                                  Yes, FPs will take
            1. Max Own Output:
                                  profitable patients:
                                                              No               No
                                  NPs have to cross-
             Newhouse (1970)
                                       subsidize


           2. Max Market Output                            Yes, offset

           or Consumer Surplus:                            mercenary
                                          No                                   No
                                                          behavior of
             Weisbrod (1977)                                  FPs

             3. For-Profits in
             Disguise, Doctors      No: NPs follow

               Cooperative:           FPs, but no
                                                               No             Yes
                                     difference by
             Pauly and Redisch       market type
                  (1973)

                                   Maybe: NPs who
                                                          Maybe: good
                                  are FPs in disguise                       Maybe:
           4. Good and bad NP:                             NPs might
                                  would max profits,                       Depends on
                                                            pursue
                                     but good NPs                          mix of good
               Hirth (1999)                                maximum
                                    might react as                        and bad NPs
                                                         market output
                                        above




                                                                                          47
                                                           Figure 1. Relatively Profitable Services

                                                                                  OPEN-HEART SURGERY
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6




                                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                    .6
                .5




                                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                    .5
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                    Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
                .4




                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                    .4
                .3




                                                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                    .3
                .2




                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                    .2
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt


High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                              MRI FACILITY
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                1




                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                    1
                .8




                                                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                                    .8
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                    Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
                .6




                                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                    .6
                .4




                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                    .4
                .2




                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                    .2




                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt


High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                        48
                                                      Figure 2. Relatively Unprofitable Services

                                                                                         HIV-AIDS SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6




                                                                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                     .6
                .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                     .5
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
                .4




                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
                .3




                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
                .2




                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                     .2
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt


High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                    PSYCH. EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6




                                                                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                     .6
                .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                     .5
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
                .4




                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
                .3




                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
                .2




                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                     .2




                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt


High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                         49
                                                           Figure 3. Services with Variable Profits

                                                                                   HOME HEALTH SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6




                                                                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                     .6
                .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                     .5
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
                .4




                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
                .3




                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
                .2




                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                     .2
                .1




                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                     .1
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000    2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt


High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                    SKILLED NURSING CARE BEDS
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6




                                                                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                     .6
                .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                     .5
                .4




                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
                .3




                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
                .2




                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                     .2
                .1




                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                     .1




                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000    2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt


High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
Appendix A. Hospital Market Definitions and Measures of For-Profit Share of Market

       The idea of defining a hospital market is to capture the population of potential patients,
most of whom live within an easy commute of the hospital, and identify the other hospitals
competing for those patients. To measure the share of for-profit competition (the “for-profit
share” below), these hospitals should be weighted according to the extent to which they can
compete for patients, i.e., by the size of the hospital and by the potential patients who live within
an easy commute of both hospitals.
        We employ three methods to construct the for-profit market share facing each hospital.
The simplest method is derived from each hospital’s MSA. We propose two alternatives, both
based on the distance between hospitals (as measured along the ellipsoidal “zero elevation”
model5 of the Earth), which we call the disk-overlap and distance-weighted measures. We prefer
the distance-weighted method for reasons explained below.


1. MSA-level estimates of for-profit share

        The least complicated measure of people who live within an easy commute is the MSA,
defined by the Census Bureau so that a labor market is encompassed and individuals within the
MSA are very likely to commute only within the MSA. We can easily calculate the proportion
of hospitals that are for-profits, weighting by their annual admissions to adjust for capacity,
within the MSA.
        Two definitions are possible even restricting to MSA-level means of FOR-PROFIT status
weighted by admissions. The market definition excluding a hospital’s own ownership category
and admissions will be referred to as not-i, and a definition including a hospital’s own
characteristics will be referred to as also-i. The also-i definition is the same for all hospitals in
an MSA, and may be intuitively appealing, simple to calculate (being close to a count of for-
profit hospitals divided by number of hospitals), and easily explained. However, it is also
determined by the hospitals own behavior (both ownership and admissions are endogenously
determined), and does not characterize the competition or environment a hospital faces any more
than it does the hospital’s own choices. Thus, we prefer the not-i definition (though results using
the also-i definition are surprisingly similar—restricted to hospitals in MSA’s with at least two
hospitals).
        However, hospitals not in an MSA (which we call rural hospitals) are problematic in this
formulation, as are groups of hospitals near an MSA boundary—the hospital just inside the
boundary is seen as competing with distant central-city hospitals, and not with a hospital just
outside the boundary. This can be seen as a problem with the weight assigned to a given hospital
being discontinuous at the boundary of the MSA, which is one everywhere in the MSA, ignoring
any variations in admissions, but drops abruptly to zero at the boundary of the MSA. Alternative
definitions of markets that rely on geopolitical divisions, such as counties or zip codes (as are the
Dartmouth health care referral regions), exhibit identical problems.


5
    For details of distance calculations, see http://www-personal.umich.edu/~nicholsa/stata/vincenty.ado



                                                                                                           51
2. Disk-overlap estimates of for-profit share
        In this specification, we identified a hospital’s potential market as a disk with a fixed
radius centered on the hospital’s own location (10 or 15 miles are radii commonly used in the
literature).6 For-profit share can then be defined as the area overlap of the hospital’s own disk
with other hospitals’ disks, weighted by total admissions in the calendar year. Luft and Maerki
(1984) define markets based on the willingness of a physician to travel and conclude that 15
miles is the maximum distance.
        Define a circle of influence as every point within 15 miles of a given hospital. Now
define the market faced by the hospital as the total admissions for every other hospital whose
circle of influence overlaps the circle of influence belonging to that hospital, weighted by the
proportion of overlap. Note there are two possible implementations of this definition, depending
on how one treats the hospital’s own circle. The market definition excluding a hospital’s own
circle of influence will be referred to as not-i, and a definition including a hospital’s own circle
of influence will be referred to as also-i. The new definition of market for-profit concentration is
the percentage of admissions in the market that are to a for-profit hospital. As a concrete
example, consider the hypothetical MSA drawn in Figure A1, with an irregular dashed line
indicating the boundary of the MSA, to emphasize that the boundary is irrelevant to the
calculations that follow.

                                                  Figure A1

                                              Hypothetical MSA

                                              A        B         C



                                                                       3000
                                  1000                               admissions
                                admissions          2000
                                                  admissions


        There are three hospitals, a hospital B in the central city, and two suburban hospitals A
and C. The distance between hospitals A and B is twenty miles, and the distance between
hospitals B and C is fifteen miles. Hospitals A and C have zero overlap, since all hospitals lie on
a straight line in alphabetical order. The overlap area between any two hospitals as a proportion
of the total land area of the market is


6
  10.4 miles is the mean distance radius that captures 75 percent of discharges and 21.5 is the mean distance radius
that captures 90 percent of discharges from acute care hospitals in non-rural settings. 14.2 miles is the mean
distance radius that captures 75 percent of discharges and 25.2 is the mean distance radius that captures 90 percent
of discharges from acute care hospitals in rural settings (Gresenz, Rogowski et al. 2004).



                                                                                                                   52
               Overlap = [2acos(d/2r)-sin(2 acos(d/2r))] /π

where d is the distance between the hospitals and r is the radius of the circle of influence (both
10 miles and 15 miles were used to produce estimates). Thus the overlap between A and B is
nearly 22% and the overlap between B and C is just over 39%. These percentages are the
weights applied to admissions, which are assumed in this example to be 1000 in A, 2000 in B,
and 3000 in C. Assume C is the only for-profit hospital in the MSA. Using the not-i market
definition, the market for-profit concentration for A is zero, for B it is just under 73%, and for C
it is zero. Using the also-i market definition, the market for-profit concentration for A is zero, for
B it is about 32%, and for C it is over 79%. The also-i market definition corresponds more
closely to an intuitive notion of market concentration, but it is endogenous to unilateral actions
by the hospital. Although the disk-overlap measure of for-profit market share does not suffer
from the sharp exclusion at the boundary, it also does not capture the possible influence of more
distant but much larger hospitals.


3. Distance-weighted estimates of for-profit share
        To address the limitations of the first two market methods, we employ a third method, the
distance-weighted method. One can imagine a market with two hospitals, each of which has
1000 admissions annually, 25 miles apart, and a third hospital 30 miles from the first and 40
miles from the second, which has 10,000 admissions annually, which should clearly matter to the
market that the first hospital faces, and yet this third hospital is irrelevant in the disk-overlap
measure of for-profit market share. A more sensible method would weight by admissions and
inversely by distance, so that distant hospitals have less importance relative to nearer hospitals,
but may still play a role.
        It might seem intuitive to use the reciprocal of distance squared, and its properties are
invariant to the scale used for distance. Unfortunately, when calculating a weighted average of
characteristics over a collection of discrete points using the reciprocal of distance squared as the
weight, only the points that are very close to the central point (hospital i’s own location) get any
kind of weight. If there are 12 census tract centroids within 10 miles, and one that’s a block
away, only the close one matters. This problem arises because the weight on a point approaches
infinity as the distance of that point from the hospital approaches zero.
        The square of the reciprocal of one plus the distance squared places more reasonable
relative weights on points of different distances from the hospital, but its properties as a weight
are not invariant to the units of distance. However, a particular parameterization accords well
with the observed distribution of patients. A disk around a non-rural hospital that encompasses
75% of the hospital's patients' residences has a mean radius of 10.4 miles, median radius 8.5
miles, standard deviation 8.5, and range [0.2, 78.4]. A disk around an non-rural hospital that
encompasses 90% has a mean radius of 21.5 miles, median 15.7 miles, standard deviation 19.7,
and range [0.4, 179.3].
       Consider the family of weighting functions




                                                                                                   53
                                   2
                   ⎛ 1 ⎞
        w( x; b) = ⎜       2 ⎟
                   ⎝ 1 + bx ⎠

where x is distance from hospital i’s own location. Now choose b so that 75% of the weight lies
within 10.4 miles of the center for an even distribution of potential patients over different
distances, regardless of how distance is measured. Thus we choose b so that
        10.4 mi                2
                  ⎛ 1 ⎞
          ∫       ⎜       2 ⎟
                  ⎝ 1 + bx ⎠
                              dx
          ∞
           0
                           2
                                   = 0.75 .
               ⎛ 1 ⎞
          ∫
          0
               ⎜       2 ⎟
               ⎝ 1 + bx ⎠
                           dx

        This weight function decays smoothly, does not put infinite weight on arbitrarily close
points, and corresponds to the notion that 75% of the patients come from a disk of radius 10.4
miles.
       Since we are working in 3 dimensions, we need to calculate the volume contained under
the curve
                                   2
                     ⎛ 1 ⎞
          w( x; b) = ⎜        2 ⎟
                     ⎝ 1 + bx ⎠
rotated about the w-axis in (x1,x2,w) space, which is given by
                 ∞
                              π∞  ⎛ 1 ⎞            π
        V = π ∫ 2 wxdx = ∫ 2bx⎜           2 ⎟
                                              dx =
                 0
                               b0 ⎝ 1 + bx ⎠       b
using the shell method for integration of a volume of a rotational solid. The area from 0 to C
miles, if x is measured in miles, is
                 C
                              πC  ⎛ 1 ⎞            π⎛      1 ⎞
        V = π ∫ 2 wxdx = ∫ 2bx⎜           2 ⎟
                                              dx = ⎜1 −         ⎟
                 0
                               b0 ⎝ 1 + bx ⎠       b ⎝ 1 + bC 2 ⎠
so the ratio of the weight within C=10.4 miles to the total weight is
         ⎛           1        ⎞
         ⎜⎜1 −                ⎟
                            2 ⎟
          ⎝ 1 + b(10.4) ⎠
and this will be 0.75 when b=0.0277, in which case the weighted proportion of an evenly
distributed population contained within C=21.5 miles is 0.928 (corresponding closely to the
notion that the mean radius of a disk that encloses 90% of the weighted population is 21.5 miles).

4. Comparison of Three Market Definitions
         The weight of a potential competitor relative to the weight of a competitor at the
hospital’s own address is shown in Figure A2 for the disk-overlap measures (both 10 and 15 mile
radii), the distance-weighted measure, and a conceptualization of the MSA-level measure for
comparison purposes (the actual space is three-dimensional, corresponding to a rotation of this
figure around the vertical axis).




                                                                                                  54
                         Figure A2. Comparison of Weighting Methods



                            1
                            .8
                    Relative Weight
                     .4     .2
                            0  .6




                                      -30   -20      -10          0           10               20   30
                                                  Distance from Neig hboring Hospital

                                                  Inverse of squ ared distance m etho d
                                                  O ve rlapping 1 5m i radius disks me thod
                                                  O ve rlapping 1 0m i radius disks me thod
                                                  MS A m eth od (border 10 to 1 5 m i awa y)




       Although there are major differences in the weight assigned to neighboring hospitals, a
wide variety of results are very similar across these specifications. This may reflect the fact that
many hospitals have a number of large neighbors within five miles, and relatively few five to
twenty miles away. If the geographic distribution of hospitals is very concentrated, differences
in weights attached to hospitals five to twenty miles away may make little difference.
        In sensitivity tests, we compute four different measures of for-profit hospital penetration
for each definition of market (MSA, disk-overlap, and distance-weighted: weighted admission
share including the observed hospital, and weighted admission share excluding the observed
hospital, and both as observed in the first year the hospital appears in the data). We also define
markets by using geopolitical boundaries analogous to the MSA method described above. The
only apparent differences arise in comparing results excluding a hospital’s own admissions and
FP/NFP status, versus including it in the definition of market for-profit share. Otherwise, these
alternative models of market share produce strikingly similar results.
       All results in this paper compare only hospitals in MSA’s (i.e., rural hospitals are
excluded from the analysis and calculations of FP market share), and only those in MSA’s that
include at least two hospitals (since FP market share using the MSA method excluding a
hospital’s own admissions and FP/NFP status is otherwise undefined). Future work will include
analyses that examine rural hospitals as well, and for these hospitals, the distance-weighted
measure is the only viable alternative for defining the FP market share.
       The distance-weighted measure has a clear intuitive appeal, and is calibrated to match the
empirical distribution of potential patients. It is the only option for dealing with the rural
hospitals currently excluded. For these reasons, we prefer the distance-weighted measure of FP
market share.




                                                                                                         55
Appendix B. Defining Market Share


        Applying the three market methods described in Appendix A, approximately 60 to 65
percent of hospitals are “low” for-profit share, and 25 to 30 percent of hospitals are “high” for-
profit share and very few are in the “middle.” The graph below shows the share by year (the
share of hospitals classified as being in “high” for-profit share markets is the distance from the
top to the “High FP” line, and the share of hospitals classified as being in “high” for-profit share
markets is the distance from the bottom to the “Low FP” line). The fact that all the lines are close
indicates that few hospitals are excluded from the analysis due to being considered “middle for-
profit share” and suggests that classifications are similar.



                                        Distance-weighted                                       MSA-Level                                           Disk overlap
                            1                                                     1                                                    1

                            .9                                                    .9                                                   .9

                            .8                                                    .8                                                   .8

                            .7                                                    .7                                                   .7

                            .6                                                    .6                                                   .6
                                                                     Proportion




                                                                                                                          Proportion
               Proportion




                            .5                                                    .5                                                   .5

                            .4                                                    .4                                                   .4

                            .3                                                    .3                                                   .3

                            .2                                                    .2                                                   .2

                            .1                                                    .1                                                   .1

                            0                                                     0                                                    0
                                 1988    1992   1996   2000   2004                     1988   1992   1996   2000   2004                     1988   1992     1996    2000   2004
                                                Year                                                 Year                                                    Year
                                            Under 15% FP share                                   Under 15% FP share                                       Under 15% FP share
                                            Under 10% FP share                                   Under 10% FP share                                       Under 10% FP share




The correlations in for-profit share measures are quite high:

                                                                     Distance
                                                                                                                   Disk                              MSA
                                                                     Weighted
                                   Distance
                                                                                  1.0000
                                   Weighted
                                    Disk                                          0.9051                           1.0000
                                    MSA                                           0.8280                           0.9046                           1.0000




                                                                                                                                                                                  56
Appendix C. Figures for All Medical Services


                 1. Relatively Profitable Services

                                                                                            ANGIOPLASTY SERVICES
                                      NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                        FP Hospitals

                 .5                                                                   .5                                                                  .5


                 .45                                                                  .45                                                                 .45



                                                                                      .4                                                                  .4
                                                                        Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                            Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .4


                 .35                                                                  .35                                                                 .35



                 .3                                                                   .3                                                                  .3


                 .25                                                                  .25                                                                 .25


                       1988   1991   1994       1997    2000     2003                       1988   1991   1994      1997    2000     2003                       1988   1991   1994       1997    2000     2003


                                 High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt               Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)



                                                 BIRTHING ROOM/ LABOR, DELIVERY, & RECOVERY ROOM
                                     NFP Hospitals                                                        GOV Hospitals                                                       FP Hospitals

                 .8                                                                   .8                                                                  .8




                 .7                                                                   .7                                                                  .7
                                                                        Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                            Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .6                                                                   .6                                                                  .6




                 .5                                                                   .5                                                                  .5

                       1988   1991   1994      1997    2000    2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997    2000    2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997    2000    2003


                                 High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                  High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                               CARDIAC CATH. LAB
                                     NFP Hospitals                                                        GOV Hospitals                                                       FP Hospitals
                 .8                                                                   .8                                                                  .8
                                                                                                                                                          .6




                 .6                                                                   .6
                                                                        Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                            Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .4                                                                   .4                                                                  .4




                 .2                                                                   .2                                                                  .2
                       1988   1991   1994      1997    2000    2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997    2000    2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997    2000    2003


                                 High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                  High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 57
                                                            CARDIAC INTENSIVE CARE UNIT BEDS

                                    NFP Hospitals                                                        GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6                                                                  .6                                                                 .6




                .5                                                                  .5                                                                 .5




                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                         Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .4                                                                  .4                                                                 .4




                .3                                                                  .3                                                                 .3




                .2                                                                  .2                                                                 .2
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                  High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                                 CT SCAN FACILITY
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                        GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                1                                                                   1                                                                  1




                .95                                                                 .95                                                                .95
                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                         Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .9                                                                  .9                                                                 .9




                .85                                                                 .85                                                                .85




                .8                                                                  .8                                                                 .8
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                  High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                     DIAGNOSTIC RADIOISOTOPE FACILITY
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                        GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                1                                                                   1                                                                  1




                .9                                                                  .9                                                                 .9
                                                                                                                                         Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                .8                                                                  .8                                                                 .8




                .7                                                                  .7                                                                 .7




                .6                                                                  .6                                                                 .6
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                  High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            58
                                                                                              ESWL SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                .3                                                                .3                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2




                .1                                                                .1                                                               .1




                0                                                                 0                                                                0
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                              FITNESS CENTER
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                .3                                                                .3                                                               .3
                                                                    Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2




                .1                                                                .1                                                               .1




                0                                                                 0                                                                0
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                               MRI FACILITY
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                1                                                                 1                                                                1




                .8                                                                .8                                                               .8
                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .6                                                                .6                                                               .6




                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2


                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       59
                                                                     NEONATAL INTENSIVE CARE UNIT BEDS
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals

                .4                                                                  .4                                                                .4



                .35                                                                 .35                                                               .35




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                      Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .3                                                                  .3                                                                .3



                .25                                                                 .25                                                               .25




                .2                                                                  .2                                                                .2
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                     NEONATAL INTERMEDIATE CARE BEDS
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .3                                                                  .3                                                                .3




                .25                                                                 .25                                                               .25
                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .2                                                                  .2                                                                .2




                .15                                                                 .15                                                               .15




                .1                                                                  .1                                                                .1

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                           OPEN-HEART SURGERY
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6                                                                  .6                                                                .6




                .5                                                                  .5                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                      Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .4                                                                  .4                                                                .4




                .3                                                                  .3                                                                .3




                .2                                                                  .2                                                                .2

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                            PEDIATRIC INTENSIVE CARE UNIT BEDS

                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .25                                                                .25                                                                .25




                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .15                                                                .15                                                                .15




                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1




                .05                                                                .05                                                                .05
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                                PET SCAN FACILITY
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2




                .15                                                                .15                                                                .15
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1




                .05                                                                .05                                                                .05




                0                                                                  0                                                                  0
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                            RADIATION THERAPY
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .5                                                                 .5                                                                 .5




                .4                                                                 .4                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .3                                                                 .3                                                                 .3




                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2




                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           61
                                                                                           SPECT SCAN FACILITY
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6                                                                 .6                                                                 .6




                .5                                                                 .5                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .4                                                                 .4                                                                 .4




                .3                                                                 .3                                                                 .3




                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                                SPORTS MEDICINE
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .5                                                                 .5                                                                 .5




                .4                                                                 .4                                                                 .4
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .3                                                                 .3                                                                 .3




                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                                 ULTRASOUND
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                1                                                                  1                                                                  1



                .95                                                                .95                                                                .95
                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .9                                                                 .9                                                                 .9




                .85                                                                .85                                                                .85




                .8                                                                 .8                                                                 .8


                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           62
                                                                                         WOMEN'S HEALTH CENTER
                                     NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                 .7                                                                 .7                                                                .7



                 .6                                                                 .6                                                                .6




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                      Pred. Prob.
                                                                                                                                                      .5
   Pred. Prob.




                 .5                                                                 .5



                 .4                                                                 .4                                                                .4



                 .3                                                                 .3                                                                .3



                 .2                                                                 .2                                                                .2
                       1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




2. Relatively Unprofitable Services

                                                             ALCOHOL/CHEMICAL DEPENDENCY BEDS

                                     NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                 .25                                                                .25                                                               .25




                 .2                                                                 .2                                                                .2
                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .15                                                                .15                                                               .15




                 .1                                                                 .1                                                                .1



                 .05                                                                .05                                                               .05


                       1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                      ALCOHOL/CHEMICAL DEPENDENCY OUTPATIENT SERVICES
                                     NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                 .4                                                                 .4                                                                .4




                 .3                                                                 .3                                                                .3
                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .2                                                                 .2                                                                .2




                 .1                                                                 .1                                                                .1




                 0                                                                  0                                                                 0
                       1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           63
                                                                                                BURN UNIT BEDS
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                      FP Hospitals
                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2




                .15                                                                .15                                                                .15




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1




                .05                                                                .05                                                                .05




                0                                                                  0                                                                  0
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                   CERTIFIED TRAUMA CENTER
                                     NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                       FP Hospitals
                .6                                                                 .6                                                                 .6



                .5                                                                 .5                                                                 .5



                .4                                                                 .4                                                                 .4
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .3                                                                 .3                                                                 .3



                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2



                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt              Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                         CHILD PSYCH. SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                      FP Hospitals
                .3                                                                 .3                                                                 .3



                .25                                                                .25                                                                .25
                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2



                .15                                                                .15                                                                .15



                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1



                .05                                                                .05                                                                .05
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           64
                                                                                                EMERGENCY DEPT.
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                1                                                                  1                                                                  1



                .95                                                                .95                                                                .95



                .9                                                                 .9                                                                 .9




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .85                                                                .85                                                                .85



                .8                                                                 .8                                                                 .8



                .75                                                                .75                                                                .75
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                   GERIATRIC ADULT DAY CARE
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .15                                                                .15                                                                .15




                .1                                                                 .1                                                                 .1
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .05                                                                .05                                                                .05




                0                                                                  0                                                                  0
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                                HIV-AIDS SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals

                .6                                                                 .6                                                                 .6



                .5                                                                 .5                                                                 .5
                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .4                                                                 .4                                                                 .4



                .3                                                                 .3                                                                 .3



                .2                                                                 .2                                                                 .2


                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           65
                                                                                              HOSPICE CARE
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                .3                                                                .3                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2




                .1                                                                .1                                                               .1




                0                                                                 0                                                                0
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                  PATIENT EDUCATION CENTER
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                1                                                                 1                                                                1




                .8                                                                .8                                                               .8
                                                                    Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .6                                                                .6                                                               .6




                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                    PSYCH. CONSULT/LIAS. SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .6                                                                .6                                                               .6




                .5                                                                .5                                                               .5
                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                .3                                                                .3                                                               .3




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       66
                                                                                         PSYCH. EDUC. SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .4                                                                 .4                                                                .4


                .35                                                                .35                                                               .35



                                                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
                .3                                                                 .3




                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .25                                                                .25                                                               .25



                .2                                                                 .2                                                                .2



                .15                                                                .15                                                               .15

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                              PSYCH. EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .6                                                                 .6                                                                .6




                .5                                                                 .5                                                                .5
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .4                                                                 .4                                                                .4




                .3                                                                 .3                                                                .3




                .2                                                                 .2                                                                .2
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                                 PSYCH. BEDS
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals

                .55                                                                .55                                                               .55




                .5                                                                 .5                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                       Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .45                                                                .45                                                               .45




                .4                                                                 .4                                                                .4



                .35                                                                .35                                                               .35
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                          67
                                                                                  PSYCH. OUTPATIENT SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .5                                                                .5                                                               .5




                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .3                                                                .3                                                               .3




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2




                .1                                                                .1                                                               .1

                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                    PSYCH. PARTIAL HOSPITALIZATION
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .4                                                                .4                                                               .4




                .3                                                                .3                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .2                                                                .2                                                               .2




                .1                                                                .1                                                               .1

                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                       SOCIAL WORK SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                1                                                                 1                                                                1




                .9                                                                .9                                                               .9
                                                                                                                                     Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .8                                                                .8                                                               .8




                .7                                                                .7                                                               .7




                .6                                                                .6                                                               .6
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       68
                                                                                   VOLUNTEER SERVICES DEPT.
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                 1                                                                 1                                                                1




                 .9                                                                .9                                                               .9




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
                                                                     Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .8                                                                .8                                                               .8




                 .7                                                                .7                                                               .7




                 .6                                                                .6                                                               .6
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




3. Variably Profitable Services

                                                                                        HOME HEALTH SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals

                 .6                                                                .6                                                               .6



                 .5                                                                .5                                                               .5
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .4                                                                .4                                                               .4



                 .3                                                                .3                                                               .3



                 .2                                                                .2                                                               .2



                 .1                                                                .1                                                               .1

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                   SKILLED NURSING CARE BEDS
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                     GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                 .6                                                                .6                                                               .6



                 .5                                                                .5                                                               .5



                 .4                                                                .4                                                               .4
                                                                     Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
   Pred. Prob.




                 .3                                                                .3                                                               .3



                 .2                                                                .2                                                               .2



                 .1                                                                .1                                                               .1

                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

 High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                        69
                4. Profitability Unknown (e.g., unclear definition, mixed patient pool)

                                                                                              OBSTETRICS BEDS
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .9                                                                .9                                                                .9




                .8                                                                .8                                                                .8




                                                                    Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .7                                                                .7                                                                .7




                .6                                                                .6                                                                .6




                .5                                                                .5                                                                .5
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                    OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH SERVICES
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                .8                                                                .8                                                                .8




                .7                                                                .7                                                                .7
                                                                    Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .6                                                                .6                                                                .6




                .5                                                                .5                                                                .5




                .4                                                                .4                                                                .4
                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                        OUTPATIENT SURGERY
                                   NFP Hospitals                                                      GOV Hospitals                                                    FP Hospitals
                1                                                                 1                                                                 1




                .9                                                                .9                                                                .9
                                                                                                                                      Pred. Prob.
                                                                    Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .8                                                                .8                                                                .8




                .7                                                                .7                                                                .7


                     1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                        1988    1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                        1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                               High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                     PATIENT REPRESENTATIVE SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals

                .8                                                                  .8                                                                .8




                .7                                                                  .7                                                                .7




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                      Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .6                                                                  .6                                                                .6




                .5                                                                  .5                                                                .5
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)


                                                                                          PHYS. REHAB. SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .9                                                                  .9                                                                .9




                .8                                                                  .8                                                                .8
                                                                      Pred. Prob.




                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .7                                                                  .7                                                                .7




                .6                                                                  .6                                                                .6




                .5                                                                  .5                                                                .5
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                           TRANSPLANT SERVICES
                                    NFP Hospitals                                                       GOV Hospitals                                                     FP Hospitals
                .25                                                                 .25                                                               .25




                .2                                                                  .2                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                        Pred. Prob.
                                                                      Pred. Prob.
  Pred. Prob.




                .15                                                                 .15                                                               .15




                .1                                                                  .1                                                                .1




                .05                                                                 .05                                                               .05
                      1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003                          1988   1991   1994     1997   2000   2003                         1988   1991   1994      1997   2000   2003


                                High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt                                 High-FP Mkt             Low-FP Mkt

High>15% and Low<10% (Wt. varies inv. w/sq. dist.--not i--excludes own status)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           71
   Appendix D. Fixed-effects Estimates of Probability of Offering Medical Services by
   Ownership Type as For-Profit Market Share Increases and Medical Service Profitability
   Designation, 1988-2005

                                               FE estimate of the effect of                            Percentage
                                                   increased FP share;                                     of
                                                exponentiated coefficients      Profitability Status    Hospitals
                                              represent positive effect when                            Offering
                                                      greater than 1                                     Service
                                                                               Qualitative
                  Service                      Gov        NFP         FP                      FP>G        %
                                                                               Approach
Adult Day Care Program                         0.839     1.084       1.738        U*          U*         0.085
Alcohol/Chem. Depend. Beds (>0) (89-05)        1.356     0.664       0.857         U          I          0.158
Alcohol/Drug Abuse or Dependency
                                               1.274     0.657       1.026         U          U          0.288
Outpatient Services
Angioplasty (89-97)                             1.221     1.278       0.574        P          P***       0.402
Birthing Room/LDR Room/LDRP Room                1.968    1.996*       2.070        P          U          0.735
Burn Care Beds                                  1.263     1.324      0.0888        U          U          0.047
Cardiac Catheterization Lab                     2.617     1.408       0.561        P          P*         0.541
Cardiac Intensive Care Beds (>0)                2.431    0.540*       0.715        P          P**        0.414
Certified Trauma Center                         1.361     0.787       0.542        U          U*         0.284
Child Psychiatric Services                      1.421     1.096       2.915        U          U*         0.246
Computed-Assisted Tomography Scan (CT)          1.778     1.215       1.543        P          U          0.924
Diagnostic Radioisotope Facility               2.005*    1.321       1.342         P          P          0.813
Emergency Department                            4.993     2.196      4.647*        U          U          0.958
Extracorporeal Shock-Wave Lithotripter          1.754     0.928      0.432*        P          P*         0.208
Fitness Center                                  1.098     1.009       0.620        P          V          0.258
HIV-AIDS Services (94-05)                       1.341     0.681       0.669        U          U***       0.604
Home Health Services                            1.868     1.338       1.496        V          V**        0.411
Hospice                                       4.147**   2.382**      3.007*        U†         U**        0.232
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)                2.117     1.304       0.791        P          P          0.533
Neonatal Intensive Care Beds (>0)               1.844     1.490       0.841        P          I          0.289
Neonatal Intermediate Care Beds (>0)            1.106     0.868       0.745        P          I          0.171
Obstetric Care Beds (>0)                        1.920     1.846       2.424        ?          U          0.756
Occupational Health Services                    1.441     1.227       1.343        ?          I          0.664
Open-Heart Surgery                              3.128     0.804       0.588        P          P***       0.346
Outpatient Surgery                              2.112     2.221       0.778        ?          U          0.975
Patient Education Center                        1.520     0.893      0.478*        U†         U          0.756
Patient Representative Services                 1.892     1.111       0.772        ?          U          0.716
Pediatric Intensive Care Beds (>0)              0.308     1.300       3.775        P          I          0.116
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) (90-05)      1.337     1.019       0.585        P          P          0.100
Psychiatric Consultation/Liaison Services       1.344     0.786       0.717        U          I          0.432
Psychiatric Education Services                  1.693     1.076       1.137        U          U          0.327
Psychiatric Emergency Services                  1.638     0.983       1.139        U          U          0.455
Psychiatric Inpatient Beds (>0) (89-05)         2.063     0.882       1.132        U          U**        0.421
Psychiatric Outpatient Services                 1.614     0.671       1.870        U          U          0.336
Psychiatric Partial Hospitalization Program     1.886     0.967       1.575        U          U          0.276




                                                                                                           72
    Appendix D (continued). Fixed-effects Estimates of Probability of Offering Medical
    Services by Ownership Type as For-Profit Market Share Increases and Medical Service
    Profitability Designation, 1988-2005

                                                       FE estimate of the effect of                                 Percentage
                                                           increased FP share;                                          of
                                                        exponentiated coefficients          Profitability Status     Hospitals
                                                      represent positive effect when                                 Offering
                                                              greater than 1                                          Service
                                                                                           Qualitative
                    Service                           Gov          NFP           FP                       FP>G           %
                                                                                           Approach
Radiation Therapy                                     1.451       1.369         0.946          P             U         0.367
Rehab Services                                       2.359*       1.242         1.258          ?             U         0.771
Single Photon Emission Comp. Tomography               1.812       1.116         0.928          P             U         0.451
Skilled Nursing Care Beds (>0)                        1.557       0.737         1.158          V             V         0.315
Social Work Services                                  1.439       1.142         1.147         U†             U         0.911
Sports Medicine Services                              1.557       1.204         1.367          P             U         0.352
Transplant Services                                   0.859       0.867         0.614          ?             P         0.131
Ultrasound                                            0.854       1.578         1.487          P             U         0.951
Volunteer Services Department                         1.245       1.262         0.565         U†             U         0.888
Women's Health Center/Services                        1.100       1.331         1.451          P             P         0.501

Notes: All designations of profit status in Qualitative Approach column are from Horwitz (2005b) unless noted. For
profit status: † = authors’ determination. P=relatively profitable; U=relatively unprofitable, V=variable; ? = insufficient
AHA description to categorize. Obstetric care draws from two distinct patient pools, one profitable, the other
unprofitable.

FP>G results are based on probit regressions using all control variables described in the text and predicting probability of
offering a service for each year in sample at the mean for-profit market share for for-profit and government hospitals.
Significance tests from hypothesis βFP*Year+βFP*Mkt*YearE(Mkt) = βGov*Year+βGov*Mkt*YearE(Mkt). P= > 10% years show
significant differences of FP>G and < 10% years show significant differences of G>FP; U= < 10% years show
significant differences of FP>G and >10% years show significant differences of G>FP, V= > 10% years show significant
differences of FP>G and > 10% of years show significant differences of G>FP; I=indeterminate. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05,
*p<0.10.




                                                                                                                         73
