NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL CONTROLS, THE DUAL
EXCHANGE RATE, AND DEVALUATION

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 132)4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 198)4

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 1/1324
April 1984

Capital Controls, the Dual Exchange Rate, and Devaluation

ABSTRACT

This paper re—examines the effect of devaluation under capital—account
restrictions, adding to traditional formulations the seemingly minor (but

realistic) assumption that central—bank reserves earn interest. The extra
assumption has important implications.

En an intertemporal model, devalua—

tion is no longer neutral in the long run as it is in the literature on

the monetary approach to the balance of payments. Further, the economy
may possess multiple stationary states, some of them unstable.

The analysis confirms, however, that even large devaluations must
improve the balance of payments if the economy is initially at a stable

stationary position. A by—product of the analysis is a pricing formula
for the financial exchange rate in a dual exchange rate system. That
formula is consistent with recent consumption—based models of asset pricing.

Naurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
(212) 280—5489

Introduction

A number of controversies in international monetary economics have cen-

tered on the analysis of devaluation. Ikst recently, accounts of the monetary approach to the balance of payments have used the devaluation example
to illustrate some basic insights of that view (see Mundell [1971]
Dornbusch [19731 , and Frenkel and Mussa [1984]). A typical exposition

assumes that there is no private international capital mobility, so that

the aggregate real money stock is predetermined. Devaluation, by instantaneously reducing real balances, leads to a flow excess demand for money,
a temporary balance—of—payments surplus, but no change in the economy's

unique long—run real equilibrium. The result is intuitively appealing, as
it conforms to the principle that changes in nominal variables should have
no permanent real effects.
This paper re—evaluates the foregoing predictions about devaluation in

a simple optimizing model of an economy with capital controls. Unlike the
models used to illustrate the monetary approach, the model used here
recognizes that central—bank foreign reserves generally earn interest.

This modification leads to two important conclusions. First, devaluation
must lead to an increase in the economy's long—run consumption and real
balances, and thus is nonneutral.

Second, the economy may have multiple

steady states, some of them unstable, even when all goods are normal.
In an optimizing model

similar to the one employed here, Calvo [1981]

has obtained the monetary—approach conclusion that devaluation is asymp-

totically neutral when central—hank reserves earn no interest and there is
no private capital mohi lity. As I show below, however, devaluation is not
in general neutral w'hen capT tal is mobile unless central—hank reserves earn

—2—
interest at the market rate. The assumption that reserves earn interest
would therefore seem to be a natural one to make in an investigation of the

effects of devaluation under capital controls. While the central bank's
reserve transactions do enable the public to engage in net external saving
and dissaving under capital immobility, however, the interest rate per-

ceived by the public can differ from the one available to the bank. This
distortion lies behind the economy's peculiarities, and I model the
domestic real interest rate explicitly by introducing a dual foreign

exchange rate for financial transactions. A characterization of the dual
exchange rate and its dynamic behavior is a by—product of the analysis.'
The paper is organized as follows.
Section I studies the benchmark case of perfect capital mobility,
showing that under certain idealized conditions (including interest—bearing
official reserves), devaluation is fully neutral, even in the short run.
This result was demonstrated previously in Obstfeld [1981} under assumptions about individual preferences somewhat different from those made below.
Section II modifies the previous section's model by adding an official

prohibition on private capital movements. Individuals are still allowed to
hold a fixed pool of "financial foreign exchange, and the price of this
asset in terms of consumption defines a floating dual exchange rate. It is
shown that the equilibrium dual exchange rate is given by a standard
consumption—based asset pricing formula.

Section III studies the dynamics of the resulting model. Because the
return to national saving, the world interest rate, differs from the

domestic

interest rate motivating private saving decisions, the usual

saddle—path stability condition characterizing steady states of optimizing

—3—
models need not hold. Further, there may exist several long—run
equilibria, some saddle—path stable and some entirely unstable.
Section IV analyzes the effect of a permanent, unanticipated devaluation on an economy initially at a stable long—run equilibrium.
Devaluation always leads to a balance—of—payments surplus; but because the
counterpart of this surplus is an increasing stock of official interest—
bearing reserves, the economy's new long—run position is characterized by a

level of national income higher than that prevailing initially. It follows
that when capital is immobile, devaluation generally has real effects both
in the short and long runs.

Concluding remarks are contained in Section V. An appendix deals with
some technical matters.

I. Capital Mobility and the Neutrality of Devaluation
This section develops a simple optimizing model with capital mobiliity

in which an unanticipated devaluation is fully neutral. As is discussed
below, some idealized features of the economy described guarantee this

neutrality. But the model is a useful benchmark for the discussion to
follow, which shows how the imposition of capital controls renders devaluation nonneutral in the short and long runs even in a frictionless setting.
Residents of the economy consume a single perishable consumption good

that may be freely inported or exported. Domestic output of the good is
constant at level y. The only two assets held by residents are a domestic
money

not held by foreigners and an internationally traded consol—type bond

paying r units of the consunption good per unit time in perpetuity. The
economy is small in

the world's

markets

for goods and

bonds:

both the

—4-foreign—currency price of the consumption good, P, and the world real
bond price, q*, are exogenous, and assumed fixed. In the model of this
section, there are no official restrictions on international capital move-

ments. An implication is that the real rate of interest,

r/q*, is

given by the world capital market and constant.

A representative immortal consumer inhabits the economy. The
consumer's instantaneous utility is a function of consumption, c, and real
balance holdings, m, where the latter variable is defined as nominal money
holdings, M, divided by the domestic—currency price of consumption, P.
Maximization of the intertemporal welfare criterion

V =

5 u(c,

0

(1)

m)exP(_ót)dt

is the consumer's goal.2 The parameter

is a fixed subjective rate of

time preference, assumed in this section to equal the world real interest

rate p*.3 The strictly concave instantaneous utility function satisfies
u u

cmm

— u u

mcm

< 0, u u

mcc

— u u

ccm

< 0, so that both goods are normal.

To simplify the subsequent discussion of the central hank's balance
sheet, I consider the case in which the exchange rate (the domestic—
currency price of foreign exchange) is fixed except for discrete, t1nantici—

pated devaluations. As will he evident, the analysis would easily
generalize to an economy in which

the

exchange rate, though pegged at each

instant, s expected to move continuously over time (see Calvo [19811 or
Obstfeld [1981]). Under a fixed exchange rate F, goods—market arbitrage

guarantees that P equals FP, and
domestic

inflation

because

P is fixed, the expected

rate is zero. The opportunity cost of holding money

is

—5—
then the real interest rate p, so the consumer's lifetime budget
constraint Is

f
0

where

(ct+p*mt)exp(_p*t)dt

m0+q*b0+(y/p*)+JTexp(_ct)dt,

(2)

0

b0 is the (net) number of bonds issued to the domestic private sector

by foreigners up to (and including) time 0 and r represents expected real

time—t transfer paents from the government.4
The central bank holds as foreign reserves consols issued by

foreigners. Since the domestic public does not hold foreign currency ——

which yields neither utility nor interest —— the central hank can hold the
exchange rate constant at E by exchanging foreign bonds for home money when-

ever there is excess demand or supply in the home money market. Earnings
on central—bank foreign reserves are turned over to the government and

other central—bank assets earn no interest. If government consumption
is zero, the consolidated public—sector budget constraint is
Tt =

rf

(3)

where f devotes the central bank's stock of foreign reserves.
The central—bank balance sheet links official foreign reserve holdings

to the (high—powered) domestic money stock, m. Assume for simplicity (and
without loss of generality) that no devaluations or changes in q* have

occurred in the past. As long as no devaluations do occur, the real money
stock is given by

m

q*f

+ (D0/P)

(4)

for t ) 0, where P0 (assuned constant) is the nominal supply of domestic

credit .

—6—
The assumption that central—bank foreign assets earn interest plays a

key role in the analysis, and will he discussed further below. It should
be noted now, however, that the assumption is certainly more realistic than
the alternative hypothesis that the central hank willingly forgoes interest

income. 6
To solve the individual's problem, form the Lagrangian expression

L=

f u(c,

m)exp(_t)dt+ X0[m0+qb0+(y/p)+fTexp(_Pt)dt_

0
Differentiation of (5) leads to the necessary conditions
=

u(c,m)

for

all

(6)

X0,

(7)
um(ct,mt:)
X0p*
t. Note that (6) and (7) imply that equilibrium c and m must

remain constant over time. To derive the unique shadow value of wealth
associated with an optimal individual program, use (6) and (7) to express

desired consumption and real balances as explicit functions of A0 and :
=

c(X0,p*),

=

Then A0 allows the lifetime budget

m(X0,p*).

constraint (2) to hold with equaliity, and thus is

[c(A0,p*)/p*](Ap,p*) =

the

solution to

m0+qb0+(y/p)+fTexp(_pt)dt.

(8)

The model cannot be closed until the process generating expectatons of
future

government transfers is

equilibrium is assumed to be a

specified. For this purpose the economy's
perfect foresight equilibrium, in the sense that

the equilibrium expected future

of official reserves {f0 =
(3)

,

Tt

=

rf,

holds for

all t.

path of transfer paents { }t0
induces a path

[m

—

(D0/P) J/q*

such

that condition

As noted above, the money market is

—7-brought into equilibrium at each instant through official foreign exchange
intervention ——

in

effect, exchanges of foreign bonds between the domestic

public and central bank. Real balances m may therefore jump at a point In
time.

It is important to remember, though, that the sumb + f of net

claims on foreigners held by the economy as a whole is a predetermined or
non—jumping variable that can change only over time through current account

deficits and surpluses. Instantaneous domestic portfolio adjustment can
alter the money supply, but it cannot result in a transfer of real resources between countries.
Substitution of (3) and (4) into (8) with

= m( A0, ck) for t > Q

yields the equation
-

q*(b+f)+(y/p*)

(9)

When no devaluation is expected, the equilibrium shadow price of wealth
is the solution to (9) , and can be expressed as a function of predetermined

or exogenous variables only:
=

A0(b0+f0,y,p).

(10)

(A0 is unique because, as is easily verified, c < 0 under the normality
assumptions.) Since domestic money is a nontraded asset, the economy's
discounted planned consumption cannot in equilibrium exceed the capftalized

value of its real resources. The equilibrium A0 may be interpreted as the
unique shadow price of wealth consistent with both individual optimality
and this aggregate intertemporal constraint.

The effects of an unanticipated devaluation at time 0 (an increase in

the exchange rate to F' from F) may now be analyzed. The devaluation occa—
sions an incipient excess demand for domestic real balances, but this is

eUminated immediately as rcsidents sell the central hank

foreign bonds

to

—8—
rebuild their aoney holdings. This process of portfolio readjustment removes foreign claims from private ownership and places then under government
ownership, hut leaves the sum b0
shows that X0 —— and

+ f0

unaltered. Equation (10) therefore

thus consumption and real balances —— iS unchanged.

&gents can instantaneously restore their real balances yet maintain their
previous consumption level because the foreign interest payments they

sacrifice to rebuild their money holdings are [by (3)] returned to them in

the form of higher transfers. Essentially for this reason, devaluation is
fully neutral.
For future reference,

it

is useful to derive the effect on the central—

bank balance—sheet relation (4) of the unantLcipated devaluation at time 0.
Let c (F' — E)/E' denote the percentage devaluation. After devaluation,
but

before private portfolio readjustment has occurred, the real money

supply is given, not by (4), but by

(ii)

q*f0 + (D0/P)_r[q*f0+(D0/p)],

provided the central hank does not monetize the nominal capital gains on
7

its foreign reserves. The devaluation thus causes an incipient reduction
in real money, but as we have seen, an immediate real private capital
inflow equal to c[q*f0 + (D0/p)] prevents such a reduction from occurring
in equilibrium. Because Am.=q Af if no further devaluations occur, the
real central—hank balance sheet relation becomes

q*f+(D0/p)_c[q*f0+(D/p)]

(12)

in future periods. Real money is then equal to real foreign reserves plus
real domestic credit minus an adjustment reflecting the fact that official

—9—
**
reserves purchased up to time 0 were purchased at a money price EP
q lower
*

than the current price E'P q
It was observed earlier that certain idealized features of the present
economy are necessary in order that devaluation be neutral in the short
run.

If central bank reserves do not earn interest, the capital inflow

following devaluation causes a fall in national income and in consumption
(Frenkel and Rodriguez [1975]); devaluation essentially acts as a tax in
this case.

If bonds are claims to nominal payments in different curren-

cies, devaluation can alter domestic wealth by changing the real value of

the net external debt (Boyer [1977] and Lapan and Enders [1978]). If the
economy is inhabited by overlapping generations with finite horizons, devaluation has real effects if it leads to redistribution of income across

generations. Abstraction from these conventional sources of nonneutrality
is necessary in order to isolate conceptually the impact of capital
controls.

II. Capital Controls and the Financial Exchange Rate
The assumption of unrestricted external asset trade is now abandoned.
Under the regime of capital controls postulated here, domestic residents
can neither buy nor sell bonds abroad, and any foreign exchange earnings

must be converted immediately into domestic money at the central bank. A
domestic bond market continues to operate, and, as before, home bonds are
perfect substitutes for claims on foreigners making up a pool b of
"investment currency" that the home public is allowed to hold.

The central hank now buys and sells foreign exchange for commercial
purposes only, pegging the commercial exchange rate (initially at E).

This

suffices

to peg

the

*

home price level at EP .

Because

the

central hank

—10—
does not intervene in the investment currency market, the stock of foreign

bonds b held by the public is fixed. The real price of such bonds, q, need
*
no longer equal the world price, q , and can be thought of as a dual,
financial exchange rate. Correspondingly, the domestic real interest rate
p =

(r+)/q

can differ from the world rate p. Both q and p will be deter-

mined endogenously in the model developed in this section.
Capital—account restrictions have several major effects on the func-

tioning of the economy. First, while individuals can still borrow or lend,
the private sector cannot in the

aggregate

alter its net claims on

foreigners. Second, while individuals can instantaneously alter their
money holdings, the domestic real money supply is, in the aggregate, a pre-

determined variable. Third, the economy as a whole (i.e., the private sector plus authorities) can alter its net foreign asset position over time
through balance—of—payments disequilibria (which under capital immobility
correspond to current—account disequilibria); hut in this process, the
central bank acts as an intermediary for the domestic public, acquiring
foreign bonds when the public desires growing real balances and decumu—

lating reserves in the opposite case. Fourth, the divergence (noted above)
between the domestic equilibrium real interest rate p and the rate
available to the central hank
economy.8

introduces

a new distortion into the

As we shall see, this distortion may result in an economy with

multiple stationary positions, some of them unstable.
The representative individual' s problem is now to maximize V [given by

— 11 —

(1)]

subject to the constraint

f

(c+Pm)exp(_fPds)dt

where

m0+q0b0+f(y+T)exP(_Jpds)dt,

(13)

is the expected real interest rate path.

Differentiation of a Lagrangian expression analogous to (5) yields the
necessary conditions

u(ct,mt) = X0exp(&—fp ds),

(14)

u(ct,mt) = X0p exp( t — fp5ds),

(15)

for all t. It is clear from (14) and (15) that consumption and real balances need no longer be constant over time.
Because the financial exchange rate is endogenous, it is difficult to
derive an explicit, closed—form characterization of the economy's

equilibrium as in the previous section. A diagrammatic approach is therefore adopted here. Differentiation of (14) yields the relationship

=

u(c,m) (

(16)

—

according to which utility "capital gains" on wealth must match any excess

of the subjective discount rate over the real rate of return. By (15),
(16) can be written

+ U

(c,mt)n

=

uc(ct,mt)6_ u(c,mt).

(17)

If a m + qb denotes real marketable assets, the identity linking

—12-asset accumulation to saving is9

=

—

y + rb + Tt +

Ct.

(18)

Substituting the government budget constraint (3) and the central—hank
balance—sheet relation (4) into (18), one obtains:

+

=

y + rb + p* [m — (D0/P)]

—

c

(19)

In perfect—foresight equilibrium, it is also true that b = b for all t, so
that b =0 for all t.

In equilibrium, then, (19') imolies that the evolution

t

of real balances is governed by the equation
=

y + r + p*{m

(1oI1)] —

c.

(20)

Equations (17) and (20) together give the equilibrium motion of
consumption:

—
—
(c,m)
u(c,m)
ucm(ct,mt){y+r[mt_ (D0/P)] — c
(
(c,m)
By (16), (20), and (21), a stationary state (q, in, c) of the economy is

defined by the relations
q =

r/,

C =

y

+ rb + p*[rn —

(22)

(D0/P)],

u(c,m)/u(c,m) =

(23)

(24)

(recall the definition of p as (r+4)/q). It is assumed henceforth that at
least one stationary state exists.

Equations (20) and (21) together define a complete dynamic system in

real balances and consumption: the dual exchange rate q enters neither
equation. It follows that co—movements in m and c may be analyzed diagram—

(21)
}).

—13—
matically without reference to movements in q. The paths of the two former
variables do affect that of q, however, for equation (16) may be integrated

to yield
u (c ,m )

q

=

f {c(t
c 0,0

r exp(—t) dt

o

t

=

Jr

exp (—fp ds) dt.

0

(25)

0

According to (25), the real financial exchange rate has two equivalent

interpretations. First, as in constnption—based models of asset pricing
(e.g., Grossman and Shiller [1981]), q is an integral of future physical

yields, weighted by marginal rates of substitution between present and
future consumption and discounted at the subjective time preference rate.
Second, q may be thought of as an integral of future physical yields
discounted by market real interest rates.

III. Dynamics
To analyze the dynamics of real balances and consumption, it is con-

venient initially to linearize the system consisting of (20) and (21) in
the neighborhood of a stationary state. There is no guarantee, however,

that the steady state (if it exists) is unique. The easiest way to see
this is to graph equation (23), which gives long—run consumption as a
function of long—run central—bank reserves, together with (24), the Engel

curve associated with the price 6. Because (23) ——
which i=0 ——

defines

also

the locus along

an upward—sloping line, the Engel curve may intersect

it several times even when both goods are normal, as in figure 1.

(Figure

1 also shows that there could easily be no stationary state.) Of course
when central bank reserves earn no interest, as in Calvo (1981) and the

C

c

c÷rLç L(r/]
—

I

—14--

earlier monetary—approach literature, the =O locus is horizontal at c =
y+rb > 0, and normality of both goods ensures the existence of a unique
long—run equilibrium.

While one could rule out multiple stationary states under certain
assumptions (e.g., homothetic preferences), there is no compelling reason

for doing so. The following section will analyze devaluation from both the
local and global perspectives.

Let tn and c be stationary levels of real balances and consumption. The
linear approximation to (20) and (21) around those levels is

rth1
I

cm

(_p*)_jmm

_•i1
I

—

Lti

—

,

cc

where functions beneath overbars are evaluated at (rn,c). The condition for
saddle—path stability of (26) is that the system have real characteristic

roots of opposite sign. M the determinant of the matrix in (26) is the
product of those characteristic roots, the stability condition may be

written

-u

U

mm

cm

—

cSu — U

cc

>

(27)

cm

Figure 2 displays the phase portrait of (26) under the assumption that

(27) holds. The stability assumption implies that the slope of the r=Q
locus is positive, exceeding that of the ii=0 locus, as shown. It is
assumed that, given an initial level of real balances, the equilibrium con—
sumption level is the unique level placing the economy on the convergent

C.

<-if
S

C

S

cz

—15—
trajectory SS.

Inequality (27) has a straightforward interpretation. The left—hand
side of the inequality is just the slope of an Engel curve such as that

pictured in figure 1. The inequality thus states that no stable trajectory
will exist unless an increase in real balances induces an increase in con-

sumption exceeding the world interest rate p. The logic of this condition
is evident. Suppose there is a current—account (i.e., balance—of—payments)

surplus. An increase tm in real balances is associated with an increase
q*f in central—bank foreign reserves and hence an increase

in

national income. Because real balances are a normal good, the rise in
income induces a further rise in desired real balances, and unless absorp—

tion

*

is rising faster than national income (i.e., unless tc > p tn), the

current account surplus will widen over time rather than shrink. Figure 3
depicts a stationary position around which (27) does not hold.'°
The foregoing discussion implies an easy saddle—path stability cri-

terion for the multiple stationary states shown in figure 1. Bcause the
i=O locus has slope p, any point at which the Engel curve cuts it from

beLj is a saddle point. Similarly, any point at which the Engel curve
cuts the ri=O locus from above is an unstable stationary state. Figure 4

shows an example of a dynamic system with several stationary states.

Note that the Engel curve coincides with the global =O locus only when the
instantaneous utility function is separable in consumption and real balan-

ces (u=O).
There are obviously several potential pathologies. For example, if the
= 0 locus first intersects the ii

=0

locus from above, there is no

convergent equilibrium to the left of the first (i.e., lowest real—balance)

steady state. Similarly, if the

= 0 locus intersects the

i =0

locus

C.

yt

2

C.

C. O

rO

m

F .& -

9-

—16—
from above at its last intersection, there is no convergent equilibrium to

the right of the last (i.e., highest real—balance) steady state. To rule
out these cases, I assume that for every real—balance level, there exists a

value of consumption placing the economy on a stable trajectory.'' The
usual sufficient conditions imply that these stable paths are equilibria
for the economy.

Using (25), it is easy to describe.the behavior of the dual exchange

rate q along a convergent path. When the balance of payments is in deficit, say, consumption is high relative to its ultimate level, and the

marginal utility of consumption is low. Thus, q exceeds its long—run level
q =

r/

S, and, by (25) ,

falls

toward it as the economy converges to external

equilibrium. This heuristic argument indicates that a deficit is accompanied by a falling (or appreciating) financial exchange rate, and a

surplus by a rising (or depreciating) rate. An appendix presents a
rigorous proof of the proposition.12

IV. Nonneutral Devaluation
The preceding apparatus may be used to demonstrate that when central—
bank reserves earn interest and there are no private capital movements,

devaluation alters the economy's long—run equilibrium. This section first
analyzes the effect of a small, unanticipated devaluation when the economy

is initially at a saddle—path stable stationary equilibrium. The result of
the experiment is always a balance—of—payments surplus that leads to a rise

in long—run consumption and real balances. A global analysis of devaluation yields essentially the same outcome. Even when there are multiple

equilibria, a large devaluation can never leap—frog an unstable stationary state and cause a balance—of—payments deficit.

—17—
Consider first the local analysis of a small, unanticipated devaluation
on the assumption that the economy is initially at a stable long—run
equilibrium (rn,c) such as that shown in figure 2. A change in the exchange

rate (to E' from E) generally shifts both the ti=O and the O loci, for
this policy action alters the balance—sheet relation linking the real money

stock and the stock of foreign reserves. By (4) and (12), the post—
devaluation equations of motion for the economy are
—

y + r + p m— (D0/P) +

(u(c,m) —

C = u
—

u(c,m)

c

(28)

,

u(c,m)

y+r+p*[in — (D0/P) +

—

c}),

(29)

E (E'—E)/E' and in is the pre—devaluation real—balance level.

where again,

Near (rn,c), the vertical shift of the ifi=O locus is

—

dc
—

= p*m>O

uC m=O

while

that of the c=O locus is

-

—

dc
de

mu cm

cc

If the =O schedule shifts downward, long—run consumption and real balances
necessarily rise. But long—run consumption and real balances rise also if

the =O schedule shifts upward, for

—
dc

——
de

iO

Figure

—
mp*

) > 0.

5 shows the impact and long—run effects of a small unanticipated

devaluation for the case in which the =0 locus shifts upward. Because the
impact

fall

in real balances equals the leftward shift of the i=0 locus,

3

(_
(-"I

U

0

0

-•

0

—18—
consumption falls in the short run. Corresponding to the public's desire
to rebuild its real balances is a balance—of—payments surplus. As real
balances rise over time, however, central—bank reserves rise, and because

these earn interest at rate p*, national income grows as well. At the new
long—run equilibrium (m' ,

c'),

consumption and real money demand are there—

fore higher than before the devaluation.13
Section Ill's results imply that the dual exchange rate q is also

affected by the devaluation. The sudden reduction in real wealth reduces
private demand for foreign bonds; equilibrium requires a fall in their

price and a depreciating financial exchange rate. Over time, expectations

are fulfilled as q rises toward r/. In the short run, therefore, an unanticipated devaluation causes the real interest rate to rise.

The preceding results were derived using "local" arguments. Must the
conclusions be modified when large devaluations are considered? It turns
out that no modification is needed: a large devaluation can never lead to
a long—run decline in consumption and real balances.
Figure 6, which combines the consumer's Engel curve with the ifi=O locus,

is used to make this point. If initial real balances at the stable
equilibrium A are m, devaluation reduces them to (1—c)rn, and also shifts

the i=O schedule leftward by m. The Engel curve's position does not
change.

The economy will now travel to one of the two stationary positions clo-

sest to C, labelled B and D in figure 6. But B must be the stable
equilibrium,

i'=O

tion.

as shown: with both goods normal, the Engel curve cannot cut

from above between C

and B and still pass through A, the initial posi-

Thus, the closest stationary state to left of C is unstable, while

1

3t

m

0

N

3

—19—
the closest to the right is stable.

It follows again that the short—run

result of devaluation is a fall in consumption and a balance—of—payments

surplus. Ultimately, real balances and consumption rise above their origi—
nal values as the central bank accumulates foreign reserves.

14

V. Conclusion
This paper has re—examined the effect of devaluation when there are
capital—account restrictions, adding to traditional formulations the

realistic assumption that central—bank reserves earn interest. In an
intertemporal model, devaluation is no longer neutral in the long run as it

is in the monetary—approach literature. Further, the economy may possess
multiple long—run equilibria, some of them unstable.

The analysis confirms, however, that even a large devaluation must
improve the balance of payments if the economy is initially at a stable

stationary position. A by—product of the analysis is a pricing formula for
the financial exchange rate in a dual exchange rate system. That formula
is consistent with recent consumption—based models of asset pricing.
Appendix

This appendix proves that in the neighborhood of a stable steady state,
a balance—of—payments surplus is accompanied by a rising (or depreciating)
financial exchange rate q and a deficit by a falling (or appreciating)

rate. To see this, linearize the model around a long—run equilibrium
(q, in, C),

Pt

=

defined by (22)—(24). By (14) and (15), u(c,m)/u(c,m) =

(r+i)/q

,

=

so that the dynamics of q are governed by

{[u (c,m)/u (ct,mt)] —

(rIq)}q

.

—20—
The approximate equations of motion for the economy are therefore

[r(i —
1) +

cm

)]
(m

—2
tSu

C

+

)]
[r(uu
C cm —uu cc
in

6uC
and

—

(cr—c)

(26)

If stability condition (27) is assumed, the foregoing system has two
positive characteristic roots (one of which is 5) and one negative root.
Let 0 denote the negative root, and

=

a characteristic vector
tii)

belonging to 0. The saddle—path equilibrium of the economy is written as
—
—

= (w11w2)(m0—
rn

=

exp(Ot),

(in0 — ) exp( Ut),

= (w3/2)(m0

c —

)

—

) exp(Ot).

Differentiation of this solution yields
=

0(w1/w2)(m

—

=U(m_rn),
=

O(c3/o2)(m

Because w31w2 =

—0

—

in).

> 0, consumption and real balances rise or fall

together during the transition to a stable long—run equilibrium (as the

diagrams in the text showed). To establish that q rises during a surplus
(when m < rn) and falls during a deficit (when in > rn), it must be shown that

> 0.

— 21 —

By direct calculation,

r
1

—

2

[(e_p*)(cm

isCpositive

Thus Ui/w2

p* cc—

cc

) — (mm—

cm )]•

if and only if

+ (&_p*) > —
cm

mm

—

0

(cm

—6

(Al)

cc )

Because

[the left—hand side of (Al) is positive by (27)1.

*

+ tS

{(P*+) —

—

+ Ucm(&••P*)_Umm

2

—
and u
cm

p* +

c5u

cc
(Al)

> 0 ,

cc

cc

mm
—

—

u

2

is equivalent to

+ (.p*)cm

—

+

—ôu cc

cm

]}V2

>

( p*+

2

U
—

4

+

cm

(6-)—
—

u

mm]

}l/2 ()

cc

Squaring both (positive) sides of (A2) yields an inequality which,, after

some manipulation, can be shown to be equivalent to

uccmm
u —

u2
cm

>0 .

(A3)

But (A3) is true because the instantaneous utility function is strictly

concave. Thus

> 0, as was to be demonstrated.

—22—
Footnotes
*

This

paper was written while the author was a visitor at the Department of

Economics, Tel—Aviv University. Financial support from the National
Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

1. Descriptive models of two—tier exchange—rate systems are developed by
Flood [19781 ,
[1984] .

Marion

[19811 ,

Aizenman

[19831 ,

Kiguel

[1983] ,

and Cumby

Calvo [1979] presents a related model in which nonreproducible

"land plays the role of foreign assets under capital controls. Adams and
Greenwood [1983] use a two—period optimizing model to study a regime in
which the authorities intervene to fix both the commerical and financial
exchange rates.

2. The neutrality result established in this section is not sensitive to
the particular preference setup adopted. Obstfeld [19811 gives an example
of devaluation neutrality under time—inseparable tastes.

3. The assumption S=p is made only to ensure the existence of a non—
degenerate stationary equilibrium for the economy; see, for exarñple,
Obstfeld and Stockman [1984] ,

section

5.1.

It should be clear, however,

that devaluation is neutral in the present model when

The assumption

&p* is relaxed in the following sections.
4. Because there is a single representative individual, the individual's
net holding of domestically—issued bonds is zero.

5. In a more general forniu1ation, D0 would would reflect also past devaluations (as discussed below) and past changes in q*.

6. Of course if central—bank reserves f were negative ——
official borrowing to support the exchange rate ——

implying

past

the central bank would

—23—
not have a choice about paying interest (barring default). In this case,
according to (3), the public would be taxed to meet official debt—service
obligations.

7. Typically the central bank creates a fictitious non—monetary accounting
liability instead.

8. There is already a distortion in the economy, even under capital mobility, because the private opportunity cost of real balances is positive and
thus exceeds the zero marginal cost at which money can be provided by the
central bank.

9. The following equation reflects the assumption that interest payments

on foreign bonds are repatriated at the commercial exchange rate.
10. Models based on intertemporal optimization typically imply the

existence of a convergent saddle path. That implication cannot be obtained
here because of the interest—rate distortion. Descriptive models of external asset accumulation typically need to assume a stability condition like

(27), however. For a discussion, see Obstfeld and Stockman [1984], section 4.1.
11. Tangencies are also excluded by assumption.

12. This result also emerges from the descriptive literature cited in footnote 1.

13. Clearly a decrease in the money supply would have a similar long—run

impact. Monetary policy (like devaluation) is therefore nonneutral in the
present model.

14. A natural question is whether a devaluation has similar effects when

the economy is out of long—run equilibrium. It appears that devaluation,
in this case, may improve or worsen the balance of payments on impact.
However, arguments similar to that in the preceding paragraph suggest that

— 24 —

the long—run equilibrium attained after a devaluation is characterized by
higher consimiption and real balances than would have been attained in the
absence of devaluation.

—25—
Ref erences

Adams, Charles, and Jeremy Greenwood, "Dual Exchange Rates and Capital

Controls: An Investigation," Research Report 8315, Department of
Economics, University of Western Ontario, 1983.

Aizenman, Joshua, "Adjustment to Monetary Policy and Devaluation under

Two—Tier and Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes." Working Paper 1107,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.

Boyer, Russell S., "Devaluation and PortfolIo Balance," AmerIcan Economic
Review, LXVII (March 1977), 54—63.

Calvo, Guillermo A., "An Essay on the Managed Float——The Small Country
Case," Discussion Paper 24, Department of Economics, Columbia
University, 1979.
Calvo, Guillermo A., "Devaluation: Levels versus Rates," Journal of
International Economics, XI (May 1981), 165—72.

Cumby, Robert E., "Monetary Policy under Dual Exchange Rates," Working
-

Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1984.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Devaluation, Money and Nontraded Goods," American
Economic Review, LXIII (December 1973), 871—83.

Flood, Robert P., "Exchange—Rate Expectations in Dual Exchange Markets,"
Journal of International Economics, VIII (February 1978), 65—77.
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Michael L. Mussa, "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates

and the Balance of Payments: The Reformulation of Doctrine," in Ronald
W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics,
volume II (Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1984).

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Carlos A. Rodriguez, "Portfolio Equilibrium and the

—26—
Balance of Payments: A Monetary Approach," American Economic Review,

LXV (September 1975), 674—94.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Robert J. Shiller, "The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review, LXXI
(May 1981), 222—27.
Kiguel, Miguel A., "Three Essays on the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes,"
doctoral dissertation, Department of Economics, Columbia University,
1983.

Lapan, Harvey, and Walter Enders, "Devaluation, Wealth Effects, and
Relative Prices," American Economic Review, LXVIII (September 1978),
60 1—13.

Marion, Nancy P., "Insulation Properties of Two—Tier Exchange Rates in a
Portfolio—Balance Model," Economica, XLVIII (February 1981), 61—70.

Mundell, Robert A., Mnetary Theory: Inflation, Interest, and Growth in the
World Economy (Santa Monica, California: Goodyear, 1971).

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Capital Mobility and Devaluation in an Optimizing Model
with Rational Expectations," American Economic Review, LXXI (May 1981),
2 17—2 1.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan C. Stockman, "Exchange—Rate Dynamics," in
Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International
Economics, volume II (Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1984).

